iiWMiBtliia.mSiifKw'f'ia 


■..mII 


iiiil 
mm' 


ft! 

iirljii 


■m 


\i\\h  \K\y    ii]\* 

Siij;!!!:    ■  ' 


ii!i;.!fl:T'  W^ 


ii: 


l|ii'iill"!  '[|!fI!. 


I 


■■■'I,  Ml-  I    I 


!; 


)L>i 
#■!■■ 

r     In     .Ml 


H;|[:!.if| 


1 1 


r 

1 1 
Hi 


111    ^i*  r    pf 

lii-M  f  fiffiL  ^;f!^??'■ 
i':f  [lit;  '-1-^^''^'^ '" 

id?!.!   I  I-''' 
I   K.I  |i  !!  '. 

.:i.i;f?l^!l  l.l.(,*rtii,;il, 


i 


^m. 


CORNELL 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


>/  £^ 


Cornell  University 
Library 


The  original  of  this  book  is  in 
the  Cornell  University  Library. 

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in 
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text. 


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31 9241 01 1 0481 2 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 

VERY   REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D., 

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER; 

AND   BY  THE 

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A. 

WITH 

INTRODUCTIONS 

BY  THE 


VEN.  ARCHDEACON  F.  W.  FARRAR,  D.D.,  F.R.S.— RT.  REV.  H.  COTTERILL,  D.D.,  F.R.S  E. 

VERY  REV.  PRINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.-REV.  CANON  G.  RAWLINSON,  M.A. 

REV.  A.  PLU'MMER,  M.A.,  D.D. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  York  and  Toronto. 


THE 


PULPIT    COMMENTARY, 


EDITED   BY  THE 


REV.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A., 

VICAR  AND   RURAL  DEAN   OF   ST.    PANCRAS,    AND    EXAMINING   CHAPLAIN  TO   THE    LORD 
BISHOP   OF  GLOUCESTER   AND   BRISTOL  ; 


AND   BY  THE 

KEY.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


I.  SAMUEL. 

(Kjeuosition : 
By  very   rev.   R.   PAYNE   SMITH,  D.D., 

DEAN   OF   CANTERBURY. 

JSomiletira  • 

By  rev.   prof.  C.  CHAPMAN,  M.A. 

WESTERN   COLLEGE,    PLYMOUTH. 

fxrmiliee  b^  t)arious  ^ntljore: 

REV.   p.    FRASER,   D.D.,  REV.   B.   DALE,   M  A. 


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY 
New  Yoek  and  Toronto. 


THE 

BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL. 

INTRODUCTION. 

Thb  Books  of  Samuel  are  so  called  not  because  they  were  written  by  Samuel, 
though  possibly  some  of  the  materials  may  claim  him  as  their  author,  but 
because  they  describe  his  work  for  Israel ;  aud  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  of  him, 
that  as  Moses  was  the  founder,  so  it  was  Samuel  who  reorganised  and  developed 
the  political  constitution  of  the  Jewish  nation,  and  enriched  it  with  institutions 
which  made  it  capable  of  taking  the  high  place  among  the  families  of  mankind 
to  which  the  providence  of  God  was  calling  it. 

Its  training  was  in  every  way  remarkable.  It  had  spent  its  childhood  in 
Egypt,  and  owed  a  great  deal  to  that  progress  in  mental  culture  in  which  Egypt 
had  outstripped  the  world.  But  it  was  in  the  wilderness,  surrounded  by  the 
bracing  desert,  and  under  the  command  of  one  who  had  mastered  all  Egyptian 
learning,  that  Israel  was  formed  into  a  high-souled  people.  And  there  IMoscs 
endowed  it  with  a  law,  which,  if  valuable  to  us  chiefly  in  its  typical  aspect,  con- 
tains nevertheless  so  perfect  a  re-enactment  of  the  fundamental  principles  of 
morality  that  its  "  Ten  Words "  still  hold  their  place  as  the  best  summary  of 
the  rules  that  should  guide  and  control  human  Ufe.  In  its  civil  and  adminis. 
trative  aspect  confessedly  there  was  much  in  the  Mosaic  law  conceded  because 
of  "  the  hardness  of  the  people's  hearts,"  or,  in  other  words,  because  of  their 
imperfect  state  of  civilisation ;  but  even  this  was  intended  to  lead  them  onwards. 
Confessedly  preparatory  and  educational,  the  institutions  of  Moses  were  but  as  a 
stage  or  scaffolding  to  aid  in  the  erection  of  a  more  perfect  building.  But  they 
pointed  out  what  that  building  was  to  be,  and  can  equitably  be  judged  only  in 
their  relation  to  it.  For  we  must  not  suppose  that  the  mass  of  the  people  had 
attained  to  that  high  level  on  which  Moses  stood.  Great  as  was  the  impress 
made  upon  them  by  his  master  mind,  and  noble  as  were  the  qualities  of  the 
Israelites  themselves,  yet  as  soon  as  the  generation  had  passed  away  which  had 
personally  known  Moses,  the  nation  hurried  back  into  barbarism.  Instead  of 
developing  and  realising  the  grand- ideal  which  their  lawgiver  had  sketched  for 

1  BAM.  A 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


them,  they  perpetually  sank  lower  and  lower.  In  the  narratives  contained  in 
the  Book  of  Judges  we  find  them  wild,  rough,  lawless,  generous  often,  hut 
oftener  cruel ;  disgraced  by  fearful  crimes,  and  punishing  them  with  atrocious 
barbarity.  The  priests  and  Levites  appear  powerless  and  apathetic ;  the  judges 
are  brave  soldiers,  but  with  little  administrative  capacity.  Even  with  them 
Gideon,  an  early  judge,  is  far  superior  in  character  to  Samson.  Who  would 
have  thought  that  a  nation,  which  seemed  fast  degenerating  into  a  loose 
aggregate  of  Bedouin  tribes,  contained  in  it  the  germ  of  all  that  is  best  and 
noblest  in  modem  culture,  and  of  that  pure  and  spiritual  religion  which  alone 
has  been  found  capable  of  satisfying  the  wants  and  longings  of  the  human 
heart  1  And  it  was  Samuel  who  arrested  Israel's  decay,  and  placed  it  upon  the 
pathway  which  led  it,  though  by  an  uphill  and  tangled  route,  to  its  high  destiny 
of  being  the  teacher  of  religion  to  mankind. 

Never  did  time  seem  more  hopeless  than  when  Samuel  arose.  The  Philis- 
tines, strengthened  not  merely  by  a  constant  influx  of  immigrants,  but  by  the 
importation  of  arms  from  Greece,  were  fast  reducing  Israel  to  the  condition  of  a 
subject  race.  It  might  contend  on  equal  terms  with  Moab  and  Ammon,  but 
the  same  superiority  of  weapons  which  had  given  Greece  the  victory  at 
Marathonaud  Platasa  made  the  Philistines  more  than  a  match  for  the  rude 
levies  of  Israel.  Samson  with  a  bone  might  slay  of  the  enemy  heaps  upon 
heaps,  but  the  nation  which  had  helmets  and  shields,  and  coats  of  mail,  and 
swords  and  spears,  mnst  in  the  long  run  prevail  When  the  Assyrians  had 
broken  up  Egypt  into  a  number  of  petty  districts,  Psammetichus  united  them 
together  again  by  means  of  his  "  brazen  men ; "  for  the  cuirass  made  its  wearer 
practically  invulnerable.  And  so  the  loss  of  the  sea-coast,  or  the  neglect  to 
conquer  and  secure  it  in  the  days  of  Judah's  strength  (Judges  L  18,  19),  nearly 
lost  Israel  her  independence,  and  made  her  forfeit  her  noble  calling.  Content 
with  those  rolling  downs  on  which  they  found  abundant  pasture  for  their 
cattle,  the  princes  of  Judah  forgot,  or  had  never  learned,  that  the  empire  of  the 
sea  carries  with  it  the  mastery  of  the  land. 

But  just  when  it  seemed  that  Israel  must  be  crushed  out  from  among  the 
nations  Samuel  arose.  There  had  been  a  gleam  of  comfort  under  his  predecessor 
Eli.  Of  the  early  life  of  this  remarkable  man  we  know  nothing.  He  was  the 
head  of  the  inferior  house  of  Ithamar,  .the  younger  of  Aaron's  sons ;  but  as  the 
chiefs  of  both  the  priestly  houses  held  a  high  place  in  the  commonwealth  of 
Israel,  it  may  not  after  all  be  so  extraordinary  that  we  should  find  him  at  the 
commencement  of  the  Books  of  Samuel  possessed  not  only  of  the  supreme  civil 
power,  but  also  of  the  high  priesthood.  We  so  carry  back  our  modem  notions 
into  ancient  times  that  any  deviation  from  succession  by  right  of  primogeniture 
seems  to  us  to  require  explanation.  In  ancient  times  it  was  the  family,  and  not 
the  individual,  to  whom  the  succession  belonged.  The  more  powerful  of  the 
kin,  or  the  father's  favourite,  a  Solomon,  and  not  an  Adonijah,  took  the  father's 
place.     It  was  this  probably  which  led  to  that  wholesale  daughter  of  relatives 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL. 


which  usually  accompanied  the  accession  of  an  Oriental  king.  What  is  really 
remarkable  is  that  Eli  should  be  Israel's  civil  ruler.  If  he  was  strong  enough 
to  take  this,  no  one  would  dispute  with  him  the  priesthood.  And  here 
Scripture  is  absolutely  silent. 

The  whole  tone,  nevertheless,  of  the  history  sets  Israel  before  us  aa  enjoying 
under  Eli  a  period  of  greater  ease  and  prosperity  than  had  been  its  lot  under 
Samson.  The  hill  land  of  Israel  was  so  easy  of  defence,  and  the  people  so 
valiant,  that  under  an  able  leader  it  repeatedly  held  its  ground  against  the  mail- 
clad  Philistines,  and  in  Eli's  days  they  had  lost  the  supremacy  which  made  even 
Judah  during  Samson's  judgeship  obey  their  commands.  It  was  only  after  a 
long  period  of  slow  decay,  of  which  Eli's  worthless  sons  were  the  cause,  that 
Israel  lost  its  independence  and  had  to  submit  to  vassalage.  It  is  an  indication 
of  the  greatness  of  the  reverse,  that  the  minds  of  the  people  were  so  embittered 
against  him  that  they  have  struck  his  name  and  the  names  of  his  race  out  of 
the  genealogies,  and  have  put  the  worst  construction  upon  the  prophecies  to 
which  the  broken-spirited  old  man  submitted  with  such  touching  humility.  To 
this  cause  perhaps  is  also  due  the-  suppression  of  all  account  of  his  earlier  doings. 
What  we  have  is  taken  probably  from  "  the  Acts  of  Samuel ; "  for  there  is  a 
curious  humour  and  play  upon  words  running  through  all  Eli's  sayings  such  as 
none  but  a  contemporary  would  record.  Samuel,  we  may  be  sure,  had  a  loving 
regard  for  Eli,  but  the  people  remembered  him  only  in  connection  with  the 
Philistine  invasion  and  the  cruelties  which  accompanied  it,  and  of  which  the 
memory  filled  them  with  an  intense  horror.  It  was  a  calamity  too  great  to  be 
fuUy  narrated  in  history,  but  the  Psalmist  speaks  of  it  as  the  climax  of  Israel's 
degradation  (Ps.  Ixxviii  59 — 64),  when  God  "greatly  abhorred"  them,  and  the 
mention  of  it  by  Jeremiah  (eh.  xxvi)  roused  all  Jerusalem  to  fury.  It  was  thus 
from  its  deepest  fall  that  Samuel  raised  the  nation  to  a  new  life,  and  &om  its 
shattered  ruins  built  it  up  into  an  orderly  and  progressive  kingdonu 

The  foundation  of  all  his  reforms  was  the  restoration  of  the  moral  and 
religious  life  of  the  people.  Without  this  nothing  was  possible.  But  in  spite 
of  all  its  faults,  Israel  was  stiU  sound  at  heart,  simple-minded  and  primitive ; 
Dackward  indeed  in  culture,  but  free  from  those  debasing  and  effeminate  vices 
which  too  often  make  sensuaHty  the  companion  of  refinement.  It  was  no  sickly, 
sentimental  people  among  whom  Samuel  preached ;  and  when  his  words  had 
brought  conviction  to  them,  with  strong  heart  they  followed  him ;  and  so  he 
won  for  them  an  alleviation  of  the  Philistine  yoke,  and  prepared  the  way  for  its 
final  destruction.  In  a  year  when  the  elements  were  greatly  disturbed — for 
there  was  lightning  during  wheat-harvest^-a  violent  thunder-storm  enabled  the 
Israelites,  rushing  down  the  steep  hill  of  Mizpeh,  to  break  the  terrified  ranks 
of  the  Philistines,  and  God  by  the  great  deliverance  wrought  that  day  set  his 
seal  to  the  prophet's  work. 

But. as  long  as  a  man's  work  depends  upon  his  personal  energy  It  has  no 
oaduring  existence.     Many  men  who  in  life  have  been  all  powerful  have  left 

a2 


INTEODDCTION  TO 


behind  them  nothing  more  lasting  than  a  Jonah's  gourd.  Samuel  yrae  too  wist 
to  trust  to  mere  personal  influence.  If  Israel  was  to  be  saved,  it  must  be  by 
institutions  which  would  daUy  exercise  their  pressure,  and  push  the  people 
upward  to  a  higher  lereL  He  seems  to  have  studied  the  past  history  of  his 
nation  carefully,  and  to  have  clearly  seen  where  its  weakness  lay.  And  so  he 
set  himself  earnestly  to  the  task  of  giving  it  mental  culture  and  orderly  govern- 
ment; externally  security  from  danger,  internally  progressive  development. 
The  means  he  employed  for  the  nation's  internal  growth  was  the  founding  of 
schools,  and  here  the  honour  of  the  initiative  belongs  to  him,  as  well  as  of  the 
wise  development  of  his  institutions.  What  Walter  de  Mertoti  long  afterwards 
did  for  Oxford  and  England,  that  Samuel  effected  for  IsraeL  But  as  regards 
the  kingdom  he  was  rather  the  regulator  than  the  initiator  of  the  movement. 
StUl  his  wise  mind  saw  the  ripeness  of  the  times  for  it,  and  to  him  is  due  its 
greatness  and  success. 

Thus  then,  in  prophecy  and  the  kingdom,  Samuel  gave  to  Israel  first 
education,  and  secondly  constitutional  monarchy.  Samuel  was  the  first  founder 
of  schools,  and  as  the  great  and  primary  objecl  of  his  life  had  been  the  internal 
reformation  of  the  Jewish  people,  we  can  well  understand  how  his  personal 
work  had  led  onwards  to  this  attempt  to  redeem  his  countrymen  from  ignorance. 
In  those  long  years  which  he  spent  in  perpetual  wanderings  up  and  down  the 
land  he  must  have  constantly  found  that  a  chief  obstacle  to  his  work  was  the 
low  mental  state  of  the  people.  He  had  been  brought  up  himself  amidst  what- 
ever learning  the  nation  had  imported  with  it  from  Egypt ;  but  Shiloh's  sun  had 
set.  Was  learning  to  perish  with  it?  Nowhere  in  Israel  were  men  to  be 
found  fit  to  bear  office  or  administer  justice.  The  decisive  failure  of  one  so 
highly  gifted  by  nature  as  Saul,  and  who  started  with  so  much  in  his  favour, 
and  under  Samuel's  guidance,  but  who  seems  to  have  had  no  ideas  beyond 
fighting,  proves  that  Samuel  was  right  in  his  hesitation  about  creating  a  king. 
The  fitting  man  was  nowhere  to  be  found.  Schools  were  the  primary  necessity. 
Through  them  the  whole  mental  state  of  the  people  would  be  raised,  and  men 
be  trained  to  serve  Gk>d  in  Church  and  State.  From  these  schools  came  forth  a 
David.  Without  them  the  brave  warrior,  but  fierce  despot,  Saul  was  all  that 
was  possible. 

At  the  iN'aioth,  oi  Students'  Lodgings,  for  so  the  word  means,  near  Eamah, 
his  own  patrimonial  inheritance,  Samuel  gathered  the  young  men  who  were  to 
lift  up  Israel  from  its  debasement.  He  taught  them  reading,  writing,  and 
music;  he  also  impressed  their  minds  with  solemn  religious  services,  and 
apparently  made  history  and  psalmody  their  two  chief  studies.  These  schools 
were  termed  Schools  of  the  Prophets  not  only  because  Samuel  was  a  prophet, 
Kud  the  teachers  bore  the  same  honoured  name,  but  because  the  young  men 
were  trained  expressly  for  the  service  of  Jehovah.  Of  course  Samuel  did  not 
expect  )ua  students  to  receive  the  gift  of  inspiration.  That  was  the  most  rare 
fmd  precious  of  gifts,  to  be  obtained  by  no  education,  but  bestowed  directly  bj 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUKL. 


Qoi ;  from  -vrhom  it  might  come  to  a  herdman,  with  only  such  learning  as  could  be 
picked  up  in  a  country  town  (Amos  vii.  14,  16),  but  was  never  given  except  for 
high  purposes,  and  where  there  was  a  special  internal  fitness  on  the  part  of  the 
receiver.  But  the  word  has  a  wide  meaning  in  Holy  Scripture.  Any  reUgious 
uninspired  service,  especially  if  musical,  was  caUed  prophecy ,  David's  trained 
singers  prophesied  with  harps  and  other  instruments  (1  Chron.  xxv.  1 — 3). 
But  all  of  them,  inspired  and  uninspired,  went  forth  to  de  work  for  Jehovah ; 
not  as  priests,  not  necessarily  as  teachers,  or  as  musicians,  though  they  were 
Israel's  bards.  The  institution  was  essentially  free,  was  open  to  all  comers,  and 
when  educated  the  prophet  might  return  to  his  fiarm,  or  to  some  avocation  of 
town  life.  Bat  he  was  first  of  all  an  educated  man,  and,  secondly,  he  had  been 
taught  the  nature  of  Jehovah,  how  he  was  to  be  worshipped,  and  what  was  tha 
life  which  every  member  of  a  covenant  nation  ought  to  lead. 

Thus  Samuel's  schools  not  only  raised  Israel  to  a  higher  mental  level,  bnt 
were  the  great  means  for  maintaining  the  worship  of  Jehovah,  and  teaching  the 
people  true  and  spiritual  notions  of  the  nature  of  God.  As  such  we  find  future 
prophets  earnest  in  maintaining  them.  Incidentally  we  learn  that  Elijah's  last 
earthly  work  was  the  visitation  of  the  prophetic  schools  at  Gilgal,  at  Bethel, 
and  at  Jericho.  He  must  have  restored  these  schools,  for  Jezebel  had  done  her 
utmost  to  exterminate  the  prophets.  He  must  also  have  laboured  with  masterly 
energy;  for  within  ten  years  after  Elijah's  great  victory  at  Mount  Carmel,  Ahab, 
at  Jehoshaphat's  request,  was  able  to  collect  at  Samaria  no  less  than  400  men 
who  claimed  to  be  "  prophets  of  Jehovah."  Of  Elisha  we  have  abundant  evidence 
that  the  main  business  of  his  life  was  to  foster  these  schools,  and  even  personally 
teach  in  them  (2  Kings  iv.  38).  What  we  read  of  these  two  men  was  probably 
true  of  aU  the  great  prophets.  At  suitable  places  there  were  schools  in 
which  they  gathered  the  young  men  of  Israel,  and  the  learning  which  at  Shiloh 
had  been  confined  within  the  sacred  priestly  enclosure  was  made  by  them 
general  and  national  It  ceased  to  be  a  special  prerogative,  and  became  the 
inheritance  of  the  whole  race.  Apparently  it  cubninated  in  the  time  of  Heze- 
kiah,  and  then  came  the  Assyrian  invasions,  and  with  them  the  destruction  of  a 
high  and  noble  civilisation.  But  under  Ezra  and  the  men  of  the  great  synagogue 
it  revived,  and  Israel  became  again,  and  continued  to  be,  a  learned  and  intellectual 
nation. 

This  then  was  one  part  of  the  labours  of  Samuel.  He  laid  the  foundation 
and  fostered  the  rapid  growth  of  a  grand  system  of  national  education.  At 
Ramah  he  trained  men  to  be  Israel's  teachers  ;  but  he  did  not  confine  himself  to 
this.  Most  ol  the  great  ornaments  of  David's  court  were  his  disciples,  and  it  is 
probable  that  large  numbers  of  the  wealthy  and  more  promising  youth  of  the 
kingdom  went  to  his  schools  simply  to  learn  something  of  those  wonderful  arts 
of  reading  and  Avriting,  which  opened  so  new  a  world  to  the  youth  of  a  race 
always  distinguished  for  its  intellectual  aptitudes.  And  throngh  them  Samuel 
raised  the  whole  people  mentally  and  morally.    Trained  men  henceforward  were 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


never  wanting  for  high  service  both  at  court  and  thronghont  the  land.  Othei 
results  followed  of  which  the  whole  world  reaps  the  benefit.  The  gift  of  ■ 
series  of  inspired  men  would  have  been  impossible  had  Israel  continued  in  the 
Btate  of  barbarous  ignorance  into  which  it  had  sunk  in  the  time  of  the  Judgea 
Brave  fighting  men  there  might  have  been  plenty ;  occasionally  a  man  of  witty 
jest  and  proverb  like  Samson;  an  Isaiah  never.  He  and  his  compeers  were 
educated  men,  speaking  to  an  educated  people,  and  themselves  foremost  in  the 
rank  of  teachers.  When  inspired  prophecy  ceased,  gradually  the  scribes  took 
the  prophets'  place ;  so  much  so  that  in  the  Chaldee  Targum  "  prophet "  is  often 
translated  "  scribe ; "  and  however  inferior  their  work,  yet  they  kept  learning 
alive.  The  Old  Testament  was  the  fruit  of  Samuel's  schools,  and  so  also  was 
the  New.  The  noble  tree  which  he  had  planted  was  still  vigorous  when  oni 
Lord  traversed  the  land  of  Israel ;  for  none  but  an  educated  people  could  have 
understood  his  teaching,  and  retained  it  in  their  memories,  and  taught  it  to 
mankind.  K  St.  Paul  added  to  the  teaching  of  Gkunaliel  the  intellectual  train- 
ing of  a  Greek  university,  it  was  in  order  that  he  might  give  to  Christian 
teaching  that  many-sidedness  which  was  necessary  for  its  reception  by  Greek 
and  barbarian  as  well  as  by  Jew.  But  side  by  side  with  him  in  equal  perfect- 
ness  stands  the  Jewish  St.  John.  Who  will  say  which  of  the  two  shall  carry 
off  the  palmt  And  it  was  Samuel  who  laid  the  broad  foundations  of  that 
culture  which,  carried  on  first  by  prophets  and  then  by  scribes,  made  the  Jews 
capable  of  writing  the  Bible,  of  translating  the  Old  Testament  into  Greek,  of 
teaching  its  principles  in  most  of  the  cities  of  Greece,  and  finally  of  going  forth 
as  missionaries,  carrying  with  them  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

The  other  great  labour  of  Samuel  was  concerned  with  the  establishment  of 
the  kingdom,  as  an  external  necessity  for  Israel's  orderly  development.  And 
here  again  we  find  a  man  far  in  advance  of  his  age;  for  his  great  aim  and 
purpose  was  to  found  a  limited,  or,  as  we  might  even  caU  it,  a  constitutional, 
monarchy.  To  a  certain  extent  he  was  an  unwilling  agent ;  for  he  saw  that  the 
times  were  not  ripe.  A  Umited  monarchy  is  only  possible  among  an  educated 
people,  and  Samuel's  Book  of  the  Kingdom  (1  Sam.  x.  25)  could  have  had  but 
little  influence  upon  a  Saul,  who  could  neither  read  nor  write.  Perhaps  anarchy 
is  inevitably  followed  by  despotism,  and  certainly  Saul  became  too  like  what 
Samuel  feared  the  king  would  be.  It  was  only  after  he  had  trained  David 
that  there  was  a  Jewish  Alfred  ready  to  sit  upon  the  throne ;  and  when  we 
read  so  emphatically  that  he  was  a  king  after  God's  own  heart,  we  must  bear 
in  mind  that,  with  aU  his  private  faults,  David  never  attempted  to  set  himself 
above  God's  law,  or  even  to  pervert  it  to  his  own  use.  He  strictly  confined 
himself  within  the  limits  of  a  theocratic  king,  and  his  crimes  were  personal,  and 
as  such  repented  of,  and  the  punishment  humbly  borne. 

But  the  term  theocracy  is  ambiguous,  or  at  least  has  two  sides  aocoiding  to 
the  nature  of  its  administration.  As  administered  by  the  high  priest  it  was  a 
failure.     The  appeal  to  Jehovah  by  Urim  and  Thummim  was  seldom  made,  and 


THE  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL. 


then  only  under  exceptional  circumstances,  and  there  was  no  orderly  method 
of  carrying  out  its  commands.  Those  commands  themselves  were  of  the  most 
general  kind,  confined  apparently  to  a  simple  afSrmative  or  negative.  It  was 
thus  irregular,  fitful,  in  abeyance  in  all  calm  snd  peaceful  epochs,  and  when 
called  into  exercise  was  liable  to  terrible  abuse,  which  it  even  seemed  to  sanction. 
"When  Israel  set  itself  to  exterminate  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  the  people  may 
have  supposed  that  they  had  a  sort  of  religious  approval  of  their  extreme 
measures  in  the  fact  that  the  oracle  had  encouraged  them  to  make  the  third 
attack  (Judg.  xx.  28).  EeaUy  the  ferocity  was  their  own,  and  the  priest  who 
had  given  an  affirmative  answer  to  their  question  may  and  ought  to  have  been 
horrified  at  the  cruelty  which  followed  upon  the  victory,  and  which  he  was 
absolutely  powerless  to  prevent.  A  theocracy  has  been  tried  again  in  the 
Papacy,  with  much  the  same  result,  of  being  actually  one  of  the  worst  possible 
forms  of  government ;  and,  like  the  theocracy  of  the  time  of  the  Judges,  it  must 
necessarily  be  a  snare  to  the  conscience,  as  claiming  or  appearing  to  give  a 
religious  sanction  to  deeds  that  offend  the  moral  sense. 

The  theocracy  which  Samuel  endeavoured  to  establish  was  that  of  kingly 
power  in  the  hands  of  a  layman,  but  acting  in  obedience  to  the  written  law  of 
God,  or  to  his  will  as  declared  from  time  to  time  by  the  living  voice  of  prophecy. 
It  was  a  monarchy  limited  by  the  priest  and  the  prophet,  the  former  taking  his 
stand  upon  the  Mosaic  law,  the  latter  with  a  more  free  and  active  force  giving 
a  direct  command  in  God's  name,  appealing  to  the  king's  moral  sense,  and 
usually  representing  also  the  popular  feeling.  To  the  old  theocracy  there  had 
practically  been  no  check,  and,  what  was  almost  as  bad,  no  person  responsible 
for  carrying  out  its  commands.  But  it  seems  soon  to  have  fallen  into  abeyance, 
and  the  judges  were  men  raised  up  irregularly  under  the  pressure  of  some 
extreme  perU.  Usually  they  did  well,  chiefly  in  expelUng  invaders  from  the 
laud,  but  the  priest  with  the  ephod  took  in  their  exploits  little  or  no  share. 
Under  so  irregular  a  form  of  government  there  was  small  chance  for  the  orderly 
development  of  the  powers  that  lay  dormant  within  Israel,  and  which  were  to 
make  it  a  blessing  to  aU  the  nations  of  the  earth. 

Samuel's  object  was  to  found  a  monarchy  active  and  powerful  for  the  main- 
tenance at  all  times  of  order,  but  controlled  by  such  checks  as  would  prevent  it 
from  becoming  a  despotism.  And  here  we  have  the  key  to  his  struggle  with 
SauL  Samuel  had  a  hearty  detestation  of  mere  arbitrary  power,  as  we  know 
from  his  own  words  to  the  elders  (1  Sam.  viii.  11 — 18);  but  Saul  with  liis 
body-guard  of  3000  men  had  both  the  will  and  the  means  of  making  himself 
absolute.  Perhaps  all  minds  of  great  military  ability  have  a  natural  tendency 
to  arbitrariness.  Unqualified  obedience  is  a  soldier's  duty,  and  a  general  knows 
that  in  discipline  lies  his  strength.  It  is  otherwise  with  a  king.  He  is  the  best 
ruler  who  trains  his  people  to  habits  of  self-reliance,  and  to  do  what  is  right  not 
because  he  orders  it,  but  because  they  choose  it.  A  nation  drilled  to  obedience, 
a  Church  made  orthodox  by  having  its  creed  forced  upon  it,  loses  thereby  all  moral 


INTBODUCTION  TO 


■trength,  because,  alike  in  national  and  leligioos  life,  it  is  only  by  the  exeicis* 
of  a  moral  choice  that  human  nature  can  advance  upward.  Samuel  was  labour- 
ing for  Israel's  growth  in  all  that  was  good,  and  the  only  king  of  whom  he  could 
approve  was  one  under  whom  Israel  would  be  free  to  work  out  its  own  destiny ; 
and  such  a  king  would  be  no  tyrant,  but  one  who  would  rule  in  submission  to 
the  same  law  as  that  which  governed  the  peopla  The  two  particulars  in  which 
Saul  set  his  own  will  above  the  command  of  Samuel  may  have  been  matters  of 
no  great  primary  importance.  But  the  one  happened  soon  after  Saul's  appoint- 
ment, and  thus  showed  a  very  early  tendency  on  his  part  to  make  his  own  judg- 
ment supreme ;  the  other  was  an  express  order,  backed  by  Israel's  past  history ; 
and  both  were  given  by  the  man  who  had  called  Saul  to  the  throne.  But  the 
real  point  at  issue  was  that  Saul  was  moving  so  quickly  towards  despotism,  and 
that  when  a  second  trial  of  him  was  made  he  had  advanced  a  long  way  towards 
it ;  and  never  was  despot  more  thorough  than  Saul  when  he  stained  his  hands 
with  the  blood  of  the  priests  at  !Nob,  and  of  their  innocent  wives  and  children, 
on  the  mere  supposition  of  their  complicity  with  David's  escape.  Possibly,  if 
we  knew  the  particulars,  the  slaughter  of  the  Gibeonites  was  a  crime  of  the 
same  deep  dye.  It  is  at  least  significant  that  the  cause  of  the  famine  was  sold 
to  be  "  Saul  and  his  bloody  house.''  People  in  those  days  were  not  so  tender- 
hearted as  to  have  troubled  much  about  putting  a  few  men  of  a  subject  race  to 
death,  unless  the  deed  had  been  done  barbarously.  The  manner  of  it  must  have 
shocked  them,  or  it  would  not  have  remained  imprinted  so  deeply  upon  the 
conscience  of  the  nation. 

In  David,  trained  by  Samuel  from  his  youth,  we  have  a  noble  example  of  a 
theocratic  king,  and  that  notable  fact,  which  I  have  already  pointed  out,  that 
David,  in  spite  of  his  terrible  personal  crimes,  never  set  himself  above  the  law, 
was  due  we  may  feel  sure  to  Samuel's  early  teaching.  He  had  in  Joab  the 
very  man  to  be  the  willing  tool  of  a  despot.  He  would  have  delighted  in  play- 
ing a  Doeg's  part.  David  valued  his  faithfulness,  appreciated  his  bravery  and 
skill,  nay,  even  used  him  for  his  crimes,  but  he  shrank  from  his  lawlessness. 
God  was  always  in  David's  eyes  greater  than  himself.  His  law,  often  violated 
in  hours  of  lust,  was  nevertheless  to  be  bowed  before  as  supreme.  And  so  as 
regards  his  subjects,  there  seems  to  have  been  no  intentional  oppression  of  them. 
The  idea  of  law  was  ever  a  ruling  one  in  David's  mind,  and  thus  he  approached 
Samuel's  ideal  of  "  the  anointed  one,"  though  his  fierce  passions  brought  upon 
him  personally  deep  and  terrible  stains. 

It  was  thus  Samuel's  lot  to  sketch  out  two  of  the  main  lines  of  thought 
which  converge  in  Christ.  The  idea  of  the  prophet  and  the  idea  of  the  liag 
gain  under  him  their  shape  and  proportion.  This  is  especially  true  as  regards 
the  latter.  The  king  is  ever  in  Samuel's  eyes  "the  Messiah,"  Jehovah's 
anointed  one.  Again  and  again  the  word  occurs  with  marked  prominence. 
And  it  was  the  pregnant  germ  of  a  great  future  with  the  Jew.  He  never  lost 
the  idea,  but  carried  it  onward  and  forward,  with  David's  portrait  for  its  centre. 


THK  BOOKS  OF  SAMUEL. 


u  of  one  in  Trhom  Messiah's  lineaments  wen  marked  in  outline,  feebly  Indeed 
and  imperfectlj,  bat  with  the  certainty  that  a  Messiah  wonld  come  who  would 
fill  up  with  glorious  beauty  that  faint,  blurred  sketch. 

Such  then  ia  a  brief  sammacy  of  Samuel's  work,  and  it  justifies  ns  ia  claim- 
ing especial  importance  for  this  portion  of  Jewish  history,  independently  of  the 
interest  connected  with  the  development  of  two  such  eztraordinaiy  charac- 
ters as  Saul  and  David,  and  with  the  many  remarkable  persons  grouped  around 
them,  such  as  Eli  and  Jonathan,  and  the  brave  soldiers  who  formed  the  court  of 
the  two  kings. 

As  regards  the  external  history  and  description  of  the  Books  of  Samuel,  the 
following  are  the  points  most  worthy  of  notice  t-^ 

SI-   l^AU. 

In  Hebrew  manuscripts  the  two  Books  form  but  ona ;  it  Is  in  the  Septuagint 
that  we  find  them  divided,  and  called  the  First  and  Second  Books  of  the 
Kingdoms.  The  Yulgate  has  followed  the  Septuagint  in  its  division,  but  calls 
them  the  first  and  Second  Books  of  Kings.  Finally,  Daniel  Bomberg,  in  the 
great  Hebrew  Bible  published  by  him  at  Venice  early  in  the  sixteenth  century, 
adopted  this  arrangement,  and  most  modem  Hebrew  Bibles  follow  his  example. 
But  the  division  is  most  awkward.  Saul's  death  is  separated  from  David's 
pathetic  lamentation  over  the  fallen  monarch,  and  the  break  in  the  narrative 
prevents  the  reader  &om  following  easily  the  development  of  David's  character 
and  history.  In  these  days,  when  no  matters  of  convenience  require  the 
disruption  of  the  Book,  a  great  advantage  would  be  gained  by  once  again 
arranging  it  as  a  whole,  instead  of  following  the  Septuagint  in  its  unphilosophi- 
cal  division.  The  name  there,  "Books  of  the  Kingdoms,"  refers  to  the  two 
monarchies  of  Israel  and  Judah,  and  is  carried  on  through  the  two  following 
Books  of  Kings. 

S  2.  Adthob. 

Who  was  the  compiler  of  the  Book  of  Samuel  is  absolutely  unknown,  and 
we  are  left  also  to  gather  our  conclusions  as  to  the  date  and  character  sf  its 
composition  from  incidental  facts  and  allusions  scattered  through  the  history. 
One  such  conclusion  forced  upon  us  is  that  the  Buck  is  made  up  of  a  number  of 
detached  narratives,  each  of  which  is  complete  in  itself,  and  carries  the  history 
down  into  its  remoter  consequences.  Of  these  narratives  we  have  five  or  six 
grouped  together  in  2  Sam.  xxL — ^xxiv.  without  any  attempt  at  arrangement. 
The  execution  of  Saul's  seven  sons  or  grandsons,  the  list  of  victories  over  the 
FhiListuies,  David's  psalm  of  thanksgiving,  his  last  words,  the  names  of  his  heroes, 
and  the  numbering  of  the  people  seem  placed  thus  at  the  end  because  the  com- 
piler had  no  means  of  knowing  what  was  their  proper  place  in  the  history. 
The  "  last  words  "  might  fitly  form  the  conclusion  of  the  whole,  but  the  other 
narratives  are  entirely  out  of  place,  and  conceal  from  the  reader  how  little  we 
know  of  David's  conduct  aftei  he  hod  returned  to  Jetusalem,  penitent  and 


INTRODUCTION  TO 


Mddened  by  the  death  of  his  beloved  but  rmfilial  son.    The  question  thxu  aiiaei 
«■  to  what  wera  the  materialB  at  the  disposal  of  the  compilei  of  these  Booka 

§  3.  Matbbiaui. 

First  then  and  foremost  theie  were  the  Acts  or  Memoirs  of  Samnel  himself. 
For  the  words  of  1  Ghron.  xiix.  29  literally  are,  "And  the  Acts  (or  matters)  of 
David  the  king,  behold,  they  are  written  npon  the  Acts  of  Samnel  the  Eoeh, 
and  upon  the  Acts  of  Ifathan  the  N'abi,  and  upon  the  Acts  of  Gad  the  Chozeh." 
It  is  interesting  to  find  in  these  words  the  archaic  title  of  Boeh  (see  1  Sam.  ix. 
9)  still  clinging  to  Samuel,  but  still  more  so  to  find  that  records  were  kept  appar- 
ently by  himsell  He  had  been  educated  at  Shiloh  among  all  the  learning  of 
the  priesthood,  and  the  place,  protected  by  the  powerful  tribe  of  Ephraim,  had 
remained  unravaged  by  war,  so  that  whatever  records  had  been  laid  up  with  the 
ark,  or  written  since  the  days  of  Joshua,  himself  no  mean  scribe,  had  accumu- 
lated there.  We  may  well  believe  that  a  youth  with  such  great  natural 
abilities  as  Samuel  had  made  no  ordinary  use  of  such  opportunities,  and  what- 
ever was  saved  for  the  use  of  future  times  from  the  wreck  of  Shiloh  was  most 
probably  removed  through  his  exertions  and  wise  forethought. 

In  1  Chron.  xxvii.  24  we  also  read  of  "  the  Chronicles  of  King  David,"  or, 
more  literally,  "  the  Acts  of  the  Days  of  King  David,"  i.  e.  a  digest  of  his  acts 
arranged  in  chronological  order.  But  when  we  read  in  2  Sam.  viii.  16, 17  of  two 
officers  of  David's  court,  of  whom  one,  Jehoshaphat,  was  recorder,  the  other, 
Seraiah,  was  scribe,  we  must  not  rashly  conclude  that  their  duties  were  historical 
The  recorder,  or,  as  the  word  means,  remembrancer,  was  more  probably  a  judge, 
whose  business  it  was  to  enrol  and  publish  royal  decrees ;  while  the  scribe  was 
a  state  secretary,  concerned  with  the  army  and  with  the  king's  exchequer.  It 
seems  to  have  fallen  to  the  lot  of  the  prophets  to  write  histories,  probably  for 
the  use  of  the  prophetic  schools,  and  certainly  as  the  result  of  the  bent  given  to 
their  minds  by  their  studies  in  those  institutions. 

Thus  henceforward  the  prophets,  and  not  the  priests,  became  the  custodians 
of  Israel's  literature.  In  the  Books  of  Chronicles  a  numerous  list  of  authors  is 
given,  who  almost  to  a  man  are  expressly  said  to  have  been  prophets  or  seers. 
At  every  prophetic  coUege  there  would  be  gathered  stores  of  such  writings,  and 
also  of  psalms  and  poems.  David  probably  arranged  the  ritual  of  the  temple 
after  the  fashion  of  Samuel's  services  (1  Sam.  xis.  20),  for  which  reason  doubt- 
less psalmody,  as  we  have  seen,  was  called  prophesying,  and  consequently  the 
temple  would  also  have  its  library  of  hymns  and  musical  compositions.  More- 
over, the  prophet  Gad  is  also  supposed  by  many  to  have  made  the  collection  of 
songs  and  ballads  called  the  Book  of  Jasher,  ».  e.  the  Upright,  whence  was 
taken  David's  spirited  elegy  over  Saul  and  Jonathan.  As  Gad  was  David's 
companion  in  his  wanderings  from  the  time  he  took  refuge  in  Moab  (1  Sam. 
xxuL  5)  till  his  death,  his  Acts  must  have  contained  full  infonuation  of  al] 
Hie  more  important  events  of  David's  life. 


THE  BOOKS  OP  SAMUEL. 


But  it  k  taaj  to  orer-estimate  the  completeness  and  extent  of  these  eontem 
porary  records.  Literature  depends  very  much  upon  the  natnie  of  the  materials 
available  for  writing.  Printing  followed  at  once  apoQ  the  discovery  of  paper. 
The  copious  materials  now  heing  brought  to  Europe  illastrative  of  Assyrbm  his- 
tory are  the  result  of  the  nse  that  people  made  of  cheap  tablets  of  clay.  The 
materials  most  frequently  referred  to  in  the  Bible  are  tablets  of  metaL  With 
no  cheaper  or  more  convenient  writing  materials  Gad's  records  wonld  be  but 
scanty,  and  David's  psalms  must  have  been  for  several  years  chiefly  preserved 
by  memory.  Tne  Canaanites  had  certainly  known  how  to  prepare  skins  for 
writing,  and  when  Samuel's  schools  had  caused  a  revival  of  learning,  the  art 
was  probably  restored.  Perhaps  it  had  never  been  entirely  lost,  and  Samuel 
may  have  obtained  such  skins  for  writing  his  book  upon  "  the  manner  of  the 
kingdom "  (1  Sam.  z.  26) ;  but  we  can  hardly  imagine  that  writing  materials 
were  easy  to  procure  until  the  prosperous  days  of  David's  kingdom. 

With  skins  of  animals  or  plates  of  metal  still  used  in  Isaiah's  days  (Isa. 
vilL  1,  where  tablet  is  wrongly  translated  roU),  the  narratives  would  be  short 
and  each  complete  in  itself.  This  fact  has  often  been  noticed  in  the  Com- 
mentary. Thus  the  narrative  in  1  Sam.  viL  carries  the  history  down  to  Samuel's 
death.  The  narrative  in  cL  ziv.  carries  Saul's  history  down  to  the  end  of  his 
victorious  wars.  That  in  ch.  xvL  gives  us  David's  history  up  to  the  time  when 
Saul  began  to  envy  and  hate  him.  We  may  safely  conclude  that  the  Acts  of 
Samuel,  of  K^athan,  of  Gkid,  and  even  the  Chronicles  of  Stag  David,  were  not 
well-digested  histories,  but  a  series  of  brief  stories  each  complete  in  itself. 
These  the  compiler,  in  days  when  they  had  not  merely  skins,  but  even  rolls  made 
of  many  skins  sewn  together,  seems  to  have  arranged,  adding  a  note  here  and  there, 
blending  perhaps  occasionally  several  narratives  into  one,  but  never  attempting 
to  form  out  of  them  a  consecutive  history,  such  as  a  Thuoydidea  or  •  modem 
writer,  formed  upon  classical  models,  would  have  dana 

14  Daik 

"nie  next  question  lefen  to  the  compiler's  date^  and  here  aome  of  oni 

materials  are  sufficiently  decisive.  When  we  are  told  that  "  Ziklag  pertain  eth 
unto  the  kings  of  Judah  unto  this  day "  (1  Sam.  xxviL  6),  it  is  plain  that  he 
lived  after  the  disruption  of  Solomon's  kingdom.  When  he  thinks  it  necessary 
to  apologise  for  Samuel  being  called  a  roeh,  it  is  plain  that  the  name  had  ceased 
to  be  honourable,  and,  by  that  degradation  which  happens  to  so  many  titles  of 
office  or  sex,  had  become  a  term  of  dubious  respectability.  There  is  too  the 
frequent  recurrence  of  the  phrase  "  unto  this  day  j "  the  change  of  the  name  of 
Saul's  successor  from  Ishbaal  to  Ishbosheth ;  the  distinction  between  Israel  and 
Judah  in  passages  like  1  Sam.  xviii.  16,  where  nothing  but  subsequent  usage 
would  have  made  a  writer  so  express  himself ;  the  note  that  even  prii  cusses 
wore  the  same  dress  as  men  (the  ineiil)  in  2  SanL  xiii.  18,  and  so  on.     Bat 


xB  INTRODUCTION  TO 


besides  these  there  are  one  or  two  other  facts  not  so  generallj  referred  to,  and 
which  may  be  worth  noting. 

Thus,  then,  we  have  seen  that  the  compiler  places  six  narratives  at  the  end 
of  the  second  Book  because,  excepting  David's  "  last  words,"  there  was  nothing 
in  them  to  show  to  what  period  of  bis  reign  they  belonged.  Evidently  a  con- 
siderable interval  must  have  elapsed  before  tradition  had  so  completely  died  out 
as  to  leave  no  trace  behind  for  the  historian's  guidance.  The  same  conclusion 
follows  from  his  uncertainty  as  to  the  chronology  of  Saul's  reign.  The  compiler 
uses  the  formula  common  in  the  Books  of  Kings,  but  he  cannot  fill  it  up. 
literally  he  says, "  Saul  was  one  year  old  when  he  began  to  reign,  and  he 
reigned  two  years  over  IsraeL"  Evidently  the  numbers  one  and  tv>o  answer  to 
our  formula  M  and  iV.  The  compiler  plainly  knew  neither  Saul's  age  nor  the 
length  of  his  reign.  St.  Paul  (Acts  xiii  21)  says  that  Saul  reigned  forty  years ; 
but  not  only  is  forty  with  Hebrew  writers  a  most  indefinite  number,  signifying 
a  "  good  long  time,"  but  it  is  very  uncertain  when  these  forty  years  begin  and 
and.  They  certainly  include  the  seven  and  a  half  years  during  which  the  house 
of  Saul  maintained  a  show  of  ruling,  and  possibly  also  several  yean  during 
which  Samuel  was  judge.  Some  think  that  as  Saul  is  described  as  a  "  young 
man  "  (ch.  ix.  2)  when  Samuel  anointed  him,  but  had  a  grown-up  son  when  he 
was  made  king,  there  was  a  long  abeyance,  either  before  he  was  chosen  by 
lot  as  king,  or  possibly  between  that  and  his  defeat  of  the  Ammonites.  But 
what  was  hard  for  the  compiler  ia  still  harder  for  ns,  and  the  chronology  of 
Saul's  reign  Is  beset  with  difficulties. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  style  of  the  Hebrew  is  more  pure  and  free  from 
Aramaisms  than  that  of  the  Books  of  Kings.  Local  worship,  moreover,  and 
■acrifices  are  spoken  of  without  any  doubt  of  their  propriety,  whereas  in  the 
Books  of  Kings  they  are  condemned.  It  is  a  further  note  of  antiquity  that  the 
compiler  never  refers  to  his  authorities,  nor  are  there  any  hints  or  allusions  to 
late  Jewish  history.  While  then  we  can  at  best  only  give  a  conjectural  date, 
yet  we  may  feel  sure  that  the  compiler  must  have  lived  at  some  period  between 
the  reign  of  Rehoboam  and  the  upgrowth  of  the  strong  disapproval  of  worship 
anywhere  except  at  Jerusalem.  The  leign  of  Jehoshaphat  is  a  not  improbable 
era,  for  "  the  high  places  were  not  taken  away "  (2  Chron.  xx.  33),  though 
idolatry  was  sternly  repressed.  Had  the  compiler  lived  nearer  to  David's  reign, 
he  would  probably  have  been  able  to  give  us  moi*  definite  information  m  to 
Saul's  age  and  the  duration  of  bis  kingdom. 

1 6.  Books  or  Sahitbl  olabsbd  auono  thi  "Eablt  Pbophbis." 

The  Books  of  Samuel  are  classed  by  the  Jews  among  the  "  Early  Prophets  " 
for  the  reason  given  above,  that  history  was  their  espedal  stady,  and  the  com- 
piler we  may  feel  sure  belonged  to  their  order  as  well  as  did  the  writers  of  tha 
various  "  books  of  acts "  used  by  him.  The  "  Early  Prophets "  comprise  the 
Books  of  Joshua,  Jndges,  Samuel,  and  Kings,  and  all  these  works  were  most 


THE  BOOKS  OP  SAMUEL.  bU 

probably  ■written  for  the  use  of  the  prophetic  schools,  and  certainly  were  the 
result  of  the  mental  actmty  awakened  in  Israel  by  Samuel,  and  maintained  by 
those  who  after  hia  decease  presided  over  the  colleges  which  he  had  called  into 
eziatenoe. 

S  6.  Abbanoement. 

The  Books  of  Samuel  naturally  arrange  themselves  into  fonr  parts  according 
to  the  chief  actors.  In  Part  I.,  consisting  of  chs.  L — vii.,  we  have  the  history 
of  Samuel  as  the  restorer  of  Israel.  This  again  divides  itself  into  two  portions, 
of  which  the  former,  consisting  of  chs.  L — iii.,  gives  us  the  details  of  Samuel's 
birth  and  early  life  up  to  the  time  when  he  was  acknowledged  by  all  Israel  as  a 
prophet ;  while  the  latter,  chs.  iv. — ^vii.,  gives  us  Samuel  as  judge.  "With  this 
the  period  of  the  Judges  closes,  and  in  Part  II.,  chs.  viii. — ^xv.,  we  have  the 
history  of  the  first  king,  Saul,  including  the  preparation  for  hia  appointment, 
hia  establishment  as  king,  and  his  final  rejection. 

In  Part  III.,  chs.  xvi. — xxxi.,  David  is  the  chief  actor,  but  side  by  side  with 
Saul,  and  we  see  the  one  daily  declming  in  moral  worth  and  external  pros- 
perity, whUe  the  other  is  ripening  into  the  full  stature  of  a  theocratic  king. 
During  most  of  this  period  Samuel  lived  on  no  unconcerned  spectator  of  the 
development  of  Jehovah's  purpose,  though  devoting  his  own  time  to  the  training 
of  the  young  men  who  came  to  his  schools.  Finally  Saul  falls  so  low  as  to  be- 
some  the  dupe  of  a  wicked  charlatan,  and  dies  by  his  own  hand  in  battle. 

In  Part  IV.,  2  Sam.  i. — xxiv.,  DavM  is  the  sole  hero  of  the  narrative.  In 
the  first  section,  chs.  i. — x.,  we  see  hiei  made  king,  and  reigning  in  glory.  In 
the  second,  chs.  xi. — xvii,  his  glory  Is  tarnished  by  personal  vices,  imitated 
too  readily  by  his  sons ;  upon  these  follow  bloodshed  in  his  family,  rebellion, 
and  the  loss  of  the  royal  power.  la  the  third  section,  chs.  xix.,  zx.,  we 
see  him  restored  to  his  throne.  In  the  last,  chs.  xxi. — xxiv.,  we  have  an 
appendix,  the  contents  of  which  have  been  already  described.  Naturally  we 
long  to  know  how  David  reigned  after  so  severe  a  punishment,  and  would  gladly 
have  seen  how  he  retrieved  in  his  later  years  the  crimes  of  his  passion-fraught 
manhood.  But  the  ways  of  God  are  not  as  the  ways  of  man  A  veil  is  thrown 
over  this  portion  of  David's  reign,  but  we  may  gather  from  his  last  words,  and 
from  his  psahn  of  thanksgiving,  that  he  returned  to  Jerusalem  a  changed  man, 
and  that  hia  last  years  rivalled  in  piety  his  early  promise. 

7.   LiTEBATURB. 

The  most  important  modem  works  upon  the  Books  of  Samuel  an.  In 
German,  the  commentaries  of  O.  Thenius,  'Kurzgef.  Handbuch  z  A.  Test.,' 
2te  Auflage,  Leipzig,  1864;  C.  F.  Keil,  'Bibl.  Com.  u.  das  A.  Test.,' Leipzig, 
1864;  C.  F.  D.  Erdmann,  in  Lange's  'Theol.  Horn.  Bibelwerk,'  Bielefeld, 
1873;  and  Bunsen,  'Bibelwerk,  die  Propheten.' 

On  the  text  of  the  Books  of  Samuel  there  is  a  usefo]  treatise  by  L.  J. 
Wellhausen,  Gottingen,  1871. 


tiv  rsTBODUcrrioN  to  the  books  of  samubl. 

In  English  the  most  important  commentaries  are  that  in  the  '  Speakert 
Commentary'  by  the  Bishop  of  Bath  and  Wells ;  Bishop  Wordsworth's ;  and  the 
translations  of  Keil  and  Erdraann,  the  latter  in  Dr.  Scha/fs  edition  of  Lange 
Clark,  Edinburgh,  1877. 

Other  illustrative  works  are  Ewald's  '  History  of  Israel ; '  Stanley's  '  Lectures 
on  the  Jewish  Church ; '  Eobinson's  '  Biblical  Eesearches ; '  Wilson's  '  Lands  of 
the  Bible ; '  Thomson's  '  The  Land  and  the  Book  i '  and  Conder's  '  Tent  Work  in 
Palastiue,'  »  Koat  valuabU  addition  to  our  knowledge  of  the  Holy  Land. 


THE  FIRST 

BOOK   OP    SAMUEL. 


THE  EARLY  LIFE  OP  SAMUEL. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  I. 


Tkb  oenbaloot  and  bibthplaok  or 
Samuel  (vera.  1—8).  Ver.  1. — Tbere  was  a 
eertaiu  man  of  Bamathaim-Zophim.  Though 
Samuel  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Levi,  yet  no 
special  mention  is  made  of  the  fact,  because 
he  owed  his  importance  and  rank  as  a  judge 
not  to  his  Leyitical  origin,  but  to  the  gift 
of  prophecy,  which  was  independent  of  the 
accidents  of  birth  and  station.  In  the  First 
Book  of  Chronicles,  ch.  vi,  his  parentage 
is  twiw^  given,  that  in  vers.  22 — 28  being 
apparently  the  family  genealogy,  while  that 
in  vers.  33 — 38  was  probably  taken  from  the 
records  of  the  temple  singers,  sprung  from 
Heman,  Samuel's  grandson  (1  Chron.  vi 
S3).  His  name  there  appears  as  Shemuel, 
our  translators  not  having  perceived  that 
it  is  the  same  as  that  for  which  elsewhere 
they  give  the  familiar  rendering,  SamneL 
The  variations  Elkanah,  Jeroham,  Elihn, 
Tohn,  Zuph  (1  Sam.  i  1) ;  Elkanah,  Jero- 
ham,  Eliab,  Nahath,  Zophai  (1  Chron.  vi 
26,  27);  Elkanah,  Jeroham,  Eliel,  Toah, 
Zuph  (ibid.  vers.  34,  35),  are  interesting  as 
showing  that  the  genealogies  in  Chronicles 
were  compiled  from  family  documents,  in 
which,  as  was  usual  in  the  case  of  proper 
names,  there  was  much  diversity  of  spelling, 
or  possibly  of  interpreting  the  cumbrous 
signs  used  for  letters  in  those  early  days. 
The  variations,  however,  in  Elihu  (God  is  he), 
Eliab  (God  is  Father),  and  Eliel  (God  is 
God)  were  probably  intentional,  as  were 
certainly  other  changes  in  names,  such  as 
that  of  Ishbaal  into  Ishbosheth.  The  name 
of  Samuel's  father,  Elkanah  (God  ia  owner), 
1   SAK 


is  a  common  one  among  the  Kohathltes,  to 
which  division  of  the  sons  of  Levi  Samuel 
belonged. 

The  prophet's  birthplace  was  Bamatbaim- 
Zophim,  no  doubt  the  Ramah  which  was 
Samuel's  own  head-quarters  (1  Sam.  viL  17  ; 
XV.  34  ;  xvi  13  ;  xix.  18—23  ;  xxv.  1) ;  the 
place  where  he  dwelt,  wrought,  died,  and 
was  buried,  and  the  Arimathsea  of  the 
Gospela  The  Septnagint  generally  gives 
the  name  in  full,  but  this  is  the  only  place 
where  it  is  so  written  in  the  Hebrew.  Bomah 
signifies  a  Tteight,  and  the  dual  Bamatbaim 
the  double  ha^kt,  the  town  being  situated 
on  a  hill  endii^  in  two  peaks.  Bnt  which 
it  was  of  the  many  Ranuihs,  or  hill  towns, 
in  the  Holy  Land,  is  hotly  contested ;  pro- 
bably it  was  the  Ramah  in  Benjamin,  about 
two  hours'  journey  north-west  of  Jerusalem. 
Its  second  name,  Zophim,  is  taken  fixun 
Zuph,  Samuel's  remote  ancestor,  with  whom 
the  genealogy  here  begins.  Zuph  had  appar- 
ently emigrated  fi-om  Ephraim,  one  of  the 
three  tribes  (Ephraim,  Manasseh,  Dan)  to 
which  the  Kohathitea  were  attached,  and 
was  a  person  of  sufiicient  power  and  energy 
to  give  his  name  to  the  whole  district ; 
called  the  land  of  Zuph  in  1  Sam.  iz.  fi. 
His  descendants,  the  Zophim,  had  Ramah  as 
their  centre,  and  Elkanah,  as  their  head, 
would  be  a  man  of  wealth  and  influence. 
Though  actually  belonging  to  the  tribe  of 
Benjamin,  Ramah  is  said  to  be  upon  Mount 
Ephraim,  because  this  limestone  range  ex- 
tended to  and  kept  its  name  almost  up  to 
Jerusalem  (see  Judges  iv.  6,  and  2  Chron. 
xiii  4  ;  xv.  8,  compared  with  xiii.  19). 
Elkanah  too  ia  called  an   Ephrathite,  i,  c 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


[CH.  1.  1—8 


an  Ephraimlte,  no  donbt  because  before  Znph 
emigrated  the  family  had  belonged  to  Eph- 
raim,  it  being  apparently  the  practice  to 
reckon  Levites  as  pertaining  to  the  tribes  to 
which  they  were  attached  (Judges  xvii.  7). 
The  Heb.  Ephrathite  is  rightly  rendered 
EpUraimite  in  Judges  xii.  6,  and  should  be 
so  translated  here,  and  in  1  Kings  xL  26. 
In  Ruth  L  2 ;  1  Sam.  xvii.  12  it  means 
Bethlehemite,  that  town  being  also  called 
Epliratah,  the  fruitful;  Ephraim  has  the 
same  meaning,  but  being  a  dual,  no  adjective 
can  be  formed  from  it. 

Ver.  2. — As  a  wealthy  man,  Elkanab  had 
two  wives,  Hannah — the  Anna  of  Virgil, 
who  very  properly  gives  this  name  to  the 
sister  of  the  Phcenician  Dido,  the  language 
of  Phoenicia  being  identical  with  Hebrew — 
and  Peninnab.  The  word  Hannah  signifies 
gracefulneiSiWhile  Peninnah  is  the  red  pearl, 
translated  coral  in  Job  xxviiL  18,  but  ruby 
in  Prov.  iii  15,  &c.  Its  ruddy  colour  is 
vouched  for  in  Lam.  iv.  7.  The  Hebrew 
names  for  women  generally  bear  witness  to 
the  affection  and  respect  felt  for  them  ;  while 
those  for  men  are  usually  religious.  Though 
polygamy  was  a  licence  permitted  to  the 
Jews,  it  does  not  seem  to  have  been  generally 
indulged  in,  except  by  the  kings.  Here,  as 
elsewhere,  it  was  the  ruin  of  family  life.  In 
Christianity  it  was  marked  for  final  extinc- 
tion by  the  rule  that  no  polygamist  should 
be  admitted  even  to  the  diacOnate,  and 
much  less  to  higher  office  (1  Tim.  iii.  2,  12). 

Ver.  3. — This  man  went  up  out  of  his 
city  yearly.  Once  in  the  year  Elkanah  went 
up  to  offer  sacrifice  before  the  ark.  The 
original  command  had  required  this  thrice  a 
year  of  all  Israelites ;  but  though  a  Levite 
and  a  religious  man,  Elkanah  went  up  but 
once  ;  and  such  apparently  was  the  rule  in 
our  Lord's  time  (Luke  ii.  41),  the  season 
preferred  being  naturally  the  passover,  while 
the  other  feests  gave  opportunities  for  the 
performance  of  this  duty  to  those  unable  to 
leave  their  homes  at  so  early  a  period  of 
the  year.  The  ark  was  now  at  Shiloh,  a 
town  in  Ephraim,  about  ten  miles  south  of 
Shechem  ;  for  Joshua  had  removed  it  from 
Gilgal  (Josh,  xviii.  1),  not  merely  because 
Shiloh  occupied  a  more  central  position,  but 
as  marking  the  primary  rank  of  his  own 
tribe  (1  Chron.  v.  1,  2).  Its  destruction  by 
the  Philistines  after  the  capture  of  the  ark 
(1  Sam.  V.  1)  was  so  complete,  and  attended 
apparently  by  such  barbarous  cruelties  (Ps. 
IxxvilL  60 — 64),  that  it  never  recovered  its 
importance,  and  Jeroboam  passed  it  by  when 
leeking  for  places  where  to  set  up  his  calves. 

To  sacrifice  unto  the  LOBS  of  hosts.  This 
title  of  the  Deity,  "  Loed  (in  capitals,  i.  e. 
Jehovah)  of  Hosts,"  is  a  remarkable  one. 
Tully  it  would  be  "  Jehovah  God  of  Hosts," 
and  th«  omission  of  the  word  God  shows  that 


the  phrase  was  one  of  long  standing  shortened 
down  by  constant  use.  And  yet,'  though 
found  260  times  in  the  Bible,  this  is  the 
first  place  where  it  occurs.  ' '  Lord  of  Hosts  " 
(Lord  not  in  capitals,  and  meaning  master, 
ruler)  occnrs  only  once,  in  Isa.  x.  16.  "  God 
of  Hosts,"  Elohim-Sabaoth,  though  rare, 
occurs  four  times  in  Ps.  ^r■^^r.  4,  7,  14,  19. 
The  word  Sabaoth,  hosts,  does  not  mean 
armies,  inasmuch  as  it  refers  to  numbers, 
and  not  to  order  and  arrangement.  It  is 
usually  employed  of  the  heavenly  bodies 
(Gen.  ii.  1  ;  Deut.  iv.  19  ;  xviL  3),  which 
seem  countless  in  multitude  as  they  are 
spread  over  the  vast  expanse  of  an  Oriental 
sky  (Gen.  xv.  6) ;  and  as  their  worship  was 
one  of  the  oldest  and  most  natural  forms  of 
idolatry  (Deut.  iv.  19 ;  Job  xxxi  26—28), 
so  this  title  is  a  protest  against  it,  and 
claims  for  the  one  God  dominion  over  the 
world  of  stars  as  well  as  in  this  lower  sphere. 
Its  origin  then  is  to  be  sought  at  some  time 
when  there  was  a  struggle  between  the  wor- 
ship of  the  sun  and  stars  and  the  pure  mono- 
theism of  the  Hebrews.  Occasionally  the 
angels  are  called  "the  host  of  heaven"  (1 
Kings  xxil  19 ;  Ps.-ciii  21 ;  cxlviil  2),  when- 
ever the  allusion  is  to  their  number,  but  when 
the  idea  is  that  of  orderly  arrangement  they 
are  called  God's  armies  (Gen.  xxxii.  2). 

The  two  sons  of  Eli  .  .  .  were  there.  The 
right  translation  of  the  Hebrew  is,  "  And 
there  (at  Shiloh)  the  two  sons  of  EU  .  .  .  were 
priests. "  Eli  apparently  had  devolved  upon 
his  sons  his  priestly  functions,  while  he  dis- 
charged the  duties  only  of  a  judge.  His 
position  is  remarkable.  In  the  Book  of 
Judges  we  find  a  state  of  anarchy.  The 
people  are  rude,  untutored,  doing  much  as 
they  pleased,  committing  often  atrocious 
crimes,  yet  withal  full  of  generous  impulses, 
brave,  and  even  heroic.  There  is  little 
regular  government  among  them,  but  when- 
ever a  great  man  stands  forth,  the  people 
in  his  district  submit  themselves  to  him. 
The  last  judge,  Samson,  a  man  of  pungent 
wit  and  vast  personal  prowess,  seems  to  have 
been  entirely  destitute  of  all  those  qualities 
which  make  a  man  fit  to  be  a  ruler,  but 
he  kept  the  patriotism  of  the  people  alive 
and  nerved  them  to  resistance  by  the  fame 
of  his  exploits.  In  Eli  we  find  a  ruler 
possessed  of  statesmanlike  qualities.  The 
country  under  him  is  prosperous  ;  the  Philis- 
tines, no  longer  dominant  as  in  Samson's 
time,  have  so  felt  his  power  that  when  they 
gain  a  victory  the  Israelites  are  astonished 
at  it  (ch.  iv.  3).  Moreover,  he  is  not  only 
judge,  he  is  also  high  priest  ;  but  instead 
of  belonging  to  the  family  of  Phinehas,  the 
dominant  house  in  the  time  of  the  Judges, 
he  belongs  to  that  of  Ithamar.  When,  to 
solve  the  problem,  we  turn  to  the  genealogies 
in  the  Chronicles,  we  find  Eli's  house  omitted, 


OH.  I.  1 — 8.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


though,  even  after  the  massacres  at  Shiloh 
and  Kob,  his  grandson  Ahimelech  was  still 
powerful  (1  Chron.  xxiv.  3),  and  one  of  his 
descendants  returned  from  Babylon  as  jointly 
high  priest  with  a  descendant  of  Phinehas 
(Ezra  Tiii.  2).  How  long  a  space  of  time 
elapsed  between  the  rude  heroism  of  Sam- 
sou's  days  and  Eli's  orderly  government  in 
Church  and  State  we  do  not  know,  but  the 
difference  in  the  condition  of  things  is  vast. 
Nor  do  we  know  the  steps  by  which  Eli  rose 
to  power,  but  he  must  have  been  a  man  of  no 
common  ability.  Warrior  as  well  as  states- 
man, he  had  delivered  the  .people  from  the 
danger  of  becoming  enslaved  to  the  Philis- 
tines. In  his  own  family  alone  he  failed. 
His  sons,  allowed  to  riot  ia  licentiousness, 
ruined  the  stately  edifice  of  the  father's 
fortunes,  and  the  Philistine^,  taking  ad- 
vantage of  the  general  discontent  caused 
by  their  vices,  succeeded  iu  once  again 
putting  the  yoke  on  Israel's  neck. 

Ver.  6. — A  worthy  portion.  This  render- 
ing is  based  upon  the  idea  that  the  Hebrew, 
which  is  literally  "  one  portion  of  two  faces," 
may  mean  "one  portion  enough  for  two 
persons. "  But  for  this  there  is  no  sufficient 
authority,  and  though  the  w^ord  is  a  dual,  it 
really  signifies  the  two  sides  of  the  face,  or 
more  exactly  "  the  two  nostrils,"  and  so 
simply  the  countenance.  The  Syriac  trans- 
lation,' "  a  double  portion,"  is  based  upon 
an  accidental  resemblance  between  the 
words.  As  the  term  sometimes  signifies 
anger  from  the  swelling  of  the  nostrils  of 
an  enraged  person,  the  Vulgate  translates, 
' '  And  Elkanah  was  sad  when  he  gave 
Hannah  her  portion  ;  for  ...  "  The  Sep- 
tuagint  has  a  different  reading,  epes  for 
apaim,  and  though  the  words  look  different 
in  our  writing,  they  are  nearly  identical  in 
Hebrew.  This  is  probably  the  true  reading, 
and  the  translation  would  then  be,  "And 
to  Hannah  he  gave  one  portion  only  (because 
she  had  no  child,  while  Peninnah  had  many 
portions,  as  each  son  and  daughter  had  a 
■hare) ;  for  ha  loved  Hannah  (and  did  not 


leave  her  without  this  mirk  of  affection), 
though  Jehovah  had  shut  up  her  womh. 
These  portions  were  of  course  taken  from 
those  parts  of  the  victim  which  formed  a 
feast  for  the  offerers,  after  Jehovah  and  the 
priests  had  had  their  dues.  It  is  plain  from 
this  feast  that  Elkanah's  annual  sacrifice 
was  a  peace  offering,  for  the  law  of  which 
see  Lev.  vii.  11 — 21. 

Vers.  6,  7,  8. — Her  adversary  also  pro- 
voked her  sore.  The  pleasure  of  this 
domestic  festival  was  spoiled  by  the  discord 
of  the  wives.  Peninnah,  triumphant  in  her 
fruitfulness,  is  yet  Hannah's  adversary,  be- 
cause, in  spite  of  her  barrenness,  she  has  the 
larger  portion  of  the  husband's  love  ;  while 
Hannah  is  so  sorely  vexed  at  the  taunts  of 
her  rival,  that  she  weeps  from  sheer  vex- 
ation. In  vain  Elkanah  tries  to  give  her 
comfort.  The  husband  really  is  not "  better 
than  ten  sons,"  for  the  joy  of  motherhood 
is  quite  distinct  from  that  of  conjugal  affec- 
tion ,  and  especially  to  a  Hebrew  woman, 
who  had  special  hopes  from  which  she  was 
cut  off  by  barrenness.  In  ver.  7  there  is  a 
strange  confusion  of  subject,  owing  to  the 
first  verb  having  been  read  as  an  active 
instead  of  a  passive.  It  should  be,  "  And 
so  it  happened  year  by  year ;  when  she 
(Hannah)  went  up  to  the  house  of  Jehovah 
she  (Peninnah)  thus  provoked  her,  and  she 
wept  and  did  not  eat."  It  must  be  re- 
membered that  the  Hebrews  had  no  written 
vowels,  but  only  consonants  ;  the  vowels  were 
added  in  Christian  times,  many  centuries 
after  the  coming  of  our  Lord,  and  represent 
the  traditional  manner  of  reading  of  one 
great  Jewish  school.  They  are  to  be  treated 
with  the  greatest  respect,  because  as  a  rule 
they  give  us  a  sense  confirmed  by  the  best 
authorities  ;  but  they  are  human,  and  form  no 
part  of  Holy  Scripture.  The  ancient  versions, 
the  Septuagint,  the  Syriac,  and  the  Vulgate, 
which  are  all  three  older  than  the  Masoretic 
vowels,  translate,  "And  so  she  (Peninnah) 
did  year  by  year  ; "  but  this  requires  a  slight 
change  of  the  consonants 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 3. — Transition!.  The  main  facts  implied  or  expressed  in  this  section 
are — 1.  A  state  of  national  degeneracy.  2.  A  scarcity  of  spiritual  illumination.  3. 
A  family  morally  imperfect  and  troubled,  yet  rigidly  observant  of  religious  duties. 
4.  A  Divine  will  using  that  family  for  the  further  unfolding  of  Messianic  purposes. 

I.  An  UNBROKEN  CONTIN0ITT  runs  through  the  revelations  of  the  Old  Testament, 
analogous  to  that  of  the  physical  order  and  the  education  of  the  individual.  It  is 
only  ignorance  of  the  Bible  that  can  suppose  it  to  be  destitute  of  the  unity  in  variety 
which  is  known  to  characterise  the  material  creation.  Separate  books,  like  diverse 
strata  in  the  crust  of  the  earth,  are  preliminary  to  what  is  to  follow  j  and'  the  character 
of  the  events  recorded,  and  the  condition  of -morality  and  religious  light  referred  to, 
must  be  considered  as  related  to  the  one  general  purpose.  Sometimes  the  transition 
twxBm  to  b«  sudden  and  abrupt,  and  a  totally  new  set  of  subjects  appears ;  but,  as  ia 

■  2 


1  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  i.  1—8. 

the  reference  here  to  a  "  certain  man,"  whose  life  was  chiefly  spent  during  the  era 
covered  by  the  latter  part  of  the  Book  of  Judges,  bo  generally  connecting  links  may 
be  found. 

II.  The  CONSERVATION  AND  DISCIPLINE  OF  THE  CHOSEN  BACE  are  Subservient  to  the 
development  of  the  Divine  purpose  in  Christ.  History  is  the  basis  of  revelation. 
Man  is  not  to  be  saved  by  abstract  truth,  but  by  an  historical  Christ.  The  historical 
Christ  is  to  appear  in  the  "  fulness  of  time,"  not  from  the  skies,  but  from  a  human 
line  well  authenticated.  Human  factors  are  the  transitory  element  in  the  Divine 
unfolding  of  salvation  in  Christ.  That  God  should  use  men,  during  a  long  succes- 
sion of  ages,  as  the  channel  through  which  his  mercy  should  embrace  all  the  world, 
is  as  natural  and  reasonable  as  that  he  should  perfect  his  will  in  the  beautiful  order  of 
the  earth  by  a  long  series  of  changes  in  crude  material  elements.  God  did  not  make 
imperfect  men  perfect  in  order  to  use  them ;  but  showed  his  wisdom  in  training  and 
holding  together  the  chosen  race  just  as  they  were.  Degenerate  as  they  were  during 
the  period  of  the  Judges,  they  were  not  cut  off  for  ever,  but  chastened  and  quickened. 
Thus  the  process  was  continued,  until  the  purpose  was  ripe  for  the  appearing  of  the 
Christ,  and  his  proper  identification,  by  the  combination  of  history  and  prophecy. 

III.  The  FOEM  AND  DEGREE  OF  REVELATION  Vouchsafed  to  an  age  are  largely  de- 
pendent on  the  ideas  and  moral  character  previously  attained  to.  Man  at  first  entered 
on  life  devoid  of  ancestral  Uterature ;  and  so  Adam's  descendants,  in  succeeding  ages, 
inherited  less  of  knowledge  and  experience  in  proportion  as  they  were  nearer  to  the 
founder  of  the  race.  It  is  not  wise  to  import  our  modem  ideas  into  the  minds  of 
those  who,  in  the  days  of  Jacob,  Moses,  and  the  Judges,  had  not  been  fashioned  by 
our  inheritance  of  knowledge.  The  devout  men  and  women  of  Elkanah's  time,  hav- 
ing acquired  knowledge  of  the  existence  of  hosts  of  intelligent  beings,  took  a  wider 
conception  of  God's  sovereignty  (vers.  3,  11)  than  was  possible  to  men  of  an  earlier 
age.  God  conveyed  truth  in  so  far  as  men  were  able  to  bear  it.  It  would  be  as 
unnatural  for  Isaiah's  lofty  teachings  to  follow  at  once  on  the  scanty  illumination  of 
the  era  of  the  Judges,  as  for  philosophical  conceptions  to  be  set  before  cyidren. 
Divine  wisdom  shines  through  the  graduated  teaching  of  Israel's  history  (Matt.  xix. 
7,8). 

IV.  The  EDDCATioN  OF  A  PEOPLE,  with  ultenoT  view  to  the  world's  instruction,  by 
provisional,  not  final  truth,  necessitates  eras  of  transition.  All  through  the  ages 
God  was  educating  a  race  for  the  benefit  of  the  world ;  and,  as  education  means 
steady  development,  widening  vision,  the  elements  of  things  would  form  the  staple 
of  early  teaching.  Times  came  when  a  new  feature  had  to  be  introduced,  and  early 
arrangements  to  give  place  to  something  more  suited  to  the  wider  truth  to  be  taught. 
The  occasional  vision  and  message,  suited  to  patriarchal  life,  were  followed  by  the 
systematic  symbohsm  and  rigid  rules  appropriate  to  national  consolidation  under 
Moses.  The  casual  illumination  of  the  Judgeship,  also,  yields  to  the  more  steady 
teaching  and  guidance  of  the  prophetic  schools  inaugurated  by  Samuel.  Later  on, 
the  early  dawn  of  the  prophetic  ages  gives  place  to  the  "  dayspring  "  which  reveals 
the  Sun  of  righteousness.  As  in  nature,  so  in  revelation,  stage  succeeds  stage; 
transitions  are  according  to  law. 

V.  The  INSTRUMENTS  FOB  EFFECTING  A  TRANSITION  are  duly  chosen,  and  are 
silently,  unconsciously  prepared  for  their  work.  The  world  little  knew  of  the 
germinal  Divine  purpose  working  out  in  an  obscure  home  of  Mount  Ephraim ;  nor 
did  the  "  certain  mun  "  know  how  the  conflicting  elements  in  his  home  were  being 
graciously  over-ruled  to  the  development  of  a  piety  not  surpassed  in  Old  Testament 
history,  and  the  sending  forth  of  one  who  should  be  a  blessed  forerunner  of  One 
greater  still.  Germs  of  future  ^ood  lie  in  undreamed-of  places  and  persons.  Out  of 
Sie  vast  storehouse  of  the  universe  the  all-gracious  God  is  constantly  preparing 
some  new  channel  of  good  to  bis  creatures.  In  the  scattered  villages  and  towns  of 
the  land  there  are  being  nurtured,  unconsciously,  the  lives  that  in  days  hence  shall 
be  foremost  in  the  Bedeemer's  host.  "  Little  Bethlehem,"  and  the  lowly  Joseph  and 
Mary,  were  in  reserve  for  the  greatest  of  events.  Any  new  advances  to  be  made  by 
the  Church  in  the  future  are  sure  to  be  provided  for  by  chosen  men,  possibly  unknown 
to  the  world,  and  silently  trained  by  Providence  for  their  work. 

Vi>    FeBSONS,  FLACB8,  AND    BYIiNTS,  IN    THEMSELVES    OBSCnSE,  BEOOMX  IKFOBTAirt 


Ch;  I.  1— «.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  ■ 

when  associated  with  the  unfolding  of  high  spiritual  purposes.  It  was  the  connection 
of  Samuel  with  Christ's  glorious  kingdom  that  linked  a  "  certain  man  "  and  bis  wife 
with  the  same,  and  so  raised  them  from  obscurity.  Spiritual  uses  give  real  value 
to  things.  The  frail  and  insignificant  becomes  enduring  and  important  when 
blended  with  the  interests  of  the  "  kingdom  that  cannot  be  moved."  Every  mem- 
ber of  Christ's  body  is  precious  to  him.  Names  are  recorded  in  heaven  which  enter 
on  no  earthly  roll.  The  life  and  spirit  of  every  lowly  Christian  are  known  by  God 
to  exercise  a  widespread,  abiding  influence  in  the  invisible  sphere.  As  the  kingdom 
is  to  be  eternal,  so,  whatever  part  each  one  may  take  in  its  unfolding,  that  item  will 
be  saved  from  the  transitorinesa  and  oblivion  of  other  toil.  Fame  in  the  world  is 
not  the  criterion  and  measure  of  real  usefulness.  The  chief  concern  should  be  so  to 
live  as  to  be,  in  some  form,  useable  by  God  for  advancing  the  glory  of  Christ.  All 
are  morally  great  when  employed  in  his  service  to  the  full  extent  of  their  capacities. 
VII.  A  DILIGENT  nsB  OF  SUCH  LIGHT  AS  IS  BESTOWED,  especially  in  degenerate 
times,  may  qualify  even  obscure  men  for  rendering  important  service.  The  family 
religion  of  a  "  certain  man  "  bore  its  fruit.  The  moral  ground  of  usefulness  lies  in 
character,  and  character  is  spiritually  strong  in  so  far  as  improvement  is  daily  made 
of  privileges,  however  few  they  may  be.  Men's  fitness  to  confer  benefits  on  the 
world  is  more  connected  with  a  wise  use  of  what  they  have  and  know,  than  with  the 
absolute  possession  of  knowledge.  A  little  goodness,  and  a  humble  routine  of  devo- 
tion in  a  dark  age,  shines  the  brighter  because  of  the  surrounding  gloom.  From  the 
ranks  of  pious  men  in  modem  times,  who  cared  for  piety  at  home,  there  have  gone 
forth  many  sons  distinguished  for  service  in  the  Church  of  God.  It  is  worthy  of 
note  how  fixed  ordinances  and  seasons  of  Divine  worship  nourish  whatever  of  piety 
may  be  struggling  here  and  there  against  degenerate  manners  and  official  corruption. 
The  usual  services  of  the  tabernacle  and  the  recurring  festivals,  though  despised 
and  profaned  by  many,  furnished  comfort  tmd  cheer  to  the  faithful  few.  In  spite  of 
unworthy  priests,  God  is  found  in  his  courts  by  all  who  seek  him. 

Vers.  4 — 8. — Domestic  troubles.  The  facts  given  in  this  section  are — 1.  Hannah's 
grief  and  disappointment.  2.  Peninnah's  cruel  jealousy.  3.  Elkanah's  efEorts  to 
console. 

I.  Providence  sometimes  seems  to  bun  codnteb  to  what  is  most  desirable,  in 
girithholding  gifts  where  they  would  be  devoutly  valued  and  wisely  used.  Humanly 
speaking,  Hannah  was  the  most  fit  person  to  be  blessed  with  offspring  to  be  nurtured. 
The  course  of  nature  which  finds  expression  in  family  life  is  of  God.  Though  the 
free  element  of  human  action  plays  a  part,  yet  God  is  supreme.  Providence  is  over 
the  home  of  the  pious.  Poverty  and  riches,  new  life  and  bereavement,  are  of  the 
Lord.  Looked  at  in  its  early  stages,  and  tested  by  our  range  of  vision,  the  course  of 
Providence  is  often  the  reverse  of  what  makes  for  the  joy  of  the  home  and  the  good 
of  the  world.  Often  the  illiberal  spirit  holds  wealth,  while  the  loving  heart  has  only 
good  wishes.  ,  Many  a  good.  Christlike  heart  laments  that  it  has  not  the  means  of 
clothing  the  poor,  and  sending  forth  messengers  of  the  cross.  Men  of  very  slender 
abilities  and  lowly  position,  but  of  intense  enthusiasm  for  Christ,  may  wonder  why 
they  have  not  been  endowed  with  the  intellectual  and  social  qualities  which  would 
enable  them  to  stem  the  tide  of  scepticism,  and  gain  overto  Christianity  persons  now 
inaccessible  to  them. 

II.  Providence,  for  reasons  not  obvious,  sometimes  seems  to  favour  inferior 
CHABACTHBS,  bestowing  gifts  where  there  is  not  the  purest  spirit  to  improve  them. 
Peninnah  was  immensely  inferior  to  Hannah  in  all  that  makes  character  to  be  ad- 
mired. If  judged  by  the  benefits  conferred  on  some  persons,  and  the' disposition  to 
use  them,  Providence  would  be  said  to  have  erred.  The  writer  of  Psalms  xxxvii. 
and  Ixxiii.  had  once  bitter  reflections  on  this  subject.  The  causes  of  the  Divine 
conduct  lie  deep  in  hidden  counsels.  The  inequalities  and  disproportions  of  life 
clearly  show  that  we  see  only  the  beginning  of  things,  and  that  there  is  a  future 
where  every  man  shall  receive  according  to  his  work.  It  is  enough  to  know,  that  in 
the  abundant  blessings  which  often  fall  to  the  lot  of  the  inferior  and  the  bad,  they 
have  experienced  goodness  and  mercy,  so  as  to  be  without  excuse  for  ingratitude, 
grid  that  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  cannot  but  do  right. 


•  THE  FIRST  ^OOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  l  1—8 

III.  Intense  grief  is  natueal  on  the  blighting  of  a  sufbehb  hope.  Every 
one  mnst  see  the  naturalness  of  Hannah's  grief.  The  ordinary  course  of  nature 
fosters  hope ;  it  is  the  basis  of  reasonable  expectations.  A  well-balanced  mind  lives 
in  strong  sympathy  with  nature's  ways,  for  they  are  of  God,  and  always  beneficent 
in  final  issue.  God  is  not  displeased  with  grief,  not  discontent,  when  it  comes  in  the 
order  of  Providence,  even  though  the  grief  rise  from  a  wish  that  he  had  ordered 
otherwise.  Tears  have  been  consecrated  by  Christ.  The  wail  over  Jerusalem  was 
not  unconnected  with  blighted  hope.  But  so  far  as  men  are  concerned,  the  roots  of 
their  sorrow  frequently  lie  in  their  ignorance  of  God's  times  and  methods.  He  doth 
not  willingly  afflict  or  grieve  the  children  of  men.  There  is  some  imdeveloped  pur- 
pose for  their  good  which  will  yet  vindicate  his  goodness. 

IV.  To  have  a  deep  and  sacred  geief  intensified  by  unhbbited  and  continuous 
REPROACH  is  the  climax  of  domestic  suffering.  The  griefs  of  private  life  are  sacred. 
The  wounded  spirit  shuns  the  inquisitive  eye.  Sorrow  often  seeks  sad  comfort  in 
self-isolation.  The  cruel  jibes  of  her  rival  were  agony  to  Hannah's  gentle  spirit. 
So  the  Man  of  sorrows  felt  the  bitter  reproach  of  his  own  people  as  a  most  painful 
addition  to  that  secret  sorrow  he  ever  carried  in  his  heart.  In  many  an  unhappy 
home  there  is  yet  to  be  found  a  meek,  loving  soul  grieving  over  deferred  hope  of  a 
husband  or  children  saved,  and  compelled  also  to  bear  scorn,  and  perhaps  ill-treat- 
ment, from  those  most  dear.  A  patient,  (Jhristlike  spirit  is  the  Divine  counterpoise 
of  such  sufEering. 

V.  Long  teare  of  meekly- endured  trial  mat  be  the  Divine  training  for 
subordinating  natural  gratification  to  high  spiritual  ends.  Completed  history  gives 
the  clue  to  the  enigmas  of  its  early  stages.  Posterity  has  seen  that  the  long  trial 
of  Hannah  was  not  without  its  blessed  uses  in  sublimating  her  hopes,  and  deepening 
her  piety.  It  is  a  first  principle  that  trial  to  the  devout  is  essentially  a  good.  The 
spirit  of  the  sufferer  has  to  grow  up  to  the  Divine  intent  by  meek  submission. 
Like  many  mothers,  Hannah  might  have  rested  in  the  simple  joy  of  bearing  off- 
spring had  not  a  merciful  God  prepared  means  for  directing  her  desires  to  a  higher 
good.  When  sympathy  with  the  holy  purposes  of  Christ  is  developed  in  the  soul, 
natural  desires  will  fall  into  harmony  with  his  will,  and  be  laid  at  his  feet.  And 
the  deepened  piety  of  a  mother  tells  most  powerfully  on  the  subsequent  nurture  of 
her  child. 

VI.  It  is  possible  for  high  religious  festivals  to  be  (1)  embittered  by  the  pre- 
sence of  wicked  jealousies,  (2)  marred  by  an  outburst  of  pent-up  grief.  The  holy 
sanctuary  is  frequented  by  the  devout  and  the  profane,  and  the  longing  heart  of  a 
Hannah  is  fretted  by  the  mikind  expressions  of  a  Peninnah.  Side  by  side  before 
the  holy  throne  may  be  found  men  and  women  embittered  by  the  very  presence  of 
each  other.  Divine  worship  and  hallowed  festivities  should  be  the  occasion  when  all 
animosities  and  vexations  of  spirit  are  lost  in  the  calm,  holy  joy  of  God's  favour. 
But  when  the  wounded  heart  is  pierced  afresh  in  the  house  of  God,  or  amidst  Zion's 
rejoicings,  the  very  joyousness  of  the  occasion  makes  sorrow  more  sorrowful. 
Many  are  the  tears  shed  La  the  sanctuary  I  The  heart  speaks  its  woes  the  more  that 
joy  becomes  the  place. 

VII.  Indiscreet  favours  in  a  home  only  add  to  tboublk.  Monogamy  is  the 
dictate  of  religion  and  of  philosophy.  Trouble  must  arise  in  society  by  departure 
from  the  prime  law.  Elkanah's  troubles  were  his  own  seeking,  and  no  amount  of 
affection  ostentatiously  bestowed  availed  to  cover  the  original  error,  or  to  lessen  the 
inconveniences  of  it.  Persons  committed  to  conflicting  domestic  obligations,  and 
beset  with  difBcuIty,  need  to  exercise  more  than  ordinary  discretion  in  the  expression 
of  their  feelings.  Even  in  properly-constituted  homes,  unwise  preferences  lay  the 
foundation  for  alienation  and  strife. 

VIII.  Men  of  tenderest  affection  and  ordinary  goodness  may  be  incapable  of 
fully  appreciating  the  great  sorrow  of  their  home.  With  all  his  kindness, 
Elkanah  was  unable  to  enter  fully  into  the  grief  of  his  wife.  Natures  move  in 
diverse  spheres.  Some  lack  responsiveness  to  the  deepest  experiences  of  their 
kindred  and  friends,  or  they  have  not  the  spiritual  insight  to  recognise  more  than 
secular  elements  in  trouble.  The  full  bliss  of  one  is  not  a  standard  for  anollier. 
There  are  incommensurable  joys,  and  joys  inconceivable.     A  husband's  love  is  a 


JH.  1. 1— «.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  1 

perfect,  beautiful  thing.  A  wife's  joy  in  holy  offspring  is  also  perfect  and  beautiful. 
The  presence  of  the  one  blessing  may  console,  but  cannot  compensate  for  th« 
absence  of  the  other.  The  "  woman  of  sorrowful  spirit "  yearned  to  be  the  means  of 
advancing  Messiah's  kingdom,  and  mourned  that  the  joy  was  not  hers ;  no  assurance 
of  afEection  could  satisfy  such  an  unrealised  yearning.  And  so,  good  as  the  love  of 
friends  may  be,  it  can  never  give  full  rest  to  the  souls  that  peer  into  the  future,  and 
long  to  have  the  bliss  of  contributing  their  best  to  the  Redeemer's  glory. 

Hence  the  Practical  suggestions : — 1.  Be  not  hasty  in  forming  a  judgment  on  the 
course  of  Providence.  2.  Cherish  sympathy  with  those  whose  hopes  are  deferred. 
3.  Be  careful  and  sow  not  in  the  home,  by,  some  irrevocable  action,  the  seeds  of 
permanent  discord.  4.  Avoid  partiality  where  vows  and  relationships  demand  equal 
treatment.  5.  Adore  the  wisdom  that  can  out  of  our  failings  and  errors  elicit  a 
future  blessing. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOR& 

Vers.  1 — 8.  (Ramah.) — A  HehrewfanvHy.  The  family  is  a  Divine  institution.  It  is 
the  most  ancient,  most  needful,  and  most  enduring  form  of  society ;  and,  in  proportion 
as  it  accords  with  the  plan  of  its  original  constitution,  it  is  productive  of  most 
beneficent  effects,  both  temporal  and  spiritual,  to  the  individual  and  the  community. 
In  times  of  general  laxity  and  anarchy  it  has  been,  in  many  instances,  a  little  sacred 
islet  of  purity,  order,  and  peace,  and  nurtured  the  elements  out  of  which  a  better 
age  has  grown.  The  real  strength  of  a  nation  lies  in  its  domestic  life,  and  Israel 
was  in  this  respect  eminent  above  all  other  ancient  nations.  Even  in  the  days  of 
the  judges,  when  "  there  was  no  king  in  Israel,"  and  "  every  man  did  that  which  was 
right  in  his  own  eyes  "  (Judges  xxi.  25),  there  were  many  godly  families  scattered 
through  the  land.  One  of  these  was  that  which  gave  birth  to  Samdel,  the  last  of 
the  series  of  the  judges,  the  first  of  the  order  of  the  prophets,  and  the  founder  of 
the  Hebrew  monarchy.  This  family  is  introduced  with  a  brief  description  (vers. 
1,  %).  The  residence  of  the  family  was  Ramah  (the  Height),  or,  more  fully  described, 
Ramathaim  (the  Two  Heights).  Here  Samuel  was  born  and  nurtured  ;  had  his 
permanent  abode  during  the  latter  portion  of  his  life ;  died,  and  was  buried.  There 
is  not  a  more  sacred  spot  on  earth  than  the  home  which  is  endeared  by  tendei- 
association  and  religious  communion. 

"  A  spot  of  earth  supremely  blest ; 
A  dearer,  sweeter  spot  than  all  the  rest" 

"  Things  are  not  to  be  valued  on  account  of  places,  but  places  for  the  good  things 
which  they  contain  "  (Bede).  "  God  chooses  any  common  spot  for  a  mighty  incident 
or  the  home  of  a  mighty  spirit."     Consider  the  family  as — 

I.  Obdebed  bta  godly  head  (ver.  3).  His  piety  was  shown — 1.  By  his  regular 
attendance  on  Divine  ordinances.  He  worshipped  "  the  Lord  of  hosts,"  not  Baalim 
and  Ashtaroth  (ch.  vii.  4)  ;  in  the  way  of  his  appointment,  at  the  tabernacle  in  Shiloh, 
at  the  proper  season,  and  with  the  prescribed  sacrifices  ;  not  according  to  his  own 
reason  or  inclination  merely,  a  will-worship  which  is  not  acceptable  to  God.  2.  By 
his  sincere  and  spiritual  service,  in  contrast  to  the  formal,  worthless,  and  hj^jo- 
critical  service  of  others,  especially  the  sons  of  Eli,  Hoplmi  and  Phinehas  (ch.  ii.  12), 
and  undeterred  by  their  evil  conduct  in  the  priestly  oflSce.  3.  By  his  faithful  per- 
formance of  his  vows^  (ver.  21).  4.  By  his  conversation  and  prayer  in  his  own  house 
(ver.  23).  6.  Bt/  his  conducting  all  the  members  of  his  family  to  "  the  house  of  the 
Lord"  (ver.  7),  m  the  exercise  of  his  parental  authority,  accompanied  by  instruction 
and  example.  The  words  of  the  Law  of  Moses  were  evidently  familiar  to  him  (Deut. 
vi.  6 — 9),  and  happy  is  the  family  in  which  they  are  obeyed. 

II.  Uniting  in  social  festivity  (vers.  4,  6).  Once  a  year  he  took  his  journey,  in 
company  with  his  family,  from  Ramah  to  the  central  sanctuary  of  the  Divine  King  of 
Israel,  for  the  twofold  purposeof  worshipping  (lit.,  bowing  down)  and  sacrificing  before 
Jehovah.  The  sacrifice  he  offered  was  a  peace  offering  (Deut.  xxvii.  7),  in  which, 
when  the  animal  was  killed,  the  priest  received  its  breast  and  right  shoulder  as  bia 


i  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OJ"  SAMDEL.  [oh.  l  1— & 

lawful  portion,  whilst  the  rest  was  given  back  to  the  worshipper  that  he  and  his  family 
might  feast  on  it  before  the  Lord.  Their  festivity  was — 1.  RdigiouB.  It  was  the  fes- 
tivity of  those  who  were  received  into  communion  with  God.  They  were  guests  at  his 
table,  and  overshadowed  by  hia  presence.  It  is  said  of  the  elders  of  Israel  that  they 
"saw  God,  and  did  eat  and  drink"  (Exod.  xxiv.  11).  And  i£  no  such  visible  sign  of 
his  glory  now  appeared,  yet  their  consciousness  of  his  presence  (according  to  his 
promise,  and  symbolised  by  the  ark  of  the  covenant)  would  give  solemnity  to  their 
repast,  and  prevent  improper  indulgence  and  revelry,  which  were  but  too  common  in 
this  corrupt  time  (vor.  14  ;  Judges  xzi.  19,  21).  It  should  ever  be  the  same  when 
Christians  join  in  social  festivity.  2.  Joyous  (Deut.  xii.  12  ;  xvi.  11).  Its  religious- 
ness did  not  detract  from  its  gladness,  but  made  it  pure,  elevating,  and  refreshing. 
"  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."  3.  Participated  in  by  the  whole  family, 
children  as  well  as  adults.  As  the  fathers  the  women  and  the  children  took  part  m 
idol  feasts  (Jer.  vi.  18),  so  they  should  take  part  in  "feasting  before  the  Lord."  4. 
It  also  called  forth  expressions  of  qffection  (ver.  4).  The  kindness  of  God  to  all 
should  lead  to  kindness  one  toward  another,  and  the  example  of  kindness  set  by  the 
head  of  the  family  should  be  followed  by  all  its  members.  Even  the  ordinary 
family  meal  may  and  ought  to  be  such  a  scene  of  sacred  festivity,  but  the  highest 
realisation  of  it  on  earth  is  in  "the  Lord's  Supper"  (1  Cor.  xi.  20).  And  how  great 
is  the  blessing  which  rests  upon  the  family,  all  the  members  of  which  partake 
together  of  the  "  cup  of  blessing,"  and  are  "  all  partakers  of  that  one  Bread. 

III.  DlSQUlBTBD  BY  DOMESTIC  TEOUBLE  (vers.  5—8).  It  was  natural  that  Hannah 
should  feel  disappointed  at  being  childless.  Her  condition  was  deemed  a  reproach, 
and  a  sign  of  Divine  displeasure.  But  her  grief  arose  chiefly  from  the  conduct  of 
her  rival,  Peninnah.  There  was  thus  an  element  of  discord  and  trouble  in  the  family. 
This  trouble — 1.  Existed  where  it  might  have  been  least  expected.  The  family  was 
distinguished  by  earthly  prosperity  and  genuine  piety.  But  what  home  is  there  on 
earth  wholly  free  from  trouble?  Beneath  the  fairest  appearances  there  is  seldom 
wanting  a  cause  of  disquiet,  to  check  self-complacency  and  teach  the  soul  its  true  rest. 
2.  Was  occasioned  by  want  of  confwmity  to  a  Divine  ordinance.  The  introduction 
of  a  second  wife  by  Elkanah  was  not  according  to  the  Divine  appointment  "  in  the 
beginning  "  (Gen.  ii.  24 ;  Mai.  ii.  15  ;  Matt.  xix.  4).  The  violation  of  that  appoint- 
ment had  taken  place  at  an  early  period  (Gen.  iv.  19)  ;  it  was  sanctioned  by  long 
usage  ;  and  it  was  permitted  under  the  Law  "  for  the  hardness  of  their  hearts,"  and  until 
they  should  be  educated  up  to  a  higher  moral  condition.  But  it  was  followed  by  per- 
nicious consequences  (Gen.  iv.  23 ;  xxx.  8),  as  it  always  is  in  those  families  and  nations 
where  it  obtains.  Ignorance  of  the  laws  of  God  may  mitigate  or  exempt  from  guilt ; 
but  it  does  not  do  away  with  all  the  evil  conseqijences  of  their  violation ;  for  those 
laws  are  rooted  in  the  fixed  relations  and  tendencies  of  things.  3.  Was  immediately 
caused  by  the  indulgence  of  improper  feeling  and  unseemly  speech.  Peninnah  may 
have  been  jealous  of  the  special  love  shown  to  Hannah  by  her  husband  (ver.  5). 
She  was  proud  and  haughty  on  accoimt  of  her  own  sons  and  daughters,  and,  instead 
of  sympathising  with  her  who  had  none,  she  made  her  defect  a  ground  of  insult ;  and 
trials  ordained  by  Divine  providence  are  peculiarly  severe  when  they  become  an  occa- 
sion of  human  reproach.  Finally,  she  gave  free  play  to  "  an  unruly  evil "  (James  iii. 
8),  especially  at  those  seasons  when  it  should  have  been  held  under  restraint.  Such 
things  are  the  bane  of  domestic  life.  4.  Disturbed  the  proper  performance  of  sacred 
duties.  Peninnah  could  have  little  peace  in  her  own  breast,  and  be  little  prepared  for 
Divine  worship  or  sacred  festivity.  As  for  Hannah,  although  she  did  not  angrily 
retaliate,  but  patiently  endured  the  reproaches  cast  upon  her  (affording  an  admirable 
example  of  meekness),  yet  "she  wept  and  did  not  eat"  (ver.  7),  and  her  joy  was 
turned  into  mourning.  Domestic  disturbances  tend  greatly  to  hinder  prayers  (1  Pet. 
iii.  7).  5.  Was  alleviated  by  affectionate  expostulation  (ver.  8).  "  In  Elkanah  we 
have  an  example  of  a  most  excellent  husband,  who  patiently  tolerated  the  insulting 
humour  of  Peninnah,  and  comforted  dejected  Hannah  with  words  full  of  tender 
affection,  which  was  truly,  in  St.  Peter's  words,  to  dwell  with  them  according  to 
knowledge  "  (Patrick).  Let  each  member  of  the  family  endeavour  to  soothe  and 
alleviate  the  sorrows  of  the  rest,  and  all  learn  to  find  their  own  happiness  in  pro^ 
■noting  the  happiness  of  others.    6.  Was  over-ruled  by  Divine  proviaMtoe  for  ffi*aX 


OH.  L  1—8.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  9 

good.  In  her  trouble  Hannah  was  led  to  pray  fervently,  and  her  prayer  wag 
answered ;  sorrowing  gave  place  to  rejoicing ;  the  family  was  benefiteii ;  and  the 
people  of  God  were  greatly  blessed.  So,  in  his  wonderful  working,  God  "  tamed  the 
curse  into  a  blessing  "  (Neh.  xiii.  2). — D. 

Ver.  8.  (Shiloh.) — Public  worship.  Worship  ia  worth-ship,  the  honour  paid  to 
superior  worth  ;  more  especially  it  is  8ie  reverence  and  homage  paid  to  God  in  religious 
exercises.  Public  worship  (as  distinguished  from  private  and  family  worship)  is 
designed  to  give  an  open  expression,  before  men,  of  the  praise  and  honour  which  are 
his  due  (Ps.  cxlv.  10 — 12)  ;  a  purpose  which  is  not  fulfilled  by  those  who  neglect  it, 
and  is  forgotten  by  those  who  observe  it  only  as  a  means  of  obtaining  their  own 
spiritual  benefit.  It  is  often  enjoined  in  the  word  of  God,  and  is  commended  by 
the  example  of  good  men.  The  conduct  of  Elkanah  is  suggestive  of  useful  Lints 
concerning — 

I.  Going  to  wobship.  Persuaded  of  the  obligation  and  privilege,  "  he  went  uj 
out  of  his  city"  and  home.  He  did  "  not  forsake  the  house  of  the  Lord"  (Neh.  x. 
39  ;  Heb.  x.  25).  Neither  the  distance,  nor  the  trouble  involved,  prevented  him ; 
nor  did  the  unworthy  conduct  of  many  of  the  worshippers  keep  him  away.  He  took 
all  his  family  with  him,  except  when  any  of  them  were  hindered  by  sickness  or 
necessary  duties  (ver.  20).  He  thought  of  the  purpose  for  which  he  went,  and  made 
the  needful  preparation  for  "worshipping  and  sacrificing  unto  the  Lord."  He  was 
careful  to  be  in  time ;  and,  doubtless,  sought  the  blessing  of  God  on  his  service, 
entertained  the  journey  with  profitable  conversation,  and  came  with  reverence  and 
■elf-restraint  (Eccles.  v.  1). 

II.  Thk  object  op  woeshd?.  "The  Lord  of  hosts."  He  did  not  worship  an 
"  unknown  God."  Man  must  worship  because  he  is  a  man ;  but  he  will  worship  a 
false  or  unworthy  object,  as  well  as  in  a  wrong  manner,  unless  he  be  Divinely  taught, 
because  he  is  a  sinner.  He  "  knew  what  he  worshipped,"  even  the  living  and  true 
God,  who  had  revealed  himself  to  his  people  ;  Creator,  Redeemer,  Ruler ;  holy,  just, 
■  and  merciful  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6,  7).     Our  knowledge  of  God  is  necessarily  imperfect 

(Job  xi.  7)  ;  but  it  may  be  true  as  far  as  it  goes,  and  the  true  idea  of  God  is  '  the 
root  of  all  absolute  grandeur,  of  all  truth  and  moral  perfection  "  (John  xvii.  3). 

III.  The  place  of  worship.  He  went  to  worship  in  Shiloh  (Deut.  xvi.  16),  where 
the  tabernacle,  made  in  the  wilderness,  having  been  first  pitched  at  Gilgal,  had  now 
been  standing  300  years.  It  was  the  palace  of  the  great  King.  Here  his  servants 
the  priests  ministered,  and  offerings  were  presented  by  his  subjects  at  his  altar  in  the 
outer  court  (ch.  ii.  33) ;  the  lamp  of  God  (ch.  iii.  3),  the  altar  of  incense  (oh.  ii.  28), 
and  the  table  of  shew-bread  (ch.  xxi.  4)  stood  in  the  holy  place  ;  and  the  ark  of  the 
covenant  (oh.  iv.  3)  in  the  holiest  of  all  (Heb.  ii.  25).  These  were  symbols  of  spiritual 
truth  and  means  of  Divine  communion  (Exod.  xxix.  43  ;  Deut.  xvi.  11).  The  ideas 
that  underlay  them  are  fully  realised  in  Christ  and  his  Church,  and  the  symbols  are  no 
longer  needed ;  nor  is  there  any  more  one  central  and  sacred  spot  "  where  men  ought 
to  worship"  (John  iv.  20,  23).  God  draws  nigh  to  us,  and  we  can  call  upin  him 
"  in  every  place."  The  presence  of  holy  souls  makes  all  places  holy,  in  bo  far  as  any 
place  can  be  so  called. 

"  What's  hallowed  gronnd  t    "Fis  what  gives  birth 
To  sacred  thoughts  in  souls  of  worth." 

Common  worship,  however,  renders  necessary  special  places  of  worship,  the  declared 
purpose  and  holy  associations  of  which  make  them  dear  to  good  men  and  helpful  to 
their  devotions,  so  that  they  are  sometimes  constrained  to  say  with  Jacob,  "How 
dreadful  is  this  place,"  &c.  (Gen.  xxviii.  17).  "  A  fearful  place,  indeed,  and  worthy 
of  all  reverence,  is  that  which  saints  inhabit,  holy  angels  frequent,  and  God  himself 
graces  with  his  own  presence." 

IV.  The  timb  of  wobship.  "  He  went  np  yearly,"  or  from  year  to  year,  and 
continued  several  days.  The  Law  required  that  the  tribes  should  assemble  at  the 
sanctuary  three  times  a  year ;  but  in  those  unsettled  times  it  appears  to  have  been 
the  custom  for  them  to  attend  only  once,  probably  at  the  passover.  What  acts  of 
tro-ship  be  performed,  or  what  times  he  observed  at  Ramab,  we  are  not  told.    The 


10  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [t3*,  1 1-4. 


Sabbath  (though  not  mentioned  in  the  Books  of  Samuel)  we  may  be  sure  was  noi 
neglected  by  him,  nor  should  it  be  by  U8.  The  spirit  of  continual  Sabbath  keeping 
(Heb.  iv.  9)  is,  indeed,  of  greater  importance  than  the  observance  of  one  day  in 
seven ;  but  its  observancBj  with  reference  to  the  higher  truths  which  tiie  first  day  of 
the  week  commemorates,  is  most  needful  and  beneficial. 

V.  The  manner  of  worship.  "  He  went  up  to  worship  and  sacrifice."  His 
worship  consisted  of  adoration,  confession,  petition,  thanksgiving.  It  was  con- 
nected with  and  embodied  in  sacrifices  of  various  kinds,  and  of  different  significance ; 
expiatory  (sin  offerings),  self-dedicatory  (burnt  offerings),  and  eucharistic  (peace 
offerings).  They  had  a  real  and  deep  relation  to  the  sacnfice  of  Christ.  From  it 
they  derived  their  worth,  and  by  it  they  have  been  done  away.  Our  worship 
demands  spiritual  sacrifices,  the  broken  and  contrite  heart,  the  "  presenting  of  our 
bqdies  as  a  living  sacrifice,"  prayer,  thanksgiving,  holy  and  benevolent  dispositions 
and  conduct.  "  By  him,  therefore  (who  brings  us  nigh  to  God,  and  makes  us  capable 
of  serving  him  aright),  let  us  offer  the  sacrifice  of  praise  to  God  continually,"  &o. 
(Heb.  xiii.  16.) 

VI.  Bbtuenino  FROM  WORSHIP.  After  the  sacred  f east  Was  over,  he  and  his  family 
*'  rose  up  in  the  morning  early,  and  worshipped  before  the  Lord,  and  returned  "  (ch. 
i.  19).  Morning  is  a  most  favourable  season  for  devotion  (Ps.  v.  3) ;  and  those  who 
are  about  to  take  a  journey  or  enter  on  a  new  enterprise  do  well  to  rise  up  early  and 
seek  the  Divine  guidance  and  help.  Elkanah  showed  that  he  was  not  weary  of  his 
devotions,  but  desired  to  avail  himself  to  the  utmost  of  the  opportunities  afforded  him  ; 
and,  by  doing  so,  he  obtained  the  greatest  permanent  benefit  from  his  visit  to  the 
sanctuary.  The  manner  in  which  we  return  from  public  worship  greatly  influences 
its  permanent  results  (Matt.  xiii.  4,  19  ;  Luke  xi.  28).  And  our  aim  and  endeavour, 
when  we  return,  should  be  to  sanctify  all  places,  all  times,  all  occupations  by 
the  spirit  of  unceasing  prayer  and  thanksgiving,  and  so  ma^e  the  whole  of  life 
a  preparation  for  the  services  of  the  heavenly  temple. — D. 

Vers.  3,11.  (Shiloh.) — TheLwdofhasts.  Thereisnosubjectmoreworthy  of  study 
than  the  nature  and  character  of  God.  His  perfections  are  often  called  his  Name, 
and  his  Name  is  expressed  by  various  words,  all  of  which  are  significant.  They  are 
not  merely  designations,  but  also  descriptions.  The  word  God  is  commonly  supposed 
to  mean  the  Good  One,  but  it  probably  denotes  "he  on  whom  one  calls,"  or  "he  to 
whom  one  sacrifices ; "  the  word  Lwd—  Giver  or  Distributor  of  bread ;  Deity  (Sanscrit, 
Dyaus)  =  the  Resplendent,  Light-giving  Heaven,  the  Shining  One,  showing  the  pure 
conception  which  the  ancient  Aryans  (the  ancestors  of  the  Indo-European  nations) 
(3utertained  of  the  Divine  Being.  But  the  Bible  mentions  other  names  of  God, 
which  were  either  in  common  use  among  the  Semitic  nations,  or  given  by  special 
revelation  to  the  Hebrews ;  and  of  these  one  of  the  most  noteworthy  is  that  of  "the 
Lord  of  hosts  "  (Jehovah  Sabaoth),  which  occurs  no  less  than  260  times,  this  being 
the  first  instance  of  its  use  (see  Max  Miiller, '  Science  of  Language,'  p.  172  ;  FairbaJm, 
'  Studies  in  Philosophy  ; '  Plumptre,  '  Biblical  Studies ').     Observe — 

I.  Its  historical  use.  1.  Founded  on  what  had  been  previously  known  or 
revealed.  Jehovah  Sabaoth  =  Jehovah,  Elohe  (God  of)  Sabaoth  (Keil ;  2  Sam.  v. 
10).  El  (Beth-^;,  lBTd,-El,  ^i-kanah,  Samu-^Z)  =  the  Strong  or  Mighty  One ;  used 
in  the  plural  as  "  comprehending  in  himself  the  fulness  of  all  power,  and  uniting  in 
himself  all  the  attributes  which  the  heathen  ascribe  to  their  divinities."  Jehovah 
(Yahveh)  =  he  who  is,  or  he  who  will  be,  the  Being,  the  Absolute  One,  the  Cause  and 
Support  of  all  other  beings,  the  Eternal,  the  Unchangeable ;  employed  with  special 
reference  to  his  personality,  unity,  his  close  relationship  to  his  people,  and  his 
promise  to  be  their  God ;  the  Proper  Name  of  Israel's  God  (Exod.  iii.  14 ;  vi.  3). 
Sabaoth  (hosts)  =  the  heaven  and  the  earth  (Gen.  ii.  1 ;  Deut.  iv.  19),  the  angela 
(Gen.  xxxii.  2,  where,  however,  another  word  of  similar  import  is  used  ;  Ps.  ciii.  21), 
and  more  commonly  armies  of  men  (Gen.  xxi.  22 ;  Exod.  vi.  .26 ;  Josh.  v.  14).  The 
whole  name  ^  "  Jehovah,  the  God  of  the  armies  of  Israel,  the  Giver  of  the  victory  in 
battle,  of  the  stars  and  of  the  angels."  2.  First  used  when  he  was  about  to  make 
a  fresh  display  of  his  power  and  grace  to  his  people  under  their  anointed  king 
(oh.  ir.  4 ;  xvii.  46 ;  2  Sam.  vi  27).      By  Hannah,  the  most  spiritually-minded 


CH.  I.  1—8.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


II 


person  of  .nat  age  (eoe  Wordsworth's  '  Com.' ).  3.  "  Rose  into  new  prominence  in 
proportion  as  the  people  came  into  contact  with  the  Assyrian  and  Chaldpean  racett, 
by  whom  the  worship  of  the  heavenly  bodies  was  systematised  into  a  national 
religion,  and  was  therefore  perpetually  on  the  lips  of  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah  as  a 
protest  against  it "  (Isa.  vi.  ;  Jer.  xlvi.  18  ;  xlviii.  15).  4.  Most  frequently  used  by 
the  later  prophets,  "  who  doubtless  sought  to  counteract  by  this  means  the  fear  which 
the  Jews,  as  a  poor,  despised  people,  had  of  the  power  of  the  Gentiles,  and  to  prove 
to  them  that  the  Q-od  in  whom  they  believed  had  hosts  enough  to  protect  them, 
though  they  should  be  devoid  of  all  earthly  might  wherewith  to  defend  themselves 
against  their  enemies  "  (Roos).  5.  Only  once  employed,  in  direct  statement,  in  the 
New  Testament  (James  v.  4) ;  other  and  still  higher  revelations  of  his  character 
being  made  by  Jesus  Christ. 

II.  Its  sublime  import.  "  God  alone  is  great."  1.  His  personality  and  unity, 
as  opposed  to  "  the  gods  many  and  lords  many  "  worshipped  by  the  heathen ;  the 
key-stone  of  the  faith  of  Israel  being,  "  The  Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord."  This  is  not 
contradictory  to  the  Christian  doctrine  of  the  Trinity,  which  signifies  a  threefold  dis- 
tinction in  the  One  God.  2.  His  supremacy.  He  is  higher  than  the  highest,  the 
great  King  and  Law-giver,  whose  will  all  must  obey  (Ps.  xxiv.  10 ;  Mai.  i.  14).  3. 
His  immensity.  He  fills  all  space ;  rules  over  sun,  moon,  and  stars ;  myriads  of 
angels;  nations,  families,  and  individual  men.  "All  are  thy  servants."  4.  His 
omnipotence.  "Lord  God  Almighty."  " Power  belongeth  unto  God."  "It  is  the 
flower  of  his  crown  imperial,  which  he  will  suffer  none  to  usurp.  If  the  proudest  of 
creatures  go  beyond  the  bounds  and  limits  of  his  present  permission,  he  will  send 
worms  to  eat  them  up,  as  he  did  Herod  "  (Owen).  "  Thine  omnipotence  is  not  far 
from  us  when  we  are  far  from  thee  "  (Augustine).  Other  revelations  have  now  been 
given.  "God  is  spirit."  "  God  is  light."  "Oodislove."  "  Our  Father  which  art 
in  heaven."  But  his  name  as  the  Lord  of  hosts  ought  often  to  be  an  object  of 
devout  contemplation. 

III.  Its  practical  influence.  It  is  adapted — 1.  To  correct  error:  atheism,  poly- 
theism, pantheism,  positivism,  scepticism,  secularism,  &c.  2.  To  elevate  our  con- 
ceptions of  him,  and  fill  us  with  humility,  reverence,  and  adoration.  3.  To  encourage 
us  to  pray  to  him,  with  strong  confidence  that  we  shall  he  heard  (oh.  i.  11 ;  Zech. 
viii.  21  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  63  ;  Eph.  iii.  20).  4.  To  strengthen  us  in  labour.  "  Work : 
for  I  am  with  you,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (Haggai  ii.  4).  6.  To  incite  us  to  con- 
tend against  his  foes,  to  "fight  the  good  fight  of  faith."  "I  come  to  thee  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (ch.  xvii.  45).  6.  To  console  us  in  trouble.  "  The 
Lord  will  protect  his  own  "  (Ps.  xxxiv.  7 ;  Isa.  viii.  13).  He  is  the  Protector  and 
Avenger  of  the  oppressed  (James  v.  4).  "  He  calls  God  the  Lord  of  hosts  in  ordej- 
to  strike  terror  into  those  who  think  that  the  poor  have  no  protector"  (Bade).  7. 
To  warn  all  who  disobey  his  voice,  and  set  themselves  in  opposition  to  him  and  his 
people.     "  Beware,  therefore.^' — D. 

EXPOSITION. 


Hannah's  prater  for  a  son  (vers.  9 — 
18).  Ver.  9.-  After  they  had  eaten .  .  .  after 
they  had  drunk.  The  Hebrew  favours  the 
translation,  "  After  she  had  eaten  in  ShUoh, 
and  after  she  had  drunk ; "  the  somewhat 
forced  rendering  of  the  A.  V.  having  arisen 
from  a  supposed  discrepancy  between  this 
verse  and  ver.  7.  Really  there  is  none.  The 
words  simply  mean  that  Hannah  took  part 
in  the  sacrificial  banquet,  though  she  did  so 
without  appetite  or  pleasure  ;  and  thus  they 
connect  her  visit  to  the  temple  and  her  prayer 
with  the  most  solemn  religious  service  of  the 
year.  To  take  part  in  this  banquet  was  a 
duty,  but  as  soon  as  she  had  fulfilled  it 
she  withdrew  to  the  temple  to  pour  out  her 


grief  before  God.  There  Eli,  the  priest,  i.  e. 
the  high  priest,  as  in  Num.  xxvi.  1  ;  xxvii.  2, 
was  seated  upon,  not  a  seat,  but  tfie  ponti- 
fical throne,  placed  at  the  entrance  leading 
into  the  inner  court  of  the  tabernacle,  so 
that  all  who  came  to  worship  must  pass 
before  him.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  taber- 
nacle is  called  the  temple  (so  1  Sam.  iii  3  ; 
Ps.  V.  7),  or,  inore  literally,  the  "palace"  of 
Jehovah,  his  royal  residence;  and  it  thus 
appears  that  the  name  had  come  into  use 
before  Solomon's  building  was  erected.  The 
curtains  (Ezod.  xxvi.  1)  also  had  given  place 
to  a  m,ezuzah,  translated  a  post,  but  really  a 
sort  of  porch,  with  doors,  as  appears  fi'om  ch. 
iii.  16  (comp.  Exod.  iii  6  ;  1  Kings  vii  6). 


u 


THB  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


[OH.  L  »-  4t, 


Ai  the  tabernacle  remained  stationary  at 
Bliiloh  for  300  years,  naturally  nnmerons 
buildings  of  a  more  solid  Aatoie  grew  up 
around  it 

Vers.  10,  11. — She  .  .  .  prayed  unto  tlie 
LOBD.  Kneeling  down  in  the  inner  court, 
but  within  sight  of  Eli,  whose  throne  in 
the  porch  probably  overlooked  the  whole 
inner  space,  Hannah  prays  unto  "Jehovah 
of  Sabaoth  "  for  a  male  child.  Her  humility 
appears  in  her  thrice  calling  herself  Jeho- 
vah's handmaid ;  her  earnestness  in  the 
threefold  repetition  of  the  entreaty  that 
Jehovah  would  look  on  her,  and  remember 
her,  and  not  forget  her.  With  her  prayer 
ahe  also  makes  a  twofold  vow  in  case  her 
request  is  granted.  The  son  given  her  is, 
first,  to  serve  not  for  a  stipulated  number  of 
years,  as  was  the  law  with  the  Levites  (Kum. 
IV.  8),  but  for  life  ;  and,  secondly,  he  ia  to 
be  a  Nazarite.  We  gather  from  Kiim.  vi  2 
that  Moses  found  this  singular  institution 
in  existence,  end  only  regulated  it,  and 
admitted  it  into  the  circle  of  established  and 
legalised  ordinances.  Essentially  it  was  a 
consecration  to  God,  a  holy  priesthood,  but 
not  a  sacrificing  priesthood,  nor  one  by  right 
of  birth,  as  the  Aaronic,  but  personal,  and 
either  for  a  limited  period,  or  for  Ufe. 
During  the  continuance  of  the  vow,  a  Kaza- 
rite  might  (1)  partake  of  no  produce  of  the 
vine,  signifying  thereby  abstinence  from  self- 
indulgence  and  carnal  pleasure.  He  might 
(2)  take  no  part  in  mourning  for  the  dead, 
even  though  they  were  his  nearest  relatives, 
because  his  holier  duties  raised  him  above 
the  ordinary  joys  and  sorrows,  the  cares  and 
occupations  of  every-day  Ufe.  Lastly,  no 
razor  might  come  upon  his  head,  the  free 
growing  hair  being  at  once  the  distinctive 
mark  by  which  all  men  would  recognise  his 
sacred  calling,  and  also  a  sign  that  he  was 
not  bound  by  the  usual  customs  of  life. 
By  Hannah's  first  vow  Samuel  was  devoted 
to  service  in  the  sanctuary,  by  the  second 
to  a  holy  consecrated  Ufe.  This  institution 
remained  in  existence  unto  our  Lord's  days  ; 
for  John  the  Baptist  was  also  consecrated  to 
God  as  a  Nazarite  by  his  mother,  though 
not  as  Samuel,  also  given  to  minister  in  the 
temple. 

Vers.  12 — 18.  —  She  continued  praying. 
Hannah's  prayer  was  long  and  earnest,  but 
in  sUence.  She  spake  not  in,  but  "to  her 
heart,"  to  herself.  It  was  an  inward  sup- 
plication, which  only  her  own  heart  and 
God  heard.  EU  watched,  and  was  displeased. 
Possibly  sUent  prayer  was  something  unusuaL 
It  requires  a  certain  advance  in  .civilisation 
and  refinement  to  enable  a  supplicant  to 
separate  the  petition  from  the  outward  ez- 
uression  of  it  in  spoken  words,  and  a  strong 
faitli  before  any  one  can  feel  that  God  hears 
and  kiiowa  the  silent  utterances  of  the  hea-i; 


(comp.  Matt  viiL  8 — 10).  Naturally  man 
think  that  they  shaU  be  heard  for  their 
much  speaking,  and  for  speaking  aloud. 
Unused  then  to  such  real  prayer,  'Si,  as  he 
marked  the  quivering  Ups,  the  prostrat* 
form,  the  face  flushed  with  earnestness,  cams 
to  the  coarse  conclusion  that  she  was  drunken, 
and  with  equal  coarseness  bids  her  "put 
away  her  wine  from  her,"  that  is,  go  and 
sleep  oS  the  effects  of  her  debauch.  Hannah 
answers  indignantly,  "No,  my  lord."  She 
is  "a  woman  hard  of  spirit'  (see  marg.), 
heavy-hearted,  as  we  should  say,  and  she 
had  been  lightening  her  heart  by  pouring 
out  her  troubles  before  Jehovah.  She  is 
no  "worthless  woman;"  for  Belial  ia  not 
a  proper  name,  though  gradually  it  became 
one  (2  Cor.  vi  16),  but  means  worthlesgnesi, 
and  "  a  daughter  of  worthlessness  "  means  > 
bad  woman.  "  G/nei"  Sa  Jither provocation, 
vexation.  Hannah  cannot  forget  the  triumph 
of  her  rival,  exulting  over  her  many  por- 
tions, while  for  her  there  had  been  only  one. 
Convinced  by  the  modesty  and  eamestnesi 
of  her  answer,  Eli  retracte  his  accusation, 
gives  her  his  blessing,  and  prays  that  her 
petition  may  be  granted.  And  Hannah,  com- 
forted by  such  words  spoken  by  the  high 
priest  (John  xL  61),  returned  to  the  sacri- 
ficial feast,  which  apparently  was  not  yet 
finished,  and  joined  in  it,  for  "she  did  eat, 
and  her  countenance  was  to  her  no  more," 
that  is,  the  grieved  and  depressed  look  which 
she  had  so  long  borne  had  now  departed  from 
her.  There  is  no  reason  for  the  msertion  of 
the  word  sad. 

Hannah's  peatbk  answered  (vers.  19, 20). 
Vers.  19,  20. — They  rose  up.  After  solemn 
worship  early  the  next  morning  Elkanah 
returned  to  his  home  at  Bamah,  and  God 
answered  Hannah's  prayer,  and  gave  her  the 
wished-for  son.  She  caUs  him  Samuel,  Ut 
Shemuel  (Num.  xxxiv.  20  ;  1  Ohron.  vii.  2), 
which  was  an  ordinary  Hebrew  name,  and 
means  "  heard  of  God,"  not  "asked  of  God," 
as  in  the  margin  of  the  A.  Y.  It  seems  to  have 
been  the  mother's  right  to  give  names  to  her 
children  (Luke  L  60),  and  Hannah  saw  in 
Samuel,  whom  she  had  asked  of  God,  a 
living  proof  that  she  had  been  heard  by 
him.  The  name,  therefore,  is  of  fuller  signi- 
ficance than  the  reason  given  for  it  Ishmael 
has  virtuaUy  the  same  meaning,  signifying 
"God  heareth." 

The  vow  fulfilled  (vers.  21  —  28). 
Ver.  21. — Elkanah  .  .  .  went  up.  When 
at  the  return  of  the  year  Elkanah  went  up 
as  usual  to  ShUoh,  Hannah  remained  at 
home,  purposing  to  wait  there  tUl  her  son 
was  old  enough  to  be  given  to  the  Lord. 
This  followed  soon  after  Ms  weaning,  which 
in  the  East  is  delayed  much  longer  thak. 
with  us.  In  2  Mace.  vii.  27  we  find  thre* 
years  mentioned  as  the  usual  period  of  lactam 


OK.  L  9—28.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


U 


tion,  but  the  chief  Jewish  authorities  make 
the  time  one  year  shorter.  At  thiee  years 
old  a  child  in  the  East  would  cease  to  be 
troublesome  ;  but  besides  this,  there  was  an 
order  of  women  attached  to  the  sanctuary 
(see  on  ch.  iL  22),  and  probably  regulations 
for  the  training  of  children  devoted  to  the 
temple  service.  The  yearly  saorifloe,  lit. 
"  sacrifice  of  days,''  would  include  among  its 
duties  the  carrying  to  Shiloh  of  the  tithes 
which  were  to  be  consumed  before  the  Lord 
(Deut.  xii;  17, 18),  and  the  payment  of  those 

Jortions  of  the  produce  which  belonged  to 
ehovah  and  the  priests,  and  had  become  due 
during  the  year.  His  vow  shows  that  Eltanah 
had  ratified  Hannah's  words,  by  adding  there- 
to a  thank-offeriug  from  himself 

At  ShUoh  Samuel  was  to  abide  for  ever ; 
Us  dedication  was  to  be  for  his  whole  life. 
And  when  Elkanah  prays,  Only  the  Lord 
establish  his  word,  it  is  evident  that  he 
and  Hannah  expected  that  a  child  bom 
nnder  such  special  circumstances  would,  like 
so  many  children  of  mothers  long  barren, 
be  intended  for  some  extraordinary  work. 
The  word  of  Jehovah  referred  to  is  that 
spoken  by  Eli  in  ver.  17,  which  contained 
not  merely  the  assurance  of  the  birth  of  a 
son,  but  a  general  confirmation  and  approval 
of  all  that  Hannah  had  prayed  for.  In  ver. 
24  the  Septuagint  reads,  "  a  bullock  of  three 
years  old,  probably  on  account  of  the  one 
bullock  mentioned  in  ver.  26  ;  but  as  three- 
tenths  of  an  ephah  of  flour  formed  the 
appointed  meat  offering  for  one  bullock 
(Kum.  XV.  8 — 10),  the  mention  of  a  whole 
ephah  confirms  the  reading  three  bullocks. 
Probably  the  one  bullock  in  ver.  26  was  the 
special   burnt   ofiering   accompanying   the 


solemn  dedication  of  Samuel  to  Jehovah's 
service,  while  the  other  two  were  for  Elkanah'i 
usual  yearly  sacrifice,  and  the  thank  offering 
which  he  had  vowM.  At  the  end  of  the 
verse  the  Heb.  reads,  "  And  the  child  was  a 
child,"  the  word  in  both  places  being  tia'ar, 
which  may  mean  anytlung  up  io  fifteen 
years  of  age.  The  child  really  was  about 
three  years  old,  and  the  Sept.  is  probably 
right  in  reading,  "And  the  child  was  with 
them."  Both  the  Vjilgate,  however,  and 
the  Syriac  agree  with  the  Hebrew. 

Ver.  28.  — ^I  have  lent  him.  The  word  lent 
spoils  the  meaning.  Hannah  really  in  these 
two  verses  uses  &e  same  verb  four  times,  - 
though  in  different  conjugations,  and  the 
same  sense  must  be  maintained  throughout. 
Her  words  are,  "For  this  child  I  prayed,  and 
Jehovah  hath  given  me  my  cukmg  which  I 
asked  of  him :  and  I  also  have  given  back 
what  was  asked  to  Jehovah ;  as  long  as  he 
Uveth  he  is  asked  for  Jehovah."  lie  con- 
jugation translated  to  give  back  what  was 
asked  literally  means  to  make  to  ask,  and 
so  to  give  or  lend  anything  asked.  The 
sense  here  requires  the  restoration  by  Hannah 
of  what  she  had  prayed  for  (comp.  Exod. 
xii  85,  36),  but  which  she  bad  asked  not  for 
herself,  but  that  she  might  devote  it  to 
Jehovah's  service.  At  the  end  of  ver.  28 
the  £lng.  "he  worshipped"  is  rendered  in 
the  pi.  by  all  the  versions  except  the  Sept, 
which  omits  it.  But  he,  L  c.  Elkanah,  in- 
cludes all  his  household,  and  it  may  be 
correctly  translated  in  the  pi.,  because  the 
sense  so  requires,  without  altering  the  reading 
of  the  Hebrew.  In  the  sing,  it  puts  an  un- 
necessary difBcnIty  in  the  way  of  the  ordinary 
reader. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  9 — 18. — Trial  tanetijled.  The  main  facts  are — 1.  Hannah,  impelled  by 
trouble,  goei  to  the  sanctuary  and  records  her  wish  in  a  vow.  2.  Eli  misjudges  hei 
character,  but  hearkens  to  her  self-defence.  3.  Bli  discovers  therefrom  her  real 
piety,  and  helps  to  create  within  her  heart  an  assurance  of  answer  to  prayer.  4. 
Hannah  enters  on  a  brighter  path. 

I.  It  brings  thb  boul  direct  to  God.  It  was  doubtless  good  for  Hannnh  to  join 
the  family  worship,  and  derive  all  possible  comfort  from  the  festivals  which  to  the 
devout  mind  told  of  a  "  mercy  "  which  "  endureth  for  ever ;  "  but  when  sorrow  is  of 
the  godly  sort,  when  the  gentle  or  heavy  hand  of  God  has  been  duly  recognised  in 
trial,  the  soul  needs  more  than  the  prayers  of  others.  Heart  and  flesh  then  cry  out 
for  the  living  God.  There  are  clearly  traceable  stages  in  trial  before  this  result 
ensues.  In  the  case  of  Hannah,  which  is  typical  of  many  others,  it  began  with  a 
fond  hope  deferred,  awakening  only  the  anxiety  common  to  such  domestic  incidents. 
Then,  as  time  wore  on,  grief  was  generated,  wearing  away  the  strength  of  the  spirit 
Years  of  silent  waiting  on  Providence  followed — ^wonder,  doubt,  occasional  hope,  and 
corresponding  despair  filling  up  the  experience.  The  weary  heart  would  turn  some- 
times to  God,  ana  social  worship  would  be  valued  as  a  means  of  gprace,  but  without 
relief.  Sadder  and  sadder,  increasingly  sensible  of  dependence  on^God,  and  impelled 
by  the  discovery  that  not  even  a  husband's  love  can  enter  into  the  deepest  sorrow, 
•  strong  resolve  is  taken  to  seek  refuge  in  God  by  an  act  of  urgent  appeal  to  him. 


14  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  i.  9— tS. 

8acb  is  the  proper  issue  of  all  trials  when  sanctified.  There  is  no  morose  repining, 
no  internal  war  against  the  Supreme  Will,  no  utter  abandonment  to  despair,  no  resting 
in  the  sympathy  and  counsel,  or  even  prayers,  of  the  CJhurch;  the  soul  wants  God, 
and,  Hs  never  before,  carries  its  load  straight  to  him. 

II.  It  leads  to  the  meect-seat.  There  is  all  the  difference  between  fleeing  to 
God  in  ignorant  desperation,  and  recognising  his  covenant  mercies  in  Christ  No 
doubt  there  is  compassion  for  every  poor  dark  creature  who  under  the  impulse  of 
trouble  cries  out  to  the  invisible  God  ;  but  it  was  not  without  a  reason  that  the 
devout  Hebrew  preferred  to  retire  to  the  place  where  the  ark  of  the  covenant  and 
the  mercy-seat  were  kept.  She  knew,  as  the  most  enlightened  of  her  people  knew, 
that  there  was  away  to  God,  and  drawing  nigh  towards  the  mercy-seat  was  a  distinct 
recognition  of  One  in  whom  the  troubled  might  expect  to  be  blessed.  Trial  still 
leads  us  to  God,  not  trusting  in  our  righteousness,  but  by  the  "  new  and  living  way  " 
consecrated  by  Christ.  And  though  that  invisible  mercy-seat  is  ever  near,  it  is  the 
wont  of  those  who  are  being  blessed  by  trial  to  seek  the  house  of  God,  and  there, 
pleading  his  mercy,  find  relief  and  lay  ofE  their  burdens. 

III.  It  makes  natubal  desires  for  an  earthly  good  bdbordinate  to  high 
RELIGIOUS  FEELING.  It  is  not  certain  at  what  stage  in  the  providential  discipline  the 
event  occurred,  but  the  fact  is  clear  that  there  was  a  time  in  the  process  when  a 
natural  love  of  ofEspring,  per  te,  became  absorbed  in  a  passion  for  devoting  the  most 
precious  of  gifts  to  God.  It  is  difficult  to  trace  the  purifying  process  by  which  pure 
and  lofty  spiritual  feeling  emerges  out  of  the  fires,  but  experience  in  all  ages  attests 
the  fact  that  it  does.  It  is  an  evidence  that  trouble  is  blessed  when  one  can  say, 
"  There  is  none  on  the  earth  that  I  desire  beside  thee."  All  good  things  are  intended 
to  be  helpful  to  our  higher  spiritual  life,  and  it  is  a  sign  of  spiritual  health  when 
the  possession  of  them  is  sought  primarily  for  the  furtherance  of  religious  ends, 
either  in  self  or  in  the  world.  Religion  is  not  in  antagonism  with  nature.  It  rather 
purifies  and  ennobles  it.  Personal  endowments,  reasonable  desires  for  family,  or 
influence,  or  wealth,  are  laid  at  the  cross  when  self  is  lost  in  zeal  for  God.  There 
were  a  few  featwreg  in  HannaKs  experience  which  correspond  vdth  the  action 
of  tan<Aified  trial  on  others.  1.  She  learnt  the  vanity  of  life  apart  from  God's 
blessing.  Unless  he  made  life  rich  with  the  desired  good,  there  was  no  sense 
of  joy  or  perfection  in  life.  It  is  a  great  gain  to  learn  the  lesson  of  our  need  of 
God  in  order  to  feel  life  to  be  a  daily  bliss.  2.  She,  by  the  action  of  long  trial, 
was  being  weaned  from  dependence  on  earthly  good  for  the  joy  of  life,  and  hence 
wag  more  free  to  cherish  awakening  sympathy  with  the  enduring  kingdom  of  God. 
Disappointment  in  temporal  affairs  has  often  been  blessed  to  a  deepened  interest 
in  the  unseen  realities  of  Christ's  kingdom.  3.  Her  religious  sensibilities,  being 
gradually  quickened  and  refined,  rendered  her  increasingly  sensitive  to  the  terrible 
abominations  of  the  age,  and  hence  opened  her  eyes  to  see  the  need  of  some  great 
reformer  of  the  nation.  Thus  would  the  natural  desire  for  ofEspring  merge  into  the 
hope  that  she  might  send  forth  the  man.  It  is  when  souls  are  more  alive  to  their 
own  spiritual  condition  that  they  long  also  for  means  by  which  to  check  prevailing 
sin. 

IV.  It  issues  in  the  highest  form  of  personal  consecration.  Solemn  vows  are 
the  strongest  expression  of  self-surrender.  In  Hannah's  case  a  mother  gives  up  her 
body  and  soul,  her  present  powers  nnd  future  possessions  and  influence,  specifically  to 
God.  It  was  not  possible  for  female  service  to  go  further.  The  routine  service  of 
the  Levite,  to  be  entered  on  at  a  definite  age,  was  not  enough  for  the  now  sanctified 
woman.  Her  heart  was  not  satisfied  even  with  the  prospect  of  a  son  who  should 
grow  up  in  blamelessness  of  life.  It  was  not  the  personal  comfort  of  the  presence 
in  the  house  of  a  loving,  pious  child  that  stirred  the  soul  to  pray :  a  vision,  given  of 
God,  of  the  coming  Messiah  imparted  spiritual  tone  to  her  nature,  and  nothing  would, 
therefore,  give  satisfaction  short  of  the  consecration  from  infancy,  to  the  service  of 
the  sanctuary,  of  a  son,  to  be  thus  prepared  for  holy  labours  among  the  degenerate 
people,  and  to  be  a  faint  type  and  useful  forerunner  of  a  still  more  blessed  Child. 
Thus,  the  limits  set  by  nature,  the  requirements  of  an  emergency,  and  the  prospective 
honour  of  Christ  are  recognised  in  an  intelligent  consecration  brought  about  by  the 
al  l-w:8e  discipline  of  him  who  knows  how  to  qualify  for  noble  service      The  exalted 


OH.  L  9— S8.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  IS 

ideal  of  life  attained  to  by  this  "  sorroTvful  woman "  beBpeaks  the  thoronghness  of 
the  discipline  through  which  she  passed.  A  young  life  habituated  to  the  calm  and 
elevating  influences  of  the  sanctuary,  separated  from  the  sad  and  sorrow-producing 
evils  of  the  age,  untouched  by  the  artificial  appliances  of  man,  and  nourished  in 
health  without  the  man-created  stimulants  which  give  so  much  imreality  to  conduct 
— a  very  Nazarite  in  spirit  and  in  body — this  rose  before  the  mind  as  an  object  of 
fond  desire,  and  was  laid  lovingly  at  the  throne  of  G-od ;  doubtless,  also,  in  prediction 
of  the  One  true  and  perfect  life. 

V.  It  qualifies  fob  renderino  continuoublt  impobtant  service  to  the  Chdbch. 
No  better  service  can  be  rendered  to  the  Church  than  to  nurture  a  life  in  such  a  way 
as  to  impart  to  it  a  tone  far  above  the  average  of  spirituality,  and  while  doing  that 
to  pour  forth  from  the  heart  sentiments  that  shall  act  as  an  inspiration  to  the  wise 
and  good  in  all  ages.  It  was  worth  while  for  Hannah  to  spend  years  of  sorrow,  to 
issue,  under  the  blessing  of  God,  in  the  superbly  beautiful  nurture  of  •  son  like 
Samuel,  and  in  the  lofty  strains  of  her  celebrated  song.  Sanctified  afQiction  enriches 
the  soul  with  qualities  permanent  in  value.  The  invalid  gains  spiritual  power  which 
in  daily  prayer  brings  down  blessings  on  those  nigh  and  afar  off.  The  devout 
mother  who  has  quietly  borne  reproach  for  Christ's  sake,  sweetens  home  all  the  rest 
of  her  days  by  her  calm  faith  in  God  and  ever-present  gentleness.  The  merchant 
who  has  endured  adversity  as  befits  a  child  of  God,  gathers  from  the  deep  sorrows  of 
his  life  power  to  pray  and  live  for  imperishable  good  far  in  excess  of  his  former 
capacity.     It  is  good  to  be  afflicted. 

If  these  things  be  so,  there  arise  several  Practical  qwettiom  deserving  conscientious 
replies ; — 1.  Is  desire  for  temporal  good  toned  and  regulated  by  regard  for  spiritual 
usefulness  ?  2.  Do  the  private  unspeakable  sorrows  of  life  draw  us  nearer  to  God, 
or  render  us  sullen  and  bitter?  3.  In  our  approaches  to  God  do  we  sufficiently 
recognise  the  mercy-seat  of  the  New  Testament?  4.  Have  we  ever  consecrated 
ourselves  or  our  belongings  to  God  by  deliberate  vow,  and  as  far  as  nature  permits, 
and  the  claims  of  religion  require  ?  5.  Does  our  personal  consecration,  or  the  devotion 
of  our  ofEspring  to  God,  approach  toward  the  Nazarite  ideal  consecration  of  perfect 
freedom  of  life  from  all  that  is  artificial  and  unwholesome — a  holy  simplicity  ? 

Vers.  9 — 18. — Character  mi^'udged. — I.  A  bare  form  of  worship.  It  was  a  rare 
thing  for  a  solitary  woman  to  be  seen  offering  prayer  without  audible  words  and  with 
a  semblance  of  folly.  The  vicinity  of  the  sanctuary  was  the  scene  of  many  strange  and 
painful  events  in  those  days  ;  but  here  was  singularity  combined  with  and  expressive 
of  the  deepest  piety.  Prayer,  though  not  in  form  of  set  phrase,  is  true  worship  when 
characterised  by  the  features  seen  in  that  of  the  "  sorrowful  "  woman :  such  as  longing 
of  the  heart  for  a  definite  object,  intense  fervour  of  spirit,  reverent  submission  to 
the  will  of  God,  profound  regard  in  what  is  sought  for  the  Divine  glory,  and 
directed  to  the  Source  of  all  power  through  the  mercy-seat  in  Christ.  The  question 
of  set  forms  of  utterance  for  public  worship  must  be  settled  by  considerations 
covering  the  range  of  history,  and  the  order  and  welfare  of  the  Church.  The  heart 
of  the  true  Christian  will  contain  petitions  which  no  words  can  anticipate  or  express. 
It  is  not  just  to  prescribe  how  individuals  shall  pray,  for  a  living  piety  must  grow 
according  to  its  inner  laws,  which  partake  of  our  own  individuality.  Sometimes  the 
Church  may  witness  the  spectacle  of  unusual  acts  of  worship,  and  it  is  good  for  the 
world  when  they  arise.  Spurious  worship,  eccentricity  in  the  name  of  religion,  can 
be  readily  detected.  Deviation  from  ordinary  forms  where  piety  is  sincere  may 
occur  when  intense  feeling  precludes  or  subdues  utterance.  Sighs,  tears,  groans  may 
be  prayers.  Or  the  privacy  of  the  request,  though  it  be  made  under  the  eye  of 
worshippers  in  the  bouse  of  God,  is  unsuited  to  the  public  ear.  Many  a  secret  vow 
is  made  on  the  Sabbath  in  the'  sanctuary.  And  sometimes  the  spirit  may  know  its 
want,  but  cannot  speak  to  God  for  very  awe  of  the  Divine  presence. 

n.  A  MISTAKEN  JUDGMENT.  Eli  erred  in  judgment  when  he  classed  among  the 
vile  the  most  devout  and  holy  of  the  age.  Here  was  an  instance  of  the  guardian  of 
the  sanctuary,  and  the  chief  authority  in  law  and  religion,  judging  from  appearance, 
and  not  from  the  heart.  The  causes  of  the  error  were  probably  such,  as  fiequently 
act  among  men.     I.  Natural  inability  of  man  to  read  tiie  real  character  by  casual 


16  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  i.  9—28. 

outward  appearances.  The  heart  is  too  deep  to  be  penetrated  by  aid  of  occasiona/ 
signs,  for  the  same  outward  action  may  proceed  from  diverse  internal  motions. 
2.  Strong  tendency  in  some  persons  to  estimate  others  by  the  standard  of  their  own 
experience.  The  area  of  one  man's  life  may  be  much  broiider  than  that  of  another. 
The  form,  therefore,  of  religion  in  the  one  may  be  far  beyond  the  appreciation 
of  the  other.  3.  The  strong  hold  on  some  good  men  of  conventional  modes  of 
worship.  Religion  in  some  instances  has  been  trained  to  find  outward  expression  for 
itself  by  rule,  and  hence  whatever  expression  deviates  from  the  conventional  type 
is  liable  to  be  regarded  with  suspicion.  4.  In  some  cases  men  hold  office  in 
connection  with  public  worship  whose  sympathies  are  not  broad  enough  for  the 
varieties  of  character  and  want  that  come  under  their  observation. 

III.  A  NOBLE  SELF- VINDICATION.  The  " sorrowful  spirit"  of  the  worshipper 
shrinks  from  the  very  thought  of  being  counted  vile  and  a  defamer  of  the  place  she 
loved.  The  cruel  pang  of  the  accusation  only  developed  the  strength  and  beauty  of 
her  piety.  The  depth  of  her  sorrow  and  the  utter  absorption  of  her  spirit  in  the  one 
longing  of  her  life,  coupled  with  a  sense  of  her  vmworthiness  to  be  used  in  the  high 
service  of  Messiah,  checked  any  tendency  to  anger  and  recrimination.  True  self- 
vindication  can  dispense  with  passion.  Its  qualities  are  calm  self-possession  even 
under  cruel  wrong,  a  gentleness  of  spirit  which  knows  how  to  be  firm,  a  respectful 
deference  to  authority  when  confronting  it,  a  delicate  reference  to  self  and  the 
private  sorrows  that  may  have  occasioned  the  misapprehension,  an  abstention  from 
all  that  would  exasperate,  and  a  plain  and  fearless  assertion  of  innocence.  The 
comfort  of  the  misjudged  lies  much  in  the  conviction  that  God  knows  all.  Religion 
gains  much  when  the  injured  exhibit  the  spirit  inculcated  and  exemplified  by  Christ. 
It  requires  much  grace  to  be  a  Christian  indeed.  The  world  is  slow  to  practise  what 
it  always  in  its  heart  admires,  when  the  misjudged  vindicate  themselves  after  the 
Saviour's  example. 

IV.  A  LIGHTENED  HEABT.  It  was  a  mom  of  joy  after  the  long  night  of  sorrow, 
when,  giving  a  true  interpretation  to  the  official  words  of  the  high  priest,  Hannah 
rose  from  prayer  and  went  her  way.  The  free,  joyful  heart  shone  forth  in  the 
countenance,  and  gave  ease  to  every  common  duty  of  life.  When  God  makes  us 
glad,  new  energy  enters  into  our  nature.  Hence,  true  religion,  bringing  to  men 
elasticity  of  spirit,  increases  a  man's  power  as  a  citizen,  improves  his  capacity  for 
business,  lends  lustre  to  the  home,  and,  in  fact,  becomes  an  important  element  in  the 
material  wealth  of  nations.  And  what  is  most  important  is,  the  joy  which  God  gives 
is  real,  permanent,  resting  on  foundations  which  abide  amid  all  change.  In  so  far  as 
the  really  devout  are  concerned,  the  lightened  heart  is  the  result  of — 1.  The  relief 
natural  to  true  prayer.  Even  when  specific  answers  are  not  obtained,  the  believer  is 
rested  and  relieved  by  laying  the  burden  before  the  mercy-seat.  2.  Clear  indications 
of  God's  acceptance.  These  vary  with  the  age  and  circumstances.  The  high  priest 
was  endowed  under  special  conditions  with  the  power  of  indicating  the  Divine 
approval.  External  channels  may  convey  immistakably  the  will  of  God.  The 
immediate  course  of  events  may  be  seen  to  correspond  to  the  request.  God  is  at  no 
loss  to  convey  outward  intimations  that  the  prayer  of  faith  is  not  in  vain.  3.  The 
inward  witness  may  be  given,  clear  and  strong,  when  God  has  important  ends  to 
accomplish  thereby.  The  Spirit  of  God  is  in  direct  contact  with  the  human,  and  can 
make  known  a  truth.  Christ's  people  know  his  voice.  As  the  Spirit  moved  St.  Paul  to 
go  to  definite  places,  so  he  moves  the  true  heart  to  believe  in  coming  answer  to  prayer. 

Practical  suggestions: — 1.  Much  prayer  may  be  offered  when  forms  of  worship 
are  lacking,  in  the  sanctuary,  in  the  city,  on  the  open  sea,  and  nt  daily  toil.  2.  En- 
couragement maybe  found  in  remembering  that  God  understands  our  thoughts  "  afar 
off,"  and  when  words  fail.  3.  We  should  not  estimate  the  value  of  prayer  in  others 
by  what  we  can  ascertain  of  it  by  our  observation.  4.  The  guardians  of  pure  worship 
have  much  need  of  charity  and  a  discriminating  spirit.  6.  Errors  of  judgment  should 
be  freely  admitted  when  ascertained.  6.  The  quiet  dignity  of  truth  befits  all  acts  of 
self-defence.    7.  The  joy  coming  from  God  is  the  real  strength  and  beautifier  of  life. 

Vers.  19 — 28. — Conjugal  sympathy.  The  facts  are— 1.  Hannah,  having  inde- 
pendently fixed    the  future  of  lier  offspring,  reveals  the   vow   to   her   husband 


OH.  1. 9—28.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  IT 


2.  Elkanah  acquiesces  in  her  vow,  and  allows  her  will  in  respect  of  time  and 
method  of  perfecting  it.  3.  A  united  and  solemn  surrender  of  Samuel  to  his  life 
work. 

I.  Qualified  wifely  independence.  Although  Elkanah  knew  his  wife's  great 
sorrow,  yet  in  the  matters  connected  with  its  removal  and  in  the  subsequent 
transactions  she  evidently  followed  her  own  course.  It  was  a  great  decision  to  fix  a 
child's  lot  in  life  apart  from  consultation  and  consent.  The  spontaneous  choice  of  a 
name,  though  harmonious  with  a  mother's  secret  knowledge  of  past  experiences,  was 
in  any  case,  and  more  so  in  Hebrew  instances,  a  bold  undertaking.  The  event  of 
naming  furnished,  most  probably,  the  occasion  for  explanation  and  revelation  of  the 
anterior  vow,  and  was  faced  with  the  most  perfect  composure.  The  mother's  feelings 
are  ever  to  be  considered  in  parting  with  children  as  they  enter  on  life's  work ;  but 
here  the  time  and  method  appear  to  have  been  fixed  by  the  mother  taking  the  initiative, 
and,  contrary  to  rule,  the  wife  is  the  prominent  figure  in  the  religious  ceremonial 
of  dedication,  whose  set  purpose  throughout  therein  attains  its  goal.  No  law  of 
social  and  dopvestic  life  is  more  clearly  laid  down  in  Scripture  than  the  subordina- 
tion of  the  wife  to  the  husband,  and  though  there  are  principles  which  limit  the 
subordination,  and  sentiments  which  convert  it  into  blissful  freedom,  yet  independence 
of  action  where  ofEspring  are  concerned,  is  as  rare  as  it  is,  per  se,  undesirable.  The 
high  intellectual  and  moral  qualities  which  render  wifely  action  free  and  firm  within 
the  sphere  of  private  affairs,  are  perverted  when  applied  to  the  independent  deter- 
mination of  the  destiny  of  a  son.  The  spirit  of  self-assertion  will  have  no  place  in 
a  well-ordered  home.  The  grace  and  the  moral  power  of  woman  vanish  or  become 
enfeebled  when  deeds  are  done  in  secret,  and  the  natural  authority  of  the  head  of  the 
house  is  anticipated.  Yet  there  are  conditions  which  render  such  independence  for  a 
season  both  necessary  and  even  religious.  1.  Hannah's  conduct  was  connected  with 
an  event  in  her  religious  experience  too  sacred  even  for  a  loving  husband  to  be 
acquainted  with.  One  cannot  unbosom,  even  to  the  dearest  earthly  friend,  the  deep 
and  passionate  longings  of  the  soul  after  God.  The  child  of  promise  belongs 
primarily  to  the  one  to  whom  the  promise  is  made,  and  so  a  special  proprietorship  is 
created  which  gives  right  to  choice  as  to  the  use  to  be  made  of  the  gift.  2.  Confidence 
in  a  husband's  sympathy  with  lofty  religious  aims  will  justify  wifely  freedom,  when 
that  freedom  is  employed  to  perfect  holy  purposes.  There  are  great  and  noble  deeds 
within  the  proper  right  of  a  husband  which  he  would  only  rejoice  to  see  independently 
performed  by  a  confiding  wife.  Where  mutual  confidence  is  fortified  by  years  of 
common  sorrow,  no  great  error  will  be  committed  in  interpreting  religious  wishes. 
3.  The  soul  that  is  bent  on  the  realisation  of  a  great  religious  hope,  and  has  pondered 
it  for  years,  best  knows  the  means  by  which  it  may  be  secured.  None  but  Hannah 
could  see  clearly  the  need  of  winning  over  the  assistance  of  Eli,  and  the  previous 
interview  of  the  woman  of  "  sorrowful  spirit "  with  the  high  priest  required  that  she 
should  figure  in  the  great  ceremonial  of  devoting  a  child  to  God. 

II.  Wise  husbandly  consideration.  The  legal  rights  secured  by  Divine  law 
(Num.  XXX.  6 — 8)  are  at  once  surrendered  by  acquiescence  in  a  holy,  God-honouring 
vow ;  acceptance  of  a  memorial  name ;  deference  to  wishes  in  matters  of  detail,  and 
cheerful  co-operation  in  completing  the  vow.  Piety  and  prudence  combine  in  making 
concessions  where  pure  motives  have  influenced  conduct,  and  where  the  ends  sought 
are  wise  and  useful.  Exacting  men  never  enjoy  the  full  love  and  confidence  of  their 
home.  It  would  be  blessed  for  many  homes  were  the  holy  daring  of  Hannah  and 
the  wise,  gentle  bearing  of  Elkanah  more  frequent.  The  key  to  such  conduct  lies  not 
in  rigid  conformity  to  excellent  rules  prescribing  spheres  of  action,  nor  in  mutual 
watchfulness,  but  in  pure  afEection  for  a  loving,  faithful  wife ;  a  quick  perception  of 
the  special  providence  which  over-rules  earthly  trials ;  sympathy  with  the  noble  piety 
that  could  so  spontaneously  and  cheerfully  surrender  the  realised  hope  of  many  a 
weary  year ;  a  conviction  that  a  devout  soul  so  evidently  led  on  by  God  is  by  far  the 
safest  guide  in  matters  pertaining  to  completed  vows,  and  an  unexpressed  joy  in  the 
honour  of  being  permitted  to  join  in  offering  to  God  the  precious  treasure  he  had 
given.     Hence  we  may  learn  a  few 

General  lessons  : — 1.  Personal  and  private  decisions  based  on  a  supreme  regard  for 
the  glory  of  God,  and  free  from  selfishness,  are  anre  to  be  appreciated  in  a  pioui 
BAH.  • 


li  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [cm.  i.  »— 28. 

home.  2.  A  loving  recognition  of  individuality  and  force  of  character  ia  essential  to 
perfect  domestic  harmony.  3.  Personal  influence  in  the  sphere  of  home  becomes 
powerful  when  holy  discipline  has  purged  selfishness  and  brought  the  spirit  into  deep 
sympathy  with  the  kingdom  of  God.  4.  There  is  no  pain,  but  joy,  in  sacrifice  when 
our  possessions  are  recognised  as  truly  God's,  and  we  perceive  the  honour  of  their 
being  employed  in  his  name.  6.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  for  children  to  be  spontaneously 
consecrated  to  God  by  the  prayers  of  self-sacrificing  parents.  6.  Those  who  by 
reason  of  circumstances  cannot  serve  in  the  sanctuary,  may  perhaps  be  permitted  to 
nurture  children  for  the  ministry  of  the  word. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  9  (Hi.  8).  (Shiloh.) — Thetempleof  the  Lord.  Most  of  the  religious  ideas  and 
expressions  with  which  we  are  familiar  had  their  origin  far  back  in  distant  ages ;  and 
it  is  interesting  and  instructive  to  trace  them  to  their  source,  and  mark  their 
alteration  and  expansion  in  the  progressive  course  of  Divine  revelation.  This  is 
the  first  instance  in  which  the  expression  "  the  temple  of  the  Lord  "  occurs.    Notice — 

I.  Its  SCRIPT0BAL  applications.  1.  A  material  structure.  "  In  the  earliest  ages 
God  was  worshipped  without  any  distinction  at  any  time  and  at  any  place,  whenever 
and  wherever  the  promptings  of  devotion  moved  in  the  hearts  of  his  creatures  ;  more 
especially,  however,  under  the  shadow  of  embowering  trees,  on  hills  and  mountains, 
and  in  places  where  they  had  experienced  some  special  manifestations  of  his  favour  " 
(Jahn).  The  first  erection  (with  the  exception  of  altars)  was  (1)  the  tabernacle  or 
lent  (Exod.  xxv.  8),  here  called  the  temple  or  (more  literally)  the  palace  oi.  Jehovah, 
as  the  royal  residence  of  the  king  of  Israel.  Afterwards  (2)  the  temple  of  Solomon  ; 
(3)  of  Zerubbabel ;  and  (4)  of  Herod.  2.  The  incamate  Word  (John  i.  14  ;  ii.  21 ; 
Col.  ii.  19).  3.  Christian  men.  The  body  of  each  (1  Cor.  vi.  19).  The  whole 
assembly  (1  Cor.  iii.  16  ;  2  Cor.  vi.  16  ;  Eph.  ii.  20—22 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  6).  Observe  the 
progress  : — God /or  us,  with  us,  in  us  ;  Father,  Son,  Spirit.  4.  The  heavenly  world. 
Although  there  is  no  temple  therein  (Rev,  xxi.  22),  yet  heaven  is  altogether  a  temple 
(Rev.  vii.  15). 

II.  Its  main  significance  in  all  these  applications.  It  is — 1.  Set  apart  for  the 
Lord.  Selected,  separated,  and  consecrated  as  his  possession,  and  for  his  use.  2. 
Inhabited  by  him.  His  throne  is  there.  He  dwells  between  the  cherubim,  in 
fellowship  with  the  redeemed.  3.  Manifests  him  in  his  holiness  and  love.  His 
glory  appears,  his  voice  is  heard,  his  will  is  declared  (Exod.  xxv.  22  ;  Heb.  iv.  16). 
4.  7»  tt  service  is  rendered  to  him.  At  first  it  was  chiefly  in  outward  symbolical 
acts ;  afterwards  of  the  man  himself,  "  body,  soul,  and  spirit "  (Rom.  xii.  1 ;  1  Pet. 
ii.  9 ;  Rev.  i.  6).  In  each  of  these  particulars  we  see  the  principle  of  progress,  from 
the  natural  to  the  spiritual  (1  Cor.  zv.  46). 

III.  Its  spiritual  suggestions.  1.  That  the  place  in  which  man  worships  is  of 
far  less  importance  than  m,an  himself  and  his  possession  of  a  holy  character.  No 
place  or  building  can  be  holy  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word.  For  holiness  implies 
intelligence,  afEection,  freedom ;  and  these  make  him  unspeakably  greater  than  all 
"  the  gorgeous  palaces  and  solemn  temples  "  which  the  earth  contains.  "  To  this 
man  will  I  look,"  Ac.  (Isa.  Ivii.  15  ;  Ixvii.  1,  2 ;  Matt.  xii.  6).  "  Let  more  regard 
be  paid  to  the  promotion  of  religion  than  the  decoration  of  churches  ;  for  although 
it  is  a  good  thing  that  churches  should  be  beautiful  edifices,  yet  virtue  forms  their 
best  crown  and  ornament.  It  seems  to  us  that  the  building  of  handsome  churches 
pertains  rather  to  the  Old  Testament,  whilst  the  improvement  of  character  and  life 
is  the  more  peculiar  work  of  the  Christian  dispensation  "  (Charlemagne,  Capitulary 
of  the  year  811).  2.  That  the  pattern  to  which  the  character  of  man  must  be  con- 
formed it  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  not  only  the.  Living  Stone  to  whom  every  one  must 
come  that  he  may  be  built  up  into  the  "  spiritual  house,"  the  Chief  Corner-stone  on 
which  the  whole  building  resta,  bnt  also  the  perfect  Model  according  to  which  each 
and  all  must  be  fashioned  (Rom.  viii.  29).  3.  That  the  character  of  man  is  con- 
formed to  its  Divine  pattern  by  tlie  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  4.  That  only 
thou  in  wAoM  Ood  dwells  here  will  befit  to  dwell  with  God  hereafter,  and  constitute 


OB.  I.  »-S8.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  19 

the  heavenly  tabernacle  and  temple  (Bev.  xxi.  3).  Above  all  things,  leek  to  be  in 
the  building  which  6od  is  rearing  for  his  habitation,  and  for  an  everlasting  monu- 
ment to  his  praise. — D. 

Vers.  9 — 13.  (Shiloh.) — Effeelwd  prayer.  Prayer  is  converse  with  God.  The 
general  principles  which  are  necessary  that  it  may  be  acceptable  and  effectual  were 
exemplified  by  Hannah  in  the  prayer  which  she  offered  at  the  porch  of  the  tabernacle 
in  Shiloh,  whilst  other  and  more  special  principles  were  contained  therein.  She  was 
possessed  of  great  intelligence,  sensibility,  meekness,  and  spirituality  of  mind,  and 
embodied  the  noblest  spiritual  element  existing  amongst  her  people,  even  as  she  was 
a  type  of  their  history  (ever  rising  out  of  weakness  and  distress  through  humiliation, 
faith,  and  prayer,  into  strength,  and  joy,  and  triumph).     Consider  her  prayer  as — 

I.  BuKN  or  DBEP  80RB0W.  "  She  was  in  bitterness  of  soul,  and  wept  sore  "  (ver.  10). 
Seemingly  forgotten  of  God,  an  object  of  reproach  and  scorn,  without  indulging 
feelings  of  resentment,  imable  to  tell  her  trouble  to  any  one  else,  she  betook  herself 
to  him  who  is  "  a  Refuge  for  the  oppressed  in  times  of  trouble."  Prayer  is  the  best 
resource  at  such  times ;  and  grief  of  heart,  together  with  the  loneliness  which  it 
usually  causes,  often  lead  to  "the  pouring  out  of  the  soul  before  tlie  Lord."  What 
a  beneficent  power  is  sorrow  in  a  world  like  this  I  And  how  blessed  are  the  fruits 
which,  through  Divine  grace,  it  produces  I  (Ps.  Iv.  22  ;  Hosea  ii.  15 ;  1  Pet  v.  7). 

II.  Uttebed  only  in  the  heart  (ver.  13).  The  first  recorded  instance  of  silent 
or  mental  prayer.  The  ordinary  worshippers  at  the  tabernacle  prayed  with  audible 
words,  and  significant  gestures  ;  and  in  the  East  to  this  day  the  people  pray  in  the 
same  manner,  and  have  little  or  no  idea  of  praying  only  in  the  mind.  They  are 
more  demonstrative  than  ourselves.  "  Mental  prayer  is  a  lifting  up  of  the  mind  to 
God  in  actual  or  virtual  supplication  for  what  we  desire."  It  is — 1.  Frequently  a 
necessity  ;  inasmuch  as  it  would  not  be  always  proper  to  express  in  the  presence  of 
others  the  desires  of  the  heart.  2.  Presumptively  smcere;  inasmuch  as  it  consists 
of  direct  intercourse  with  the  Invisible  and  Omniscient  One,  and  cannot  spring  from 
a  desire  to  be  seen  or  heard  of  men.  3.  Highly  beneficial ;  inasmuch  as  it  «ei  ves 
to  strengthen  the  spirit  of  prayer,  and  is  heard  of  God  (Neh.  li.  4).  Even  when  It 
does  not  shape  itself  in  words  within  the  mind,  but  consists  of  aspirations  and 
"groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered,"  "  he  that  searcheth  the  hearts  knoweth  what 
is  the  mind  of  the  spirit"  therein  (Eom.  viii.  27). 

III.  Expressive  of  fervent  desire.  Desire  is  the  soul  of  prayer.  It  arises  from, 
and  is  proportionate  to,  the  sense  of  need.  Its  intensity  is  not  always  manifested 
by  audible  words ;  for  sometimes  its  strength  is  dispersed  and  exhausted  thereby ; 
whereas  silence  condenses  and  increases  it.  "  Deepest  waters  stillest  flow."  Our 
desires  cannot  be  too  fervent,  or  our  requests  too  importunate,  provided  they  be  for 
things  which  are  according  to  the  will  of  God  (Eom.  xii.  12 ;  1  John  v.  M,  16). 

"  Fervent  love 
And  lively  hope  with  violence  assail 
The  kingdom  of  the  heavens,  and  overcome 
The  will  of  the  Most  High  j  not  in  such  sort 
As  man  prevails  o'er  man  ;  but  conquers  it 
Because  tia  willing  to  he  conquer'd ;  stiU, 
Though  conquer'd,  by  its  mercy  conquering." 

Dante,  'Div.  Com.,'  Par.  xx. 

IV.  EXHIBITINO  GENUINE  FAITH.  "  0  Lord  of  hosts,"  &c.  (ver.  11).  Like  Abra- 
ham, she  "  believed  in  the  Lord  "  (Gen.  xv.  6) ;  truated,  leant  on  him,  as  a  child  rests 
on  the  bosom  of  a  parent.  She  had  exalted  conceptions  of  his  character ;  believed 
in  (1)  his  living  personality,  supreme  dominion,  power,  goodness,  faithfulness  (Heb, 
xi.  6)  ;  relied  on  (2)  his  promises,  summed  up  in  the  assurance, "  I  will  he  your  God  " 
(Exod.  vi.  7  ;  Levit.  xxvi.  12);  and  (3)  although  she  had  no  express  promise  of  the 
particular  blessmg  which  she  desired,  yet,  inwardly  taught,  she  applied  the  general 
oromise  to  herself,  and  had  "  confidence  respecting  things  hoped  for  "  (Heb.  xi.  1). 
When  express  promises  are  wanting,  it  behoves  us  to  seek  particular  blessings  with 
Ot*  utmost  dependence  and  submission;  but,  so  far  from  being  prohibited  from 

of 


20  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  l  »— 28, 

Reeking  them,  we  are  encouraged  to  do  so  by  the  unlimited  range  of  such  directioni 
as  this :  "  WJmt  things  soever  ye  desire,  when  ye  pray,"  &c.  (Mark  xi.  24). 

V.  Distinguished  by  entire  self-stjebbndek.  Once  and  again  she  called  herself 
the  "  handmaid  "  of  the  Lord,  as  belonging  to  him,  and  wholly  devoted  to  his  service. 
Her  will  she  freely  offered  up  in  sacrifice  to  his,  and  made  a  fresh  surrender  of  her- 
self in  her  solemn  engagement  to  render  back  to  him  the  gift  he  might  bestow. 
She  sought  not  her  own  gratification,  but  his  glory  and  the  welfare  of  his  people. 
"  The  vow  of  the  Nazarite  embodied  the  yearning  of  the  better  part  of  the  nation  for 
a  moral  and  religious  reformation,  as  the  only  hope  of  Israel.  It  symbolised  Israel's 
perfect  calling  of  voluntary  self-surrender  to  God  "  (Edersheim).  When  we  seek 
not  our  own,  but  make  it  subservient  to  higher  and  larger  good,  we  place  ourselves 
in  a  line  with  the  Divine  purposes,  and  may  entertain  sure  and  steadfast  hope  of 
success. 

VI.  Offeeed  with  steadfast  pebsevebancb.  "  She  continued  praying  before  the 
Lord"  (ver.  12).  It  was  not  a  momentary  ebullition  of  feeling,  but  the  fixed  direc- 
tion of  her  whole  soul  (Gen.  xxxii.  26  ;  Luke  xi.  8  ;  xviii.  1 ;  Eph.  vi.  18). 

VII.  Followed  by  an  abundant  blessing.  The  benediction  of  the  high  priest 
(ver.  17)  was  to  her  an  oracle  of  God,  to  be  in  due  time  fulfilled  ;  whilst  the  imme- 
diate efEect  on  her  heart  was  peace  and  gladness,  and  "  she  went  away,  and  did  eat, 
and  her  countenance  was  no  more  sad."  "Prayer  is  heart's  ease  to  the  gracious 
soul."— D. 

"  Lord,  what  a  change  within  us  one  short  hour, 
Spent  in  thy  presence,  will  prevail  to  make  ; 
What  heavy  burdens  from  our  bosoms  take  ; 
What  parched  grounds  refresh  as  with  a  shower  I "  (Trench). 

Vers.  11(21,23,28).  (Shiloh.)— Fow».  "And  she  vowed  a  vow."  The  first  recorded 
instance  of  a  religious  vow  is  that  of  Jacob  (Gen.  xxviii.  20  ;  xxxi.  13).  Under  a  sense 
of  obligation  to  God,  he  entered  into  a  spontaneous  and  solemn  engagement  before  him 
to  do  what  he  believed  would  be  pleasing  in  his  sight,  joining  with  it  the  desire  of 
obtaining  certain  benefits  at  his  hand.  He  did  not,  as  it  has  been  said,  make  a  bar- 
gain with  God  ;  but  gratefully  repeated  what  had  been  virtually  promised  ("  if  "  or 
"  since  God  will  be  with  me,"  &c.),  and  simply  desired  those  blessings,  without  which 
it  would  be  impossible  for  him  to  fulfil  his  purpose.  Directions  concerning  the  practice 
of  making  vows  were  given  in  the  Law  (Levit.  xxvii. ;  Num.  vi.,  xxx. ).  The  age 
of  the  judges  was  an  age  of  vows.  "  Then  appears  a  new  power  of  the  age,  the  bind- 
ing vow — a  spasmodic  impulse,  dangerous  to  many,  yet  in  the  greatest  emergencies 
of  life  indispensable ;  bracing  up  the  deepest  energies,  and  working  the  greatest 
marvels ;  often  renovating,  or  else  entirely  transforming,  whole  nations  and  religions ; 
assuming  a  thousand  forms,  and  in  all,  while  the  first  fidelity  endures,  exercising  an 
indomitable  power"  (Bwald).  Jephthah  —  Samson  —  Samuel.  Vows  are  seldom 
alluded  to  in  the  New  Testament  (Luke  i.  16  ;  Acts  xviii.  18 ;  ixi.  23).  In  some  of 
their  forms,  and  in  so  far  as  they  might  embody  a  legal  spirit,  they  are  done  away. 
But  they  are  not  prohibited;  and,  understood  as  denoting  a  solemn  binding  of  our- 
selves to  the  service  of  God,  or  resolutions  and  engagements  made  before  him  to 
perform  or  omit  certain  definite  acts,  they  are  often  needful  and  beneficial.  Con- 
sider that — 

I.  There  are  certain  things  to  which  they  may  lawfully  febtain.  1.  Things 
over  which  we  possess  a  rightful  authority.  We  may  not  vow  what  does  not  belong 
to  us.  2.  Things  which  ought  to  be  done,  independently  of  vows  ;  but  the  obligation 
of  which  is  felt  for  the  first  time,  or  with  unusual  force.  3.  Things  which  are  in  them- 
selves indiferent ;  being  right  or  wrong  according  to  the  individual  conscience,  but 
with  reference  to  which  a  vow  creates  a  new  obligation.  The  vow  of  a  Nazarite  to 
abstain  from  wine,  &c.  4.  Things,  more  particularly,  that  relate  to  the  use  of  (1) 
property  (Gen.  xxviii.  22;  1  Cor.  xvi.  2);  (2)  time;  (3)  infiuence  over  others. 
especially  in  the  training  of  children;  (4)  the  various  powers  of  body  and  »oid 
(Eom.  xii.  1). 

II.  There  are  special  occasions  on  which  they  abb  appbopbiatbly  madk.  1. 
Severe  trouble — personal  affliction,  nearness  to  death,  bereavement;   bringing  the 


OH.  I.  9—28.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  fll 

invisible  and  eternal  nigh,  teaching  dependence  on  Ood,  and  exciting  desire  for  his 
help  (Iga.  Ixvi.  13,  14).  2.  Singular  prosperity — unexpected  recovery  from  illnesB, 
extraordinary  deliverance  from  danger,  unwonted  providential  and  spiritual  benefits, 
temporal  success.  3.  Spiritual  exercises — in  public  worship,  private  meditation, 
religious  profession.  4.  Starting-points  of  life — a  birthday,  the  first  day  of  a  new 
year,  the  commencement  of  a  fresh  enterprise.  These  things  are  often  occasions 
of  spiritual  illumination  and  impression,  mountain  heights  that  rise  above  the  mists 
of  ordinary  life  ;  and  it  is  well  to  embody  the  views  and  feelings  then  entertained  in 
fixed  purposes,  definite  resolutions,  solemn  vows  for  future  guidance  and  help. 
"  Vow,  and  pay  unto  the  Lord  your  God  "  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  11). 

III.  They  sHonLD  always  be  made  in  a  proper  spirit.  With — 1.  Dvs  ddiberar 
tion  (Eocles.  v.  2),  so  as  to  ascertain  "  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is,"  and  what  we 
may  reasonably  hope  to  accomplish,  lest  they  should  become  a  burden  and  tempta- 
tion. 2.  A  sense  of  dependence  on  jjimne  grace  ;  and  not  in  a  self-righteous  spirit, 
as  if  our  service  were  exceedingly  meritorious,  and  deserved  to  be  richly  rewarded. 
3.  Humble  and  earnest  prayer  for  the  aid  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  Vows  made  in  our 
own  strength  are  "  as  the  morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew."  4.  Faith  in  Christ, 
the  perfect  pattern  of  self -surrender  and  self-sacrifice,  the  way  of  approach  to  God, 
the  medium  of  Divine  blessing.  "  Bind  the  sacrifice  with  cords,  even  unto  the  horns 
of  the  altar  "  (Ps.  cxviii.  27). 

IV.  When  made  they  ought  to  be  strictly  pdlfillbd.  Their  making  is  optional, 
voluntary;  not  so  their  performance.  Their  oblij<ation  —  1.  Changes  not  with 
a  change  of  feeling,  even  with  respect  to  those  things  which  are,  in  themselves, 
mdifferent.  „  ,^^  ^^^^  ^^.^j^  ^^^  j^^  insight  willed 

Must  bo  m  hours  of  gloom  fulfilled." 

2.  Bests  upon  the  same  ground  as  that  of  the  obligation  of  promises  generally,  and 

is  specially  strong  because  of  their  sacred  character.  3.  Is  enforced  by  the  conse- 
quences of  their  observance  or  neglect.  Their  fulfilment  is  a  means  of  grace.  Broken 
vows  undermine  the  foundations  of  character,  interfere  with  Divine  fellowship,  and 
pave  the  way  to  destruction  (Ecoles.  v.  4 — 6).  4.  Requires  their  performance  with 
sincerity  (in  the  sense  intended,  not  by  the  substitution  of  something  else,  not  in 
part  merely),  cheerfulness  (Ps.  cxvi.  17,  18),  and  promptitude.  "Defer  not." 
"  There  is  a  Greek  mythical  story  of  the  treatment  of  the  goddess  Juno  by  Mandra- 
bulus  the  Samian.  This  man  had,  under  her  auspices,  and  by  her  directions,  dis- 
covered a  golden  mine.  In  the  first  flush  of  gratitude  he  vowed  to  her  a  golden 
ram ;  however,  he  presently  exchanged  that  for  a  silver  one,  and  again  that  for  a 
very  small  brass  one,  and  that  for  nothing  at  all "  (Trench).  "  It  is  storied  of  a 
merchant  that  in  a  great  storm  at  sea  vowed  to  Jupiter,  if  he  would  save  him  and 
his  vessel,  to  give  him  a  hecatomb.  The  storm  ceaseth,  and  he  bethinks  that  a 
hecatomb  was  unreasonable  ;  he  resolves  on  seven  oxen.  Another  tempest  comes, 
arid  now  again  he  vows  the  seven  at  least.  Delivered,  then  also  he  thought  that 
seven  were  too  many,  and  one  ox  would  serve  his  turn.  Yet  another  peril  comes, 
and  now  he  vows  solemnly  to  fall  no  lower ;  if  he  might  be  rescued,  an  ox  Jupiter 
shall  have.  Again  freed,  the  ox  sticks  in  his  stomach,  and  he  would  fain  draw  his 
devotion  to  a  lower  rate ;  a  sheep  was  sufficient.  But  at  last,  being  set  ashore,  he 
thought  a  sheep  too  much,  and  purposeth  to  carry  to  the  altar  only  a  few  dates. 
But  by  the  way  he  eats  up  the  dates,  and  lays  on  the  altar  only  the  shells.  After 
this  manner  do  many  perform  their  vows  "  (Adams,  vol.  L  p.  112). — D. 

Vers.  13—18.  (Smw^.)— Undeserved  rebuke.  The  duty  of  rebuking  othere  when 
they  do  evil  is  often  enjoined  (Levit.  xix.  17 ;  1  Thess.  v.  14),  and  is  especially 
incumbent  on  those  who  occupy  positions  of  authority.  But  how  seldom  is  rebuke 
given  or  received  aright !  Eli,  the  aged  judge  and  high  priest,  sitting  on  the  judg- 
ment-seat, "  by  a  post  of  the  temple  of  the  Lord,"  and  observing  a  woman  ejdiibiting 
signs  of  excited  feeling,  severely  rebuked  her  for  being  intoxicated  with  wine.  In 
his  words,  and  what  followed,  we  have  rebuke — 

I.  Uttered  without  justice  (vers.  13,  14).  There  was  certainly  apparent 
ground  for  the  judgment  he  formed ;  for  excitement  caused  by  wine  was  probablj 


tl  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  l  »— Sa 

no  uncommon  thing  at  the  tabernacle  in  those  coirapt  timea.  But  he  did  not 
"judge  righteously'  (John  vii.  24).  Loam— 1.  That  apparent  ground  for  jseneure 
is  often  found  on  inquiry  to  be  really  groundless.  Therefore  there  should  be  proof 
before  reproof.  2.  That  the  most  excellent  are  often  the  most  misjudged,  especially 
in  religious  matters.  Whilst  sensual  excitement  was  often  seen,  spiritual  excitement 
was  rare.  Beligious  services  were  formal,  cold,  and  dead ;  and  holy  fervour  was 
natnrally  misunderstood  and  misinterpreted  by  superficial  observers.  So  they  who 
were  filled  with  the  Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  were  accused  of  being  filled  with 
new  wine.  And  men  of  large  views,  disinterested  motives,  and  exalted  aims  are 
often  condemned  by  the  ignorant,  selfish,  and  unspiritual.  3.  That  the  highest  in 
authority  are  liable  to  err  in  judgment.  Infallibility  belongs  to  God  alone.  The 
assumption  of  it  by  men  is  rebuked  by  their  own  manifest  mistakes  and  failings, 
and  is  an  insult  to  heaven.  4.  That  persons  who  think  that  they  see  clearly  the 
faults  of  others  are  commonly  blind  to  their  own  transgressions  (Matt.  vii.  3 ;  Bom. 
ii.  1).  Eli  was  unconscious  of  his  own  easily  besetting  sin,  wluch  consisted  in  his 
indulgent  treatment  of  his  children  and  their  vices.  6.  That  those  who  censure 
others  should  themselves  be  undeserving  of  censure.  6.  That  our  own  exposure  to 
judgment  should  make  us  cautious  in  passing  judgment  on  others  (Matt.  vii.  1 — 5). 
7.  That  it  is  the  part  of  charity  to  put  the  best  construction  on  their  conduct, 
"  Believeth  all  things ;  hopeth  all  things."  Eli  exhibited  a  want  of  knowledge, 
consideration,  charity,  and  tenderness.  How  different  the  High  Priest  and  Judge 
"with  whom  we  have  to  do  "  I 

IL  BoBNi  WITH  MBEKNKSS.  Hannah  was  not  only  innocent  of  the  vice  for  which 
ahe  was  rebuked,  but  was  at  the  time  uttering  a  vow  that  if  the  Lord  would  give 
her  a  son  he  should  be  a  Nazarite,  and  a  life-long  protest  against  that  vice  and 
other  prevailing  evils.  Her  fervour  of  spirit  was  equalled  by  her  calmness,  self- 
control,  and  discreet  answer  to  the  reproach  of  Eli  (vers.  16,  16).  Learn — 1.  That 
resentment  and  retaliation  toward  unjust  accusers  afford  no  evidence  of  innocence. 
Some  persons  when  rebuked  fly  into  a  passion,  and  utter  worse  judgments  on  others 
than  have  been  pronounced  on  themselves.  2.  That  a  good  conscience  can  be  calm 
under  accusation.  3.  That  appearances  which  seem  to  justify  censure  should  be  as 
fuUy  as  possible  explained.  4.  That  those  who  say  they  are  not  guilty  of  sin  should 
show  their  abhorrence  of  sin.  "  Call  not  thine  handmaid  a  daughter  of  Belial " 
('  a  worthless  woman ').  In  her  view  intoxication  was  a  great  sin,  and  deserving  of 
severe  condemnation.  5.  How  beautiful  is  "the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet 
spirit **  6.  To  look  to  Christ  as  the  perfect  pattern  of  the  spirit  here  exhibited, 
and  the  source  of  the  grace  which  is  needed  for  its  exercise  (1  Pet.  ii.  20 — ^28). 
"Let  me  find  grace  in  thy  sight." 

IIL  TuBNED  INTO  BBNBDioTiON  (vers.  17, 18).  Leam — 1.  That  those  who  see  that 
they  have  erred  in  judgment  should  be  ready  to  acknowledge  their  error.  2.  That 
meekness  and  patience  are  adapted  to  change  a  severe  reprover  into  a  kind  friend. 
3.  That  the  endurance  of  rebuke  in  a  right  spirit  is  often  a  means  of  obtaining  a 
favourable  answer  to  prayer.  Ood  himself  spoke  through  the  voice  of  the  high 
priest  (ver.  17 ;  John  xi.  61),  4.  That  it  also  causes  perturbation  and  sorrow  to 
give  place  to  peace  and  joy  (Matt.  v.  6,  11).  "  Strive  to  rejoice  when  others  use 
towards  thee  words  of  injury  or  rebuke,  or  despise  thee.  For  a  rich  treasure  lies 
hid  beneath  this  dust ;  and,  if  thou  take  it  willingly,  thou  wilt  soon  find  thyself 
rich  unperceived  by  those  who  have  bestowed  this  gift  upon  thee  "  (Soupoli). — D. 

Vers.  13 — 18. — Harsh  judgment  meeMy  answered.  We  hear  much  of  the  mothers 
of  eminent  men,  and  it  is  easy  to  see  whence  Samuel  derived  his  elevation  of  mind, 
his  religious  temperament,  and  the  natural  aptitude  to  be  a  seer  and  prophet  of  God. 
It  was  from  his  mother— the  sensitive,  poetical,  devout,  imselfish  Hannah.  Her 
prayer  at  the  house  of  the  Lord  in  Shiloh  shows  her  in  a  noble  light.  She  asked  for 
no  vengeance  on  her  adversary  Peninnah,  who  had  so  often  taunted  her,  but  only  for 
a  son  whom  she  might  devote  as  a  pure  Nazarite  to  Jehovah's  service.  Her  thought 
reourred  to  the  last  great  judge  of  Israel— the  Nazarite  Samson.  The  work  which 
he  might  have  performed  had  been  very  imperfectly  done ;  and  Hannah's  devout  and 
patriotic  wiih  was  to  give  birth  to  one  who  might  repair  the  failure  of  Samson,  aa 


m.  L  9—28.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  SS 

well  88  remedy  the  evil  wrought  by  the  sons  of  EH,  and  work  a  great  deliverance 
for  Israel. 

I.  Pious  emotioh  habshlt  cehsdbbd.  If  Hannah's  grayer  had  been  mocked  by 
the  profane,  it  had  not  surprised  her ;  but  this  was  her  tnal,  that  the  venerable  priest, 
whose  duty  it  was  to  recognise  and  encoqrage  religious  aspiration,  cruelly  miscon- 
strued her  agitation,  and  charged  her  with  wickedness.  Eli  was  weak  towards  men, 
stem  to  a  woman.  He  could  not  restrain  his  own  sons,  but  he  could  speak  sharply 
and  severely  to  Hannah.  The  only  palliation  of  his  readiness  to  impute  evil  to  her 
lies  in  the  fact  that,  through  his  weakness,  there  had  come  to  be  a  great  license  of 
manners  at  the  time,  and  women  of  Israel  misconducted  themselves  at  the  very  seat 
of  worship.  Eli  took  Hannah  for  one  of  these,  and  her  holy  ardour  for  the  agitation 
of  one  unduly  excited  by  wine.  Behgious  emotion,  especially  in  persons  of  a  sensi- 
tive and  pensive  nature,  may  resemble  the  effect  of  "  wine  wherein  is  excess  "  in  the 
eyes  of  a  careless  or  unsympathetic  observer.  And  this  applies  to  the  joyful  as  well 
as  to  the  sorrowful  in  spirit.  On  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when  the  power  of  the  Spirit 
descended  on  the  disciples  of  our  Lord,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost  expressed  itself 
in  their  looks  and  words,  some  of  the  bystanders  began  to  mock  and  say,  "  These 
men  are  full  of  new  wine."  That  religious  fervour  should  be  imappreciated  by 
worldly  minds  need  cause  no  wonder.  That  tears  and  prayers  poured  forth  before 
the  unseen  God  should  be  despised  as  drivelling  superstition,  or  the  flush  of  spiritual 
gladness  derided  as  irrational  frenzy,  by  persons  of  a  cold,  unbelieving  temper,  is 
what  may  be  expected.  But  it  is  hard  to  bear  misconstruction  from  men  Uke  Eli, 
who  ought  to  understand  that  the  spirit  of  man  or  woman  sometimes  faints,  sometimes 
leaps  for  joy  before  the  Lord. 

II.  Thk  equanimity  of  a  good  C0N8CIENCB.  When  one  is  quite  conscious  of 
mnocence  he  can  meet  accusations  with  calmness,  and  repel  them  without  passion  or 
bitterness.  If  Hannah  had  been  unguarded  in  eating  or  drinking  at  the  feast  after 
the  sacrifice  in  Shiloh,  she  would  probably  have  given  a  sharp  answer  to  Eli,  and 
exonerated  herself  from  his  charge  with  some  heat  of  temper.  But  her  conscience 
was  quite  clear  in  the  matter.  From  her  vow  to  make  the  son  for  whose  birth  she 
prayed  a  Nazarite,  we  infer  that  she  was  strongly  sensible  of  the  evils  which  indulg- 
ence in  wine,  and  consequent  licentious  excess,  had  brought  on  the  nation.  So  her 
answer  to  the  priest,  while  firm,  was  calm,  and  even  meek :  "  No,  my  Lord,  I  am  a 
woman  of  a  sorrowful  spirit." 

III.  The  true  besourcb  of  the  sorrowful.  "I  have  poured  out  my  soul  before 
the  Lord."  Hannah  abhorred  the  kind  of  evil  of  which  Eli  accused  her.  "Count 
not  thine  handmaid  for  a  daughter  of  Belial."  Alas,  how  many,  because  they  are 
in  low  spirits,  or  vexed  with  their  lot,  seek  exhilaration  in  wine  or  strong  drink  I  It 
is  a  gross  and  dangerous  consolation,  fit  for  children  of  Belial,  not  for  children  of 
God.  "  Is  any  afflicted  ?  Let  him  pray."  Is  any  anxious  ?  Let  him  by  prayer  and 
supplication,  with  thanksgiving,  make  his  request  known  to  God.  To  be  excited 
with  wine  is  to  have  the  imagination  and  passions  fired  through  the  flesh  and  the 
senses.  For  a  time  care  or  grief  may  be  forgotten,  and  the  mind  may  seem  to 
become  gay  and  brilliant ;  but  as  the  appetite  grows,  and  the  fallacious  pleasure 
beguiles,  there  ensues  degradation  and  sorrow  upon  sorrow ;  the  mind  is  clouded 
and  enfeebled,  and  the  heart  made  selfish  and  gross.  How  different  from  the 
excitement  of  the  praying  heart  that  is  "  filled  with  the  Spirit  I  "  This  takes  hold  of 
the  best  and  highest  part  of  our  nature,  and  from  this  acts  on  the  whole  man — sub- 
dues sensual  passion,  scatters  delusion,  and  while  it  may  for  a  time  agitate  the 
frame,  as  Hannah's  was  agitated,  never  disturbs  or  unhinges  the  reg^ative  principles 
of  reason  and  conscience  within. 

IV.  The  comfort  after  peayeb.  Whatever  the  worth  of  Eli's  personal  character, 
his  ofBce  gave  weight  to  his  words ;  and  when  he  invoked  from  the  God  of  Israel  an 
answer  to  Hannah's  petition,  she  received  his  words  with  reverence,  and  went  home 
with  a  glad  assurance  in  her  heart.  Have  not  we  a  great  High  Priest  who  mis- 
onderstands  no  one,  requires  no  corrective  explanation,  discourages  no  suppliant ;  and 
is  it  not  he  who  has  said,  "  What  things  soever  ye  desire,  when  ye  pray,  believe  that 
▼e  receive  them,  and  ye  shall  have  them "  ?  Look  to  Jesus,  and  where  is  your 
burden?    It  is  gone.    Where  are  yow  tears?    They  are  wiped  away.    Where  is 


S4  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  i.  »-M. 

your  desiied  thing,  your  Samuel  ?  It  is  at  hand.  Go  your  way  when  you  hav» 
poured  out  your  prayer,  for  he  has  heard  you,  and  "  let  your  countenance  be  no 
more  sad." — F. 

Vers.  19 — 28.  (Ramah  and  Shiloh.) — SamueVs  birth  and  infancy.  {References — 
1  Chron.  xxiz.  29,  "  the  seer ; "  Ps.  xcix.  9 ;  Jer.  xv.  1  ;  Acts  iii.  24 ;  xiii.  20 ;  Heb. 
xii.  32 ;  Apoc.  Ecclus.  xlvi.  13 — 20.)  Consolation  and  hope  were  from  the  first 
associated  with  the  birth  of  children  (Gen.  iii.  15 ;  iv.  1,  26 ;  v.  29 ;  xxi.  6).  More 
tlian  ordinary  joy  (John  xvi.  24)  was  felt  at  the  birth  of  Samuel  by  his  mother, 
because  of  the  peculiar  circumstances  connected  therewith,  and  the  expectations 
entertained  by  her  of  the  good  which  he  might  efiect  for  Israel.  Often  as  she 
looked  upon  her  God-given  infant  she  would  think,  "What  manner  of  child  shall 
this  be  ?  "  (Luke  i.  66),  and  ask,  "  How  shall  we  order  the  child,  and  how  shall  we  do 
imto  him?  "  (Judges  xiii.  12).  Nor  did  she  fail  to  do  her  utmost  towards  the  fulfil- 
ment of  her  exalted  hopes.     The  child  was — 

I.  Regarded  as  a  Divine  gift  (Ps.  cxxvii.  4).  Every  little  infant  b«an  the 
impress  of  the  "  Father  of  spirits  "  (James  iii.  9). 

"  Trailing  clouds  of  glory  do  we  come 
From  God,  who  is  our  home. " 

The  gift  of  a  fresh,  new,  mysterious  human  life,  with  its  vast  capabilities,  is  a  great 
gift,  and  demands  grateful  acknowledgment  of  the  Divine  goodness  ;  but  it  is  not  an 
absolute  gift;  it  is  rather  a  trust  which  involves  serious  responsibilities  on  the  part 
of  those  into  whose  hands  it  is  placed.  God  says  in  efEect,  "  Take  this  child,"  &c. 
(Exod.  ii.  9). 

II.  Designated  by  an  appropriate  name  (ver.  20).  Samuel  =  heard  of  God. 
"  The  mother  names,  the  father  assents,  God  approves,  and  time  confirms  the  nomina- 
tion "  (Hunter).  Like  other  personal  names  in  the  Bible,  it  was  full  of  significance  ; 
being  a  grateful  memorial  of  the  goodness  and  faithfulness  of  God  in  the  past,  and 
a  constant  incentive  to  faith  and  prayer  in  the  future.  "  Our  very  names  should  mind 
us  of  our  duty."  The  name  "  Samuel "  was  uttered  by  the  Lord  as  mindful  of  his 
history,  and  recognising  his  special  relation  to  himself  (ch.  iii.  10).  The  name  of  a 
child  is  not  an  unimportant  matter,  and  it  should  be  given  with  due  consideration. 
When  parents  give  their  children  names  borne  by  excellent  men,  they  should  train 
them  to  follow  in  the  footsteps  of  such  men. 

III.  Nurtured  with  motherly  tenderness  (vers.  22 — ^25).  His  mother  was 
herself  his  nurse  (ver.  28),  not  intrusting  him  to  others,  and  not  neglecting  him, 
whereby  many  young  lives  are  sacrificed  ;  but  thoughtfully,  carefully,  and  constantly 
ministering  to  his  physical  needs,  praying  over  him,  and  directing  his  thoughts,  with 
the -earliest  dawn  of  reason,  toward  the  Lord  of  hosts.  That  she  might  the  more 
perfectly  fulfil  her  trust,  she  remained  at  home,  and  went  not  up  to  Shiloh  until  he 
was  weaned.  Her  absence  from  the  sanctuary  was  justifiable,  her  worship  at  home 
was  acceptable,  and  the  service  which  she  rendered  to  her  child  was  a  service 
rendered  to  God  and  to  his  people.  "A  mother's  teachings  have  a  marvellous 
vitality  in  them ;  there  is  a  strange  living  power  in  that  good  seed  which  is  sown  by 
a  mother's  hand  in  her  child's  heart  in  the  early  dawn  of  the  child's  being,  when 
they  two  are  alone  together,  and  the  mother's  soul  gushes  forth  on  her  child,  and  the 
child  listens  to  his  mother  as  a  God  ;  and  there  is  a  deathless  potency  in  a  mother's 
prayers  and  tears  for  those  whom  she  has  borne  which  only  God  can  estimate " 
(W.  L.  Alexander).  "Who  is  best  taught?  He  that  is  taught  of  his  mother" 
('Talmud'). 

IV.  Prayed  over  with  fatherly  solicitude.  Elkanab  consented  to  the  vow  of 
his  wife  (Num.  xxx.  6,  7),  and  appears  to  have  made  it  his  own  (ver.  21).  He  was 
zealous  for  its  performance,  and  whilst  he  agreed  with  her  in  the  desire  of  its  post- 
ponement for  a  brief  period,  he  expressed  the  wish  in  prayer,  "  Only  the  Lord 
establish  his  word  "  (ver.  23).  "  Word,  that  is.  May  he  fulfil  what  he  designs  with 
him,  and  has  promised  by  his  birth  (vers.  11,  20).  The  words  refer,  therefore,  to 
the  hoy's  destination  to  the  service  of  God,  which  the  Eternal  has  in  fact  acknowledged 
by  the  partial  fulfilment  of  the  mother's  wish  "  (Bunsen).     His  frayib  indicate!, 


OH.  I.  9—28.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  t6 

with  respect  to  the  Divine  word — 1.  Confidence  in  its  truth.  He  believed  (1)  that 
it  was  his  word  which  had  been  uttered  by  the  high  priest  (ver.  17)  ;  (2)  that  its 
Divine  origin  and  faithfulness  had  been  in  part  confirmed  by  his  own  act  (ver.  20)  ; 
and  (3)  that  it  would  be  completely  established  by  his  bringing  about  the  end 
designed.  2.  Desire  of  its  fulfilment.  (1)  As  a  matter  of  great  importance.  (2) 
Deeply  felt.  "  Only."  (3)  Through  the  continued  and  gracious  operation  of  God. 
"  The  Lord  establish  his  word."  3.  Obedience  to  its  requirements.  In  order  to  its 
establishment,  co-operation  on  their  part  was — (1)  Necessary.  God's  purposes  and 
promises  are  fulfilled  in  connection  with  human  endeavour,  and  not  independently  of 
it.  (2)  Obligatory.  It  had  been  solemnly  promised  by  them,  and  was  a  condition  of 
the  bestowment  of  the  Divine  blessing.  (3)  Fully  resolved  upon.  "  His  father  used 
to  open  his  breast  when  he  was  asleep  and  kiss  it  in  prayer  over  him,  as  it  is  said  of 
Origen's  father,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  would  take  possession  thereof  "  ('  Life  of  Sir 
Thomas  Browne '). 

V.  Conducted  to  the  house  op  the  Lord.  As  soon  as  he  was  weaned  (the  first 
step  of  separate,  independent  life)  "  she  took  him  up  with  her  "  (ver.  24),  and  "  they 
brought  the  child  to  Eli "  (ver.  25).  Children  are  in  their  right  place  in  the  temple 
(Matt.  xxi.  15,  16),  and  their  praises  are  acceptable  to  the  Lord.  Even  infants 
(sucklings)  belong  to  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  are  capable  of  being  blessed  by 
him  (Matt.  sir.  13).  Therefore  the  "little  ones"  should  be  brought  unto  him 
(Matt,  xviii.  14). 

VI.  Dedicated  to  a  life-long  service  (vers.  25 — 28),  i.  e.  a  continual  (and 
not  a  limited  or  periodical)  service  at  the  sanctuary  as  a  Levite,  and  an  entire  (and 
not  a  partial)  service  as  a  Nazarite.  It  was  done  (1)  with  a  burnt  offering,  (2) 
accompanied  by  a  thankful  acknowledgment  of  the  goodness  of  God  in  answer  to 
prayer  offered  on  the  same  spot  several  years  previously,  and  (3)  in  a  full  surrender 
of  the  child.  "  My  child  shall  be  entirely  and  absolutely  thy  servant.  I  give  up  all 
my  maternal  rights.  I  desire  to  be  his  mother  only  in  so  far  as  that  he  shall  owe  his 
existence  to  me  ;  after  that  I  give  him  up  to  thee  "  (Chrysostom).  "  For  this  child 
I  prayed,  and  the  Lord  hath  granted  me  my  request  which  I  asked  of  him  ;  therefore 
I  also  make  him  one  asked  of  the  Lord  all  the  days  that  he  liveth  ;  he  is  asked  of  the 
Lord  "  (Keil).  So  the  vow  was  performed.  And  in  the  spirit  of  this  dedication  all 
parents  should  give  back  to  God  "  the  children  which  he  hath  given  them." 

VII.  Followed  by  parental  prayers  and  thanksgivings.  "  He  (Elkanah)  wor- 
shipped the  Lord  there  "  (ver.  28).  "  And  Hannah  prayed,  and  said,  My  heart  re- 
joiceth  in  the  Lord  "  (ch.  ii.  1).  "  And  Elkanah  went  to  Eamah  to  his  house  "  (oh. 
ii.  11).  The  sacrifice  made  in  leaving  the  child  behind  was  great,  but  it  was  attended, 
through  Divine  grace,  with  great  joy.  The  more  any  one  gives  to  God,  the  more 
God  gives  back  to  him  in  spiritual  blessing.  Hannah  felt  little  anxiety  or  fear  for 
the  safety  of  her  child,  for  she  believed  that  he  would  "  keep  the  feet  of  his  saints  " 
(ch,  ii.  9).  What  holy  influences  ever  rest  on  children  whose  parents  pray  for 
them  "  without  ceasing  1 "  and  what  multitudes  have  by  such  means  been  eternally 
■aved  1— D. 

"  The  hoy  wa«  vowed 
ITnto  the  temple  service.     By  the  hand 
She  led  him,  and  her  silent  soul,  the  while, 
Oft  as  the  dewy  laughter  of  his  eye 
Met  her  sweet  serious  glance,  rejoiced  to  think 
That  anght  so  pure,  so  beautiful,  was  hers, 
To  bring  before  her  God. 

I  give  thee  to  thy  God— the  God  that  gave  thei 
A  well-spring  of  deep  gladness  to  my  heart  I 

And  precious  as  thou  art, 
And  pure  as  dew  of  Hermon,  he  shall  have  theai 
My  own,  my  beautiful,  my  undefiled  1 

And  thou  shalt  be  his  child. 

Tberefore,  farewell ! — I  go,  my  soul  may  fail  mt| 
Am  the  stag  panteth  for  the  water  brooks, 
Yeanung  for  thy  sweet  looks. — 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  n.  1 — 10. 


Bat  thou,  my  first-born,  droop  not,  nor  bewail  me  I 
Thon  in  the  Shadow  of  the  Bock  shalt  dwell, 

Th«  Bock  of  Strength.— Farewell  I"  (Mrs.  Hemani), 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTEE  II. 


Hannah's  song  of  peaisb  (yeis.  1 — 
10).  Ver.  1. — And  Hannah  prayed  and 
Bald.  Like  the  Magnificat,  Hannah's  hymn 
of  thanksgiving  begins  with  the  temporal 
mercies  accorded  to  herself,  but  rises  imme- 
diately into  the  realms  of  prophecy,  fore- 
telling Christ's  kingdom  and  the  triumphs 
of  the  Church.  From  this  prophetic  element, 
common  more  or  less  to  all  the  hymns  of  the 
Bible,  most  of  them  have  been  used  in  Chris- 
tian worship,  and  still  merit  a  place  in  it, 
though  we  in  the  liturgy  of  the  Church  of 
Jlngland  now  use  only  two,  taken  both  from 
the  New  Testament.  In  ver.  1,  infourstrophes 
of  equal  length,  Hannah  declares  how,  first, 
her  heart,  the  centre  with  the  Hebrews,  not 
merely  of  the  physical,  but  also  of  the  moral 
and  intellectual  life,  rejoices  in  Jehovah ; 
while  the  exaltation  of  her  horn,  the  symbol 
of  strength  and  vigour,  signifies  that  this 
inward  joy  is  accompanied,  or  even  occa- 
sioned, ^  the  changed  circumstances  of  her 
outward  lot.  Her  mouth,  therefore,  is  opened 
wide  over  her  enemies,  yet  not  for  cursing 
and  in  bitterness,  but  for  joyful  praise  of  the 
God  who  has  answered  her  prayers.  It  is 
his  salvation,  the  being  delivered  by  him, 
that  makes  her  thus  burst  forth  into  thanks- 
giving. It  is  a  proof  too  of  her  faith  and 
spirituality  that  she  thus  refers  all  to 
Jehovah. 

In  ver.  2  she  gives  her  reasons  for  this 
holy  joy.  The  first  is  God's  absolute  holiness  ; 
the  second  his  absolute  existence,  in  which 
she  finds  the  proof  of  his  holiness.  Hannah 
may  have  meant  to  express  only  the  language 
of  piety,  but  she  also  stated  a  primary 
philosophical  truth,  which  was  early  grasped 
by  the  deeply  religious  instinct  of  the  He- 
brews, that  outside  of  God  is  no  existence. 
Many  necessary  deductions  follow  from  this 
fundamental  truth,  that  God  alone  absolute- 
ly exists,  and  that  all  other  existence  is 
secondary  and  derived  ;  but  no  deduction  is 
more  certain  than  Hannah's  own,  that  such 
a  Being  must  be  absolutely  holy.  In  calling 
him  a  rock  she  assigns  to  him  strength, 
calm,  immovable,  enduring,  but  a  strength 
which  avails  for  the  safety  of  his  people 
(comp.  Dent,  xxxil  4,  16 ;  Ps.  xviii.  2). 
For  rocks,  as  being  capable  of  easy  defence, 
formed  the  nucleus  of  most  ancient  towns, 
and  continued  to  serve  as  their  citadels. 

In  ver.  3  she  appeals  to  God's  omniscience, 
'  for  Jehovah  is  a  God  of  knowledges,"  the 


pL  being  intenrive,  and  signifying  every 
kind  of  knowledge.  As  too  he  weighs  and 
judges  human  actions,  how  can  men  venture 
to  talk  so  arrogantly  before  him,  lit  so 
proudly,  provdly.  The  last  clause  is  one  ol 
those  numerous  places  in  which  there  is  a 
doubt  whether  the  Hebrew  word  lo  means 
iu>t,  or  hy  him,.  If  the  negative  sense  be 
taken,  which  the  Hebrew  spelling  favours, 
the  rendering  will  be  "  though  actions  be 
not  weighed.  Though  .wicked  actions  be 
not  immediately  punished,  yet  Jehovah  is 
cognisant  of  ihem,  and  in  due  time  will 
requite. 

In  vers.  4 — 8  Hannah  illustrates  the 
working  of  this  attribute  of  the  Deity  by  enu- 
merating the  vicissitudes  of  human  events, 
which  are  not  the  result  of  chance,  but  of 
that  omniscience  combined  with  holiness 
which  she  has  claimed  for  Jehovah  in  vers. 
2,  3.  She  begins  with  the  vicissitudes  of 
war ;  but  these  are  not  more  remarkable  than 
those  of  peace,  by  which  the  full,  the  rich 
and  wealthy,  have  to  descend  to  the  position 
of  a  hireling ;  while  those  previously  hungry 
have  ceased,  i.  e.  from  labour,  and  keep 
holiday.  In  a  nation  of  small  proprietors, 
where  the  land  was  tilled  by  the  owner 
and  those  "bom  in  his  house,'  the  positior 
of  the  hireling,  the  "mean  white  of  th( 
southern  States  of  America,  was  lower  thai; 
that  of  the  slave,  especially  in  Judaea,  when 
the  slave  was  more  in  the  position  of  a  vassal 
than  of  a  serf  or  forced  labourer.  In  the  next 
clause  the  translation  may  either  be,  "  Sh( 
that  was  long  barren  hath  borne  seven,"  or, 
"UntU  the  barren"  &c;  Le.  these  vicis- 
situdes may  even  reach  so  far  as  to  make  a 
barren  woman  the  mother  of  seven,  t,  e.  ol 
a  perfect  number  of  children,  happily  gener- 
alised in  Ps.  cxiii.  9  into  "  a  joyful  mothei 
of  children."  But  see  Bnth  iv.  15  ;  Jer.  xv. 
9.  In  this  there  is  also  a  typical  reference 
to  the  long  barrenness  of  the  Gentile  world, 
to  be  followed  by  a  fruitfulness  far  exceeding 
that  of  the  Jewish  Church,  while  it,  prolific 
once  in  patriarchs,  and  prophets,  and  saints, 
is  now  comparatively  sterile.  In  ver.  6  "  the 
grave,"  Heb.  Sheol,  is  "the  pit,"  the  hollow 
vault  underground,  which  is  the  dwelling  of 
the  dead.  Lit.,  therefore,  Hannah's  words 
might  seem  to  imply  a  belief  in  the  resurre& 
tion  ;  but  her  meaning  rather  was  that  God 
brings  a  man  to  the  very  brink  of  the  grave, 
and  then,  when  all  hope  seems  past,  raises  him 
np  again.  In  ver.  8  beggar  is  simply  needy, 
but  the  expressions  cKujil  and  thmghUl  add 


CH.  II.  1 — 10.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


27 


dishonour  to  Us  porertj.  To  let  might 
more  correctly  be  translated  to  make  them 
sit ;  sitting,  especially  on  a  raised  seat,  being 
a  mark  of  hononr  among  Orientals,  who 
generally  squat  on  mats  on  the  ground.  In 
the  next  clause  the  A.  Y.  particularises  what 
in  the  Heb.  is  quite  general.  "  He  will 
make  them  possess  (or  enjoy)  a  glorious 
throne."  Their  seat  among  the  princes  is 
not  inherited,  but  acquired  ;  and  though 
promoted  thus  to  a  place  among  men  of 
hereditary  rank,  and  given  an  honourable 
position  among  them,  yet  it  was  not  neces- 
sarily "  the  throne  of  glory,"  the  highest 
seat.  StUl  even  this  was  quite  possible ;  for 
while  the  tribal  chiefs  and  heads  of  fathers'- 
houses  obtained  their  rank  by  inheritance, 
nevertheless,  in  early  days  the  judges,  and 
among  them  Eli  and  Samuel,  acquired  rank 
and  power  for  themselves.  Subsequently, 
under  the  kings,  the  great  officers  of  state 
took  their  place  along  with  the  hereditary 
princes,  but  were  dependent  upon  royal 
favour.  In  the  last  clause  the  word  rendered 
pillars  is  rare,  being  found  only  here  and  in 
ch.  xiv.  4.  In  both  places  the  ancient  ver- 
sions are  uncertain  as  to  its  signification,  but 
in  the  latter  it  can  only  mean  a  crag,  or 
mass  of  rock.  If  then  the  rock-masses  of 
the  earth  are  Jehovah's,  and  he  can  lift  up 
and  poise  upon  them  the  inhabited  world 
(Heb.  tebel),  how  much  more  easily  can  he 
raise  up  a  man  I 

Ver.  9.  —  The  feet  of  his  saints.  The 
Heb.  written  text  {eh'tib)  has  his  saint, 
sing.  ;  but  the  word  really  means  not  saint, 
i.  e.  one  sanctified  and  holy,  but  pious,  i.  e. 
one  lovingly  disposed  towards  God.  The 
sense,  therefore,  is  not  affected  by  the  num- 
ber, but  the  sing,  is  more  forcible  "He 
will  guard  the  steps,  the  earthly  course,  of 
each  one  that  loveth  him  ; "  while  over 
against  this  watchful  providence,  ever  exerted 
for  the  safe-keeping  of  all  who  love  the  light, 
stands  God's  punitive  justice,  whereby  the 
wicked  are  finally  brought  down  to  the  dark 
silence  of  the  grave.  For  they  had  only 
human  strength  and  prowess  upon  which  to 
depend,  and  no  man  can  sustain  himself  in 
the  manifold  confiict  of  life  without  help 
from  above. 

Ver.  10. — The  adversaries.  In  the  Heb. 
the  nouns  are  again  sing. ,  though  the  verb 
is  pL,  showing  that  they  are  to  be  taken 
collectively.  Lit.  the  translation  is,  "  Je- 
hovah— they  shall  be  broken  in  pieces,  who- 
ever it  be  that  contendeth  with  him ; "  the 
word  having  reference  to  contentions  in  a 


conrt  of  law,  and  the  whole  verse  keeping 
the  administration  of  jostice  in  view.  It 
proceeds,  "  Upon  him  he  shall  thunder  in 
heaven  ; "  i.  e.  Jehovah,  seated  on  his  throne 
in  heaven,  shall,  as  the  supreme  Judge,  ntter 
the  sentence;  and  thunder  was  to  the  He- 
brew God's  voice.  He  shall  judge  the  ends 
of  the  earth,  i.  e.  the  whole  earth  up  to 
its  remotest  quarters.  The  last  distich  is 
remarkable.  It  is  a  distinct  prophecy  of 
David's  kingdom,  and  of  the  king  as  the 
anoiated  one,  but  looking  onwards  to  the 
Messiah,  David's  greater  Son.  So  distinct 
a  reference  to  a  king  before  a  king  existed  has 
made  Ewald  and  others  regard  the  whole 
hymn  as  an  interpolation  of  later  times. 
But  already  Hannah's  thoughts  had  risen  to 
a  higher  level  than  the  fortunes  of  the  literal 
IsraeL  In  claiming  for  Jehovah,  her  cove- 
nant God,  the  righteous  government  of  the 
whole  world,  she  prepares  our  minds  for  the 
corresponding  thought  of  Jehovah  being  the 
universal  Saviour.  Very  probably  the  whole 
national  mind  was  set  upon  having  a  king  to 
enable  them  to  make  head  against  the  Philis- 
tines long  before,  under  Samuel,  the  desire 
became  so  strong  as  to  be  irresistible.  The 
thought  of  a  king  was  in  no  respect  alien 
from  the  Jewish  commonwealth  (Dent,  xvii 
14).  They  had  wished  Gideon  to  hold  this 
office  (Judges  viiL  22) ;  Jotham's  parable  in 
Judges  ix.  described  the  nation  as  eager 
to  be  thus  governed,  but  the  better  minds 
as  bent  on  declining  so  dangerous  a  pre- 
eminence. There  is  very  much  to  prove 
that  the  nation  had  come  to  regard  the 
appointment  of  a  king  as  an  eventual  neces- 
sity, however  long  delayed.  But  not  here 
only,  but  everywhere,  the  Jewish  mind  was 
constantly  brooding  upon  the  future.  Han- 
nah does  no  more  than  every  patriarch  and 
saint  and  prophet  of  the  old  dispensation. 
Prophecies  such  as  that  in  Gen.  xlix.  10 
filled  the  hearts  of  all  alike.  And  though 
the  present  longings  of  the  nation  for  a  king 
make  Hannah's  words  not  unnatural  even 
in  their  lower  sense,  yet  the  truer  exposition 
is  that  which  acknowledges  in  Israel  a  peo- 
ple raised  up  for  a  speciEj  purpose,  and  the 
bestowal  by  God  upon  its  seers  for  the  carry- 
ing out  of  this  purpose  of  the  gift  of  pro- 
phecy. And  it  was  this  extraordinary  gift 
which  bent  and  shaped  the  mind  of  the  nation, 
and  filled  it  with  future  aspirations ;  and  not 
a  causeless  state  of  the  national  mind  which, 
excited  by  vague  hopes,  made  men  from  time 
to  time  give  utterance  to  anticipations  which 
by  some  strange  coincidence  always  came  true. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Salvation.    The  facts  implied  and  indicated  in  the  song  ai»— 1. 
Hannah's  deliverance  from  grief  and  realisation  of  desire  are  perfected.     2.  Q-od  ia 


2»  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  ii.  1—10. 

recognised  as  the  author  of  the  great  salvation.  3.  Under  Divine  inspiration  Hannah 
sees  in  her  own  personal  experience  a  type  of  various  triumphs  which  Gnd  achieves 
for  his  people.  4.  She  is  conscious  of  an  overwhelming  joy  in  her  own  deliverance, 
and  in  the  prevision  of  future  triumphs  of  the  Church.  6.  A  clear  and  joyous 
recognition  of  Christ's  final  triumph  as  the  climax  of  all.  The  burden  of  this 
glorious  song  is  the  salvation  wrought  by  God,  and  this  may  be  considered  as — 

I.  Typical.  The  terra  "  salvation  "  is  very  common  in  the  Old  Testament,  and 
its  application  is  "  exceeding  broad,"  being  inclusive  of  deliverance  from  evils  and 
a  realisation  of  positive  good.  It  may  be  applied  to  an  episode  in  personal  experi- 
ence, as  in  the  case  of  Hannah,  David,  and  others ;  a  soul's  restoration  to  God 
through  Christ ;  a  nation's  rescue  from  calamity  and  elevation  to  relative  influence, 
as  when  Israel  was  deliverea  from  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea,  and  later,  from  the 
Assyrian  hosts ;  the  deliverance  of  the  Church  from  persecution,  as  in  apostolic  days 
and  subsequently ;  and  especially  the  completion  of  Christ's  triumph  over  all 
enemies  and  the  gathering  into  one  of  the  redeemed  children  of  God  CTitus  ii.  13 ; 
Heb.  ix.  28 ;  Rev.  vii.  9 — 17).  The  episode  in  the  life  of  Hannah  was  typical  oj 
all  other  salvations  to  be  wrought  by  the  same  merciful  God.  As  in  the  physical 
world  the  trained  eye  can  detect  what  are  called  "  typical  forms,"  so  in  the  records 
of  God's  dealings  with  the  saints  the  spiritually  enlightened  can  see  in  the  personal 
experience  of  individuals  a  foreshadowing  of  numerous  instances  yet  to  occur  in 
human  experience.  Omnia  in  Uno  will  hold  true  here.  The  elements  of  all  salva- 
tions are  found  in  the  blessing  vouchsafed  to  the  "  woman  of  sorrowful  spirit."  J"or 
there  is  in  her  case,  as  in  all,  a  deep  human  need,  arising  from  a  pressure  of  a 
heavy  burden,  and  the  raoji-realisation  of  the  very  end  for  which  life-  was  supposed 
to  be  given ;  utter  despair  of  human  resources  for  the  removal  of  the  evil  and  the 
acquieition  of  the  good ;  Divine  energy  graciously  acting  directly  on  the  hidden 
forces  by  which  sorrow  or  joy  are  governed  and  produced ;  Divine  patience  in 
working  out  the  processes  by  which  the  want  and  sorrow  shall  be  made  to  pass 
away ;  completeness  of  result  in  the  bestowment  of  the  very  boon  so  long  desired 
and  waited  for ;  connection  of  the  result  attained  with  some  ulterior  issue  of  still 
wider  blessing ;  and  employment  throughout  of  visible  and  invisible  second  causes 
in  working  out  the  purposes  of  mercy.  Each  item  found  reality  in  Hannah's  experi- 
ence, and  has  its  counterpart  in  our  deliverance  from  trouble  ;  in  the  restoration  of 
the  lost  soul ;  in  the  rescue  of  a  nation  or  Church  from  destruction  ;  and  in  the  com- 
pletion of  the  desire  of  him  who  from  the  travail  of  his  soul  looked  on  through  the 
ages,  saw,  and  was  satisfied.  Every  deliverance  of  every  saint  now  is  a  shadowing 
forth  and  a  prediction  sure  and  certain  of  the  great  salvation,  in  the  bliss  of  which 
Christ,  and  angels,  and  men  shall  share. 

II.  Occasion  op  jot.  Naturally  salvation  in  every  form  brings  joy.  It  is  the 
great  event  of  the  life.  It  means  freedom,  rest,  enrichment,  full,  sunny  favour  of 
God.  Hannah  could  not  but  sing.  Moses  led  the  joy  of  Israel  on  the  shores  of  the 
Red  Sea.  When  Saul  became  Paul  the  Churches  enjoyed  "comfort  of  the  Holy 
Ghost."  The  fatted  calf  and  dance  awaited  the  restored  prodigal  son.  The  very 
advent  of  the  one  true  Saviour  awoke  the  chorus  of  the  skies,  and  heaven  will 
resound  with  the  joyous  acclaim  of  innumerable  hosts  when  the  woes  of  earth  are 
past,  and  all  power  submits  to  Christ  (Rev.  xix.  1).  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  joy 
awakened  by  accomplished  salvation  is  not  a  mere  selfish  delight  in  one's  own  happi- 
ness. It  is  joy  in  God.  In  "  thy  salvation  "  do  I  rejoice.  "  In  the  Lord  "  is  my 
"  horn  exalted."  "  The  heart "  is  not  set  on  the  bliss  of  a  Samuel's  love,  it  "  rejoiceth 
in  the  Lord."  Again,  it  is  joy  in  God  saving  through  his  Anointed.  The  "  pro- 
mised seed,"  the  foreordained  Messiah,  was  the  spring  of  all  inspired  Hebrew 
expectation  of  blessing.  The  birth  of  a  son  called  forth  Hannah's  song.  It  is 
curiously  sweet  to  notice  how  like  the  echo  of  some  distant  melody  is  this  song, 
reiniiKling  us  of  a  Child  more  holy  than  even  Samuel.  Surely  in  the  invisible 
splieres  angels  recognised  here  the  substance  of  that  hymn  they  on  a  later  day  sang 
over  tlie  plains  of  Bethlehem.  In  that  severe  but  blessed  discipline  of  years  the 
spirit  of  Hannah  had  been  trained  to  pass  over  in  vision  to  a  salvation  more  perfect 
than  wliat  Samuel  would  effect  for  Israel,  and  by  a  Child  more  truly  given  of  God. 
The  songs  of  faith  and  of  fulfilment  find  alike  their  inspiration  in  "his  King"  and 


ea.  n.  1—10.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  SI 

"my  Saviour."  But  the  relationship  to  his  chosen  One  grows  closer  and  dearer  as 
the  ages  roll  on.  What  shall  it  be  at  last  I  And  what  joy  will  it  awaken  I  Also, 
the  condition  of  sharing  in  this  Joy  is  twofold,  being  personally  a  saved  one,  and 
cherishing  full  sympathy  with  "his  King."  Hannah,  blessed  with  a  great  deliver- 
ance from  sorrow  and  desolation,  could  sing  and,  laying  all  at  the  feet  of  God  in 
holy  sympathy  with  the  coming  kingdom,  she  found  inspiration  for  song  beyond  the 
range  of  her  own  experience.  A  "  new  song  "  is  leanit  on  earth,  in  so  far  as  its  first 
notes,  by  all  who  have  known  in  their  personal  experience  the  salvation  of  God ;  and 
it  becomes  sweeter  and  more  inspired  as  the  freed  spirit  sees  by  faith  the  blessed 
day  when  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall  also  see  the  King  in  his  beauty. 

III.  Revelation  of  Divine  perfections.  In  some  sense  all  God's  acts  are 
revelations.  Nature,  as  we  call  the  beautiful  system  around  us,  is  but  the  shadow 
of  the  Eternal  Presence.  The  Eternal  Power  and  Godhead  are  clearly  seen  through 
the  visible  creation.  In  the  Incarnation  of  God  in  Christ  we  have,  therefore,  a  higher 
expression  of  a  general  truth ;  so  that  in  one  respect  the  most  stupendous  and 
mysterious  of  all  supernatural  facts  is  in  keeping  with  Nature.  Especially  is  every 
instance  of  salvation,  whether  typical  or  antitypical,  individual  or  national,  a  revela- 
tion to  the  universe  of  the  ever-blessed  One.  From  Hannah's  deliverance  from 
sorrow  and  desolation,  on  through  the  ages  of  mercy,  to  Christ's  final  victory  over 
death  and  sin,  the  same  attributes  are  revealed  in  the  deeds  and  processes  by  which 
the  salvation  in  each  instance  is  effected.  1.  Mercy,  as  seen  in  compassion  shown 
to  the  sorrowful  and  helpless.  2.  Holiness,  inasmuch  as  the  salvation  is  wrought 
out  against  evil  powers  and  persons, /or  only  good  and  pure  issues,  by  exacting  and 
nourishing  into  maturity  holy,  unselfish  motives,  and  ordaining  suffering  and  deferred 
good  only  for  pure  and  blissful  ends.  3.  Power,  demonstrating  that  "beside" 
him  "there  is  none,"  as  seen  in  complete  control  over  the  hidden  forces  of  Nature, 
and  full  realisation  of  all  that  is  promised.  4.  Wisdom,  counteracting  the  devices 
of  the  proud,  and  causing  the  bitterest  grief  and  protracted  suffering  to  contribute 
at  last  to  depth  and  fulness  of  joy.  5.  Faithfulness,  unshaken  and  firm  as  a 
"rock,"  insuring  that  all  the  strength  and  wisdom  of  the  Divine  nature  shall  be 
exercised  for  the  final  bestowment  of  the  covenanted  blessings.  The  retrospect  of  a 
personal  history  was  to  Hannah  the  means  of  reading  the  outlines  of  the  manifesta- 
tion of  the  Divine  glwy,  especially  in  the  salvation  of  the  Church.  She,  like  us,  saw 
only  the  beginnings  of  things.  The  remote  glory  shone  through  a  glass  darkly.  It 
was  for  St.  Paul  and  St.  John  to  declare  the  same  truth  in  fuller  and  more  precise 
terms,  as  the  one  tells  of  the  "  manifold  wisdom  of  God  "  being  made  known  "  by 
the  Church  "  unto  "  principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly  places,"  and  the  other,  of 
him  who  by  virtue  of  what  he  has  wrought  out  for  his  redeemed  is  "  worthy  "  of  all 
that  is  due  to  the  only  Lord  of  glory.  Men  are  now  intent  on  studying  the  material 
framework  of  the  universe ;  the  day  will  come  when  the  best  minds  will  study  with 
unbounded  delight  the  perfections  of  God  as  seen  in  the  restoration  of  spiritual 
order,  beauty,  and  joy  out  of  the  chaos  of  sin  and  sorrow. 

IV.  Insteuctivb  to  the  wicked.  There  was  a  time  when  the  jealous  and  cruel 
Peninnah  was  proud  in  her  strength  and  abundance.  Also  Pharaoh,  and  other 
oppressors  of  Israel,  could  boast  of  their  power  and  resources.  The  infant  Church 
in  primitive  times  was  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  the  numerical  and  social  power 
of  her  enemy.  The  exceeding  proud  talk  and  arrogancy  of  men  who  proclaim  their 
vast  superiority  in  secular  knowledge  to  the  mass  of  Christians,  is  in  keeping  with 
the  conduct  of  the  kings  and  princes  who  "  take  counsel  against  the  Lord  and  against 
his  Anointed."  But  as  Hannah's  fear  and  trembling  yielded  to  confidence  and  joy, 
consequent  on  the  casting  down  of  her  proud  enemy  and  the  lifting  up  of  the  sorrow- 
ful spirit,  so  the  same  ever-recurring  triumphs  of  the  Redeemer,  awakening  in  hia 
people  the  song  of  salvation,  reads  out  in  clear  and  forcible  terms  the  instructive 
lesson  to  the  proud  to  "  talk  "  no  more,  and  to  the  arrogant  to  "  shut  their  mouth," 
and  to  the  seemingly  prosperous  that  all  "actions  are  weighed"  by  him  who  is  a 
"  God  of  knowledge."  It  is  ever  true  that  no  weapon  formed  against  God's  children 
can  prosper.  In  what  God  has  effected  for  the  lowly  pious  in  time  past,  the  proud, 
the  wise,  the  strong  may  find  instruction ;  and,  if  they  will,  learn  both  how  vain  it  is 
Vo  curae  in  heart  or  mouth  whom  God  has  blessed,  and  how  important  for  them- 


so  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  n.  1—10. 

selTes  tibat  thej  "Um  the  Son,"  lest  they  perish,  "while  Ua  wrath  is  kindled  Irat 

a  little." 

V.  Ikvolvino  obbat  beversions.  Proyidence  -vindicated  itself  for  former  ap- 
parently unequal  and  undesirable  distributions  of  favour  by  breaking  the  bows  of 
the  strong  and  giving  strength  to  the  feeble ;  by  causing  the  self-satisfied  Peninnah 
to  feel  the  lack  of  a  satisfaction  not  to  be  obtained  by  the  eruel,  and  the  yearning  Hannah 
to  want  for  nothing  more.  The  once  proud  mother  of  many  children,  from  causes 
in  the  home  life,  fails  in  her  joys,  while  the  unfruitful  attains  to  the  perfection  of 
earthly  bliss.  In  the  one  case  hopes  and  joys  are  smitten ;  in  the  other,  created.  The 
rich  in  home  delights  becomes  poor,  by  possibly  erring  sons,  or  enfeebled  health ;  the 
poor  and  sorrowful  is  enriched  with  a  treasure  for  the  use  of  all  ages.  Thus  does 
Hannah  see  in  outline  the  reversions  ever  occurring  in  the  working  out  of  Qod's 
salvation  in  the  individual,  the  nation,  or  the  Church.  1.  In  the  human  80ul  saved 
by  Christ,  forces  of  evil  once  strong  and  self-satisfied,  lacking  nothing,  and  usurping 
authority,  are  brought  low,  enfeebled,  made  conscious  of  their  impotence,  and  finally 
killed  ;  while  the  poor,  faint,  struggling  spirit  of  love  and  faith  is,  when  once  "  made 
alive,"  girded  with  strength,  satisfied  with  good,  and  made  finally  dominant  over  the 
entire  nature.  Doubts,  fears,  and  mighty  temptations  are  laid  low.  Hopes,  joys, 
and  victories  of  faith  are  called  forth ;  and,  as  a  final  issue,  the  once  outcast,  unhappy 
soul  is  enriched  with  the  full  bliss  of  a  child  of  God.  2.  In  national  affairs.  The 
strength  of  Egypt  sinks  in  the  sea ;  the  helplessness  of  Israel  puts  on  the  strong^ 
of  God.     The  boastful  nations  that  in  pride  of  their  resources  set  aside  the  practice 

f  righteousness,  one  by  one  are  brought  low  by  the  corruption  concealed  beneath 
their  material  splendour ;  while  the  feeble  people  who  live  in  the  fear  of  God  go  from 
strength  to  strength,  and  "  delight  themselves  in  the  abundance  of  peace."  3.  In 
the  Church.  The  wealth,  power,  and  wisdom  of  Borne  and  Greece  fell  before  the 
rising  power  and  spiritual  knowledge  of  poor  fishermen.  The  mighty  evils  of  an  age 
are  at  length  brought  down,  and  the  despised  "  things  that  are  not "  are  caused  to  be 
the  most  potent  and  blessed  of  all  agencies. 

VI.  Tkacbablk  to  God.  Well  did  Hannah  know  that  her  deliverance  was  of  God, 
and  not  of  man.  In  all  the  second  causes  co-operating  towards  the  completion  of 
her  desire  she,  with  true  spiritual  instinct,  saw  the  work  of  the  First  Cause.  "  The 
Lord  "  it  was  who  "  killed  and  made  alive."  "  The  Lord  "  "  brought  low ''  the  proud 
rival,  and  "  lifted  up"  "  the  woman  of  sorrowful  p^iirit."  He  it  is  who  "keeps  the 
feet  of  his  saints,"  and  causes  the  wicked  at  length  "  to  be  silent.''  So  through  the 
unfolding  ages  it  is  "  the  Lord  "  who  works  to  destroy  the  evils  of  the  soul,  and  to 
create  and  nourish  the  good.  All  the  triumphs  of  the  Church  over  political  schem- 
ing, pseudo-learning,  violent  persecution,  and  satanic  opposition  are  by  the  might  and 
power  of  him  who  raiseth  up  the  wise  and  good,  checks  the  rage  of  man,  and  in  the 
invisible  sphere  frustrates  the  "  gates  of  hell."  All  things  are  of  God,  who  worketh 
all  and  in  all.  It  is  not  crude  anthropomorphitm  that  refers  all  the  processes  of 
individual,  national,  and  Church  salvation  to  the  energy  of  God.  It  is  the  most 
penetrating  philosophy,  bom  of  the  inspiring  Spirit  of  God.  There  are  "  pillars  "  or 
foundations,  or  bases,  of  all  terrestrial  things.  We  may  call  this  a  cause,  and  that  an 
effect.  We  may  clothe  matter  with  qualities,  and  point  out  their  uniform  and  neces- 
sary interaction.  But  still  they  are  all  traceable  down  to  some  original  constitution 
inherent  in  the  elemental  forces  and  materials ;  and  that  constitution,  that  firm  and 
grand  arrangement  of  invisible  "pillars"  or  bases,  is  what  it  is  because  God  made  it 
so,  and  for  no  other  reason.  Wisely  and  beautifully,  therefore,  does  the  prophetess 
anticipate  the  philosophies  of  the  coming  ages  by  referring  all  the  agencies  and 
powers  involved  in  the  accomplishing  of  salvation  for  men  to  "the  Lord."  Not 
unto  us,  but  to  thy  name  be  the  glory. 

VII.  Culminating  in  Christ's  pekfeot  beign.  The  prophetic  eye  looks  on 
through  the  material  disorder  of  Eli's  day  to  a  typical  King  in  Zion.  The  order  and 
prosperity  of  a  David's  reign  are  but  the  temporal  shadow  of  the  enduring  order  and 
unfading  prosperity  of  the  "  Anointed,"  who  is  in  the  highest  spiritual  sense  to 
"  exalt "  his  "  horn,"  and  "  judge  the  ends  of  the  earth.'  What  though,  mean 
*rhile,  "  adversaries "  may  combine,  and  the  occasional  "  strength  "  of  the  wicked 
*hreaten  to  cast  down  "  the  saints ; "  he  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens  has  in  reserve  hi« 


OH.  II.  1—10.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  81 

swift  and  awe-inspiring  forces  (Ps.  ii.)  to  shatter  all  opposition,  and  ultimately 
insure  a  peaceful  reign  over  mankind.  It  was  some  years  before  Peninnah's  ground 
of  annoyance  to  Hannah  was  removed,  and  the  lowly  one  was  raised  to  joy  and  full 
satisfaction ;  so,  proportionately  to  the  vaster  deliverance  to  be  wrought  out  for 
mankind,  it  may  require  many  centuries  to  cast  down  all  foes  and  create  and  perfect 
the  bliss  of  the  redeemed.  But  the  "  strength  "  of  the  "  King  "  will  bring  it  to  pass 
by  a  combination  of  invisible  and  visible  forces  more  subtle  and  intricate,  but  not 
less  obedient  to  his  will,  than  those  which  brought  a  mother's  joy  to  Hannah.  Here 
we  see  the  beautiful  unity  of  all  Scripture  reference  to  the  final  triumph  of  Messiah. 
The  "serpent's  head"  is  to  be  "  bruised  "  was  consolation  to  our  weeping  ancestors, 
bereft  of  Eden.  In  him  "  all  nations  shall  be  blessed  "  was  the  grand  assurance 
that  made  Abraham's  life  one  of  large  sympathy  with  the  future.  "  To  him  shall 
the  gathering  of  the  people  be  "  was  the  solace  of  Jacob's  dying  hour.  And  thus, 
aided  by  Hannah's  joyous  song  of  victory,  as  though  already  real,  the  holy,  blessed 
succession  ran  on,  telling  of  the  "  kingdom  "  that  "  shall  have  no  end,"  and  the  day 
when  to  the  Name  that  is  "  above  every  name  "  every  knee  shall  bow,  and  every 
tongue  confess  that  he  is  Lord  and  Christ. 

From  this  survey  of  truth  concerning  "  salvation  "  note  a  few  important  Practical 
truths: — 1.  See  here  a  beautiful  instance  of  how  a  single  life's  experience,  when 
under  the  holy  discipline  of  God,  may  be  rich  in  instruction  and  inspiration  for  men 
in  all  ages.  This  is  brought  about  not  by  mere  natural  genius,  but  by  a  woman's 
pure  and  full  consecration  to  Christ,  and  passionate  desire  to  accelerate  the  advent  of 
his  kingdom.  Happy  they  who  can  live  so  as  to  inspire  and  help  posterity !  Let 
our  life  become  a  song  of  thanksgiving  to  our  successors.  This  is  possible  to  all  in 
some  degree.  2.  An  underlying  current  of  faith  in  Christ's  complete  triumph  runs 
through  the  ancient  Church,  and  this  should  embolden  us.  True  saints  live  much  in 
the  future,  while  not  careless  of  present  duties.  There  may  be  much  inspiration  for 
work  from  the  prospect  of  what  is  to  be.  3.  The  effect  of  true  faith  is  to  enlarge  the 
vision  and  broaden,  the  sympathies.  Hannah's  faith  in  a  coming  Christ  caused  her 
spirit  to  he  open  to  those  inspirations  which  carried  the  vision  over  the -weary  ages 
to  the  true  golden  age,  and  she  felt  with  all  the  saints  in  all  time.  Religion  of  this 
kind  becomes  an  expansive  power  in  whatever  nature  it  dwells.  4.  The  proper 
unity  of  the  Church  lies  in  the  one  faith  which  holds  the  life  to  Christ,  whether 
to  come,  or  having  come  ;  and  this  will  insure  sympathy  with  his  kingdom  and  with 
purity  of  life,  as  well  as  consecration  of  what  is  most  precious  to  its  realisation. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 10.  (^B^VLon.)— Rejoicing  in  the  Lord.  "My  heart  rejoiceth  in  the  Lord."* 
The  song  of  Hannah,  "  the  Magnificat  of  the  Old  Testament  Church,"_was  the  outburst 
of  her  deep  and  holy  joy  in  the  Lord.  Whilst  watching  over  the  infant  Samuel  at 
Bamah,  she  had  silently  pondered  the  ways  of  God,  and  the  condition  and  prospects 
of  his  people  and  kingdom.  After  several  years  of  absence  from  the  central 
sanctuary  at  Shiloh,  she  appears  once  more  at  its  entrance ;  and,  standing  on  the 
well-remembered  spot  where  she  had  prayed  in  her  distress,  she  fulfils  her  vow,  and 
gives  back  to  God  the  sacred  treasure  intrusted  to  her  care.  The  trouble  of  former 
years  recalled,  provocations  and  inward  conflicts  ended,  the  sunshine  of  Divine 
favour  experienced,  cause  her  full  heart  to  "  bubble  up  like  a  fountain,"  and  pour 
itself  out  in  lofty  poetic  strains  (ver.  1).  What  a  contrast  does  this 'language 
indicate  between  her  condition  at  the  time  of  the  previous  visit  and  her  condition 
now  I  1.  Then  her  heart  was  full  of  grief;  now  it  "rejoioeth  in  the  Lord."  2. 
Then  her  "  horn  "  (strength,  a  figure  taken  from  animals  whose  strength  is  in  theil 
horns,  and  here  first  employed.  2  Sam.  xsii.  3 ;  Luke  i.  69)  was  trampled  in  the 
dust ;  now  it  is  "  exalted, '  and  she  is  endued  with  strength  and  honour  "  by  the 
Lord."  3.  Then  her  mouth  was  shut,  in  silent  endurance,  beneath  the  provocation 
of  her  adversary  (ch.  i.  6) ;  now  it  is  "  enlarged,"  or  opened  in  holy  exultation, 
"above  her  enemies."  4.  Then  she  was  petitioning  for  the  help  of  the  Lord  ;  now 
she  "rejoices  in  his  salvation,"  or  the  deliverance  which  he  has  wrought  on  hei 


M  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  n.  1— Itt 

behalf;  and  it  is  "because"  of  this  that  she  utters  aloud  her  thanksgiving  and 
praise.  Her  soul  with  all  its  powers,  like  a  harp  of  many  strings,  touched  by  the 
Divine  Spirit,  gives  forth  exquisite  music.  "  The  Divinely-inspired  song  of  Hannah 
is  like  a  golden  key  for  the  interpretation  of  the  whole  book  "  (Wordsworth's  'Com.'). 
Compare  this  song  with  the  song  of  Miriam  and  of  Deborah.  "  Those  compositions 
are  g^and,  indeed,  and  elevated,  and  worthy  of  tliat  inspiration  which  produced 
them ;  but  they  have  not  that  tenderness  of  spirit,  that  personality  of  devotion,  and 
that  eucharistic  anticipation  of  good  things  to  come  which  characterise  the  hymn  of 
Hannah"  (Jebb,  'Sac.  Lit.,'  p.  395).  It  is  the  model  after  which  the  song  of  the 
Virgin  Mary  was  formed,  though  there  are  notable  points  of  difference  between 
them.  Considered  in  relation  to  the  circumstances,  and  in  its  general  nature,  her 
songjwas  a  song  of — 1.  Gfratitude.  Her  prayer  had  been  answered  in  the  gift  of  a 
son ;  and,  unlike  those  who  look  no  further  than  the  blessings  bestowed  upon  them, 
she  looked  from  the  gift  to  the  Giver,  and  praised  him  with  joyful  Jips.  Her 
heart  rejoiced  not  in  Samuel,  but  in  the  Lord.  2.  Dedication.  She  had  given  back 
her  child  to  God,  and  with  him  herself  afresh.  The  more  we  give  to  God,  the  more 
our  heart  is  enlarged,  by  the  shedding  abroad  of  his  love  therein,  and  filled  with 
exceeding  joy.  3.  Triumph ;  remembering  how  she  had  been  delivered  from  her 
adversaries  in  the  past.  4.  Faith  in  his  continued  help.  5.  Patriotism.  She 
sympathised  with  her  people  in  their  oppression  by  the  Philistines ;  and,  identifying 
herself  with  them,  she  almost  lost  sight  of  what  God  had  done  for  her  in  the  con- 
■templation  of  what  he  would  do  for  them.  "  From  this  particular  mercy  she  had 
received  from  God  she  takes  occasion,  with  an  elevated  and  enlarged  heart,  to  speak 
of  the  glorious  things  of  God,  and  of  his  government  of  the  world  for  the  good  of 
the  Church."  "  She  discerned  in  her  own  individual  experience  the  general  laws  of 
the  Divine  economy,  and  its  signification  in  relation  to  the  whole  history  of  the 
kingdom  of  God"  (Auberlen).  6.  Prophetic  hope.  She  beheld  the  dawn  of  a 
new  day,  and  was  glad.  In  all  and  above  all — 1.  Joy  in  the  Lord.  "  My  heart 
rejoiceth  in  the  Lord ; "  not  merely  before  him  (Deut.  xii.  12)  ;  but  in  him,  as  the 
Object  and  Source  of  its  joy ;  in  communion  with  and  contemplation  of  hiin,  and 
in  the  admiration,  affection,  and  delight  thereby  excited.  "  My  meditation  of  him 
shall  be  sweet:  I  will  be  glad  in  the  Lord"  (Ps.  civ.  34).  "  When  I  think  of  God," 
said  Haydn  (on  being  asked  the  reason  why  the  style  of  his  music  was  so  cheerful), 
"  my  soul  is  so  full  of  joy  that  the  notes  come  leaping  and  dancing  from  my  pen." 
More  especially  observe  that  Hannah  rejoiced  in — 

I.  Thb  peefections  of  his  chabacter  (vers.  2,  3).  Such  perfections  must  not, 
indeed,  be  thought  of  as  existing  in  God  separate  and  distinct  from  each  other ; 
they  are  essential  attributes  of  his  living  personality,  and  are  all  reaUy  present  in  his 
every  purpose  and  act.  What  is  here  declared  of  God  is,  that — 1.  He  alone  is 
"holy.  (1)  Supremely  excellent;  whatever  excellence  exists  in  any  other  being 
falls  infinitely  short  of  his  (Isa.  vi.  3).  (2)  Morally  perfect ;  invariably  willing 
what  is  right  and  good ;  transcendently  glorious  in  the  view  of  conscience  (Levit. 
xi.  44).  (3)  Absolutely  existent,  which  is  the  ground  of  hid  excellence  and  perfec- 
tion. "  For  there  is  none  except  thee."  "  God  is  the  most  perfect  Being,  and  the 
cause  of  all  other  beings."  His  moral  perfection  is  a  peculiar  distinction  of  the 
revelation  which  he  made  to  his  chosen  people,  needs  to  be  specially  magnified  in 
times  of  corruption,  and  can  only  be  rejoiced  in  by  his  saints.  The  conception 
which  men  form  of  God  is  an  evidence  of  their  own  character,  and  exerts  a  powerful 
influence  upon  it  (Luke  i.  49).  2.  Ee  alone  is  strong.  "A  Rock."  (1)  Firm, 
unchanging,  enduring ;  a  sure  foundation  for  confidence.  (2)  None  can  be  com- 
pared unto  him.  They  may  not  be  trusted  in,  and  they  need  not  be  feared.  (3) 
Happy  are  those  who  can  say.  He  is  "  our  God.  That  which  is  a  terror  to  others  is 
a  consolation  to  them.  "  The  children  of  a  king  do  not  fear  what  their  father  has 
in  his  arsenal."  "Let  the  inhabitant  of  the  rock  sing."  But  men  often  speak 
proudly  and  arrogantly  (ver.  3),  as  if  they  were  independent  of  him,  and  could  do 
whatever  they  pleased.  Let  them  not  boast  any  more ;  for — 3.  Se  is  the  All-wise  ; 
a  "God  of  mowledge"  (h't.,  knowledges),  of  all  knowledge,  "The  Lord  knowetb 
the  thoughts  of  man,  that  they  are  vanity  (Ps.  xciv.  11  j  cxzzviii.  6).  His  know- 
ledge is  (1)  immediate,  (2)  perfect,  and  (3)  universal.     And,  4.  He  is  the  Judge  t^ 


OB.  n.  1—10.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  88 

human  actions.  He  determines  how  far  they  ma^  go  before  they  are  effectuallT 
checked  by  the  manifestation  of  his  power  and  wisdom  (Thenius).  "  By  strength 
shall  no  man  prevail."  He  also  forms  a  just  estimate  of  their  moral  worth,  and 
gives  to  every  man  his  due  reward.  His  righteousness  and  justice,  as  well  as  his 
strength  and  wisdom,  when  contemplated  by  the  good,  fill  them  with  great  joy. 

II.  The  operations  of  his  peovidencb  (vers.  4 — 8).  The  operations  of  Pro- 
ridence  are  the  operations  of  God  in  the  natural  world,  the  laws  of  which  are  the 
uniform  methods  of  his  activity,  and  more  especially  in  human  affairs ;  wherein, 
whilst  there  is  room  for  human  JEreedom  and  prudence,  and  the  use  of  means,  his 
will  encircles  and  overrules  all  things,  and  his  hand  moves  in  and  through  those 
events  which  are  commonly  attributed  to  chance  or  accident,  and  directs  and  con- 
trols them  for  the  good  of  those  who  love  him  (Bom.  viii.  28).  In  and  by  these 
operations — 1.  He  mamfesls  the  perfections  of  his  character  :  his  holiness,  power 
wisdom,  and  justice.    "  The  Lord  is  righteous  in  all  his  ways  "  (Ps.  xcvii.  2 ;  cxlv.  17). 

2.  He  apportions  the  different  conditions  of  men,  and  accomplishes  the  varied 
changes  of  their  condition.     (1)  Makes  the  strong  weak  and  the  weak  strong  (ver.  4). 

i2)  The  full  empty  and  the  empty  full  (ver.  5).  (3)  Increases  the  lonely  and 
iminishes  the  numerous  family.  (4)  Brings  into  great  distress,  even  to  the  verge 
of  the  grave,  and  again  restores  to  health  and  prosperity  (ver.  6).  (5)  Makes  poor 
and  makes  rich.  (6)  Brings  low  and  raises  up.  Prosperity  and  adversity  alike, 
when  received  from  the  hand  of  God  and  used  aright,  become  occasions  of  joy ;  and 
the  changes  of  life  are  morally  beneficial  (Ps.  Iv.  19 ;  Jer.  xlviii.  11 ;  James  i.  9, 10). 

3.  He  does  great  things,  especially  for  the  lowli/  (ver.  8).  Stooping  to  them  in  their 
utmost  need  and  shame  (Ps.  cxiii.  7,  8),  and  raising  them  to  the  highest  honour  and 
glory.  "God  does  nothing  else,"  said  an  ancient  philosopher,  "but  humble  the 
proud  and  exalt  the  lowly."  "  Set  thyself  in  the  lowest  place,  and  l;he  highest  shall 
be  given  thee ;  for  the  more  elevated  the  building  is  designed  to  be,  the  deeper  must 
the  foundations  be  laid.  The  greatest  saints  in  the  sight  of  God  are  the  least  in 
their  own  esteem ;  and  the  height  of  their  glory  is  always  in  proportion  to  the 
depth  of  their  humility  "  (Thomas  k  KempisJ.  4.  He  supports  the  earth  and  all 
that  is  upon  it.  His  dominion  is  supreme ;  and  he  has  therefore  the  power,  as  he  has 
the  right,  to  do  whatever  may  please  him.  An  unfaltering  trust  in  Providence  is  a 
cure  of  undue  anxiety  and  a  cause  of  abounding  peace  and  joy.  "  Certainly  it  is 
heaven  on  earth  to  have  a  man's  mind  move  in  charity,  rest  in  Providence,. and  turn 
upon  the  poles  of  truth  "  (Bacon).  "  The  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament  inculcate 
with  a  remarkable  perspicuity  and  decision  the  overruling  agency  of  God's  pro- 
vidence in  the  affairs  of  the  world.  Their  whole  prophecy  is  more  or  less  a  com- 
mentary on  this  doctrine What   a   basis  is  laid  by  it  of  peace  and 

tranquillity  to  every  thoughtful  and  most  feeling  mind ;  and  how  different  the 
aspect  of  the  world  becomes  when  we  have  reason  to  know  that  all  things  in  it,  and 
every  combination  of  them,  whether  in  the  fortunes  of  kingdoms  or  in  a  more  private 
state,  are  under  the  control  of  an  intelligent  and  gracious  Ruler.  Were  we  in  the 
chains  of  chance,  how  gloomy  would  our  case  be.  Were  we  in  the  hands  of  men, 
too  often  how  fearful,  how  humiliating,  how  conflicting.  But  the  impression  of 
the  scene  is  changed  when  we  admit  into  it  the  direction  of  an  all-wise  and  perfect 
Being,  in  whose  rectitude  and  goodness  we  may  acquiesce  through  the  whole  coutm 
of  his  providential  dispensation  "  (Davison  '  on  Prophecy,'  p.  69). 

"  One  adequate  support 
For  the  calamities  of  mortal  life 
Exists,  one  only  ; — an  assured  belief 
That  the  procession  of  our  fate,  howe'er 
Sad  or  disturb'd,  is  order'd  by  a  Bemg 
Of  infinite  benevolence  and  power, 
Whose  everlasting  purposes  embrace 
All  accidents,  converting  them  to  good  "  (Wordsworth), 

in.  Thb  establishment  of  his  kingdom  (vers.  9,  10).  God  is  a  moral  governor, 
and  directs  his  providential  operations  with  a  view  to  the  setting  up  of  a  kingdom 
of  righteousness  upon  earth.    This  kingdom  existed  from  the  Saet,  was  more  fully 

1  SAM  « 


84  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  n.  1— lOt 

exhibited  in  the  theocracy  of  Israel,  and  culminated  in  the  rule  of  Christ,  who  "  must 
reign  until  he  hath  put  all  enemies  under  his  feet."  In  every  stage  of  development 
it  involves  conflict.  But — 1.  He  will  protect  its  sultfects;  his  saints  (lit.,  pious, 
those  who  love  God),  against  whom  the  wicked  will  contend  in  vain  (ver.  9).  2.  He 
will  overthrow  its  adversaries  (ver.  10) ;  their  overthrow  being  (1)  certain,  (2)  un- 
expected, (3)  complete — "broken  to  pieces,"  —  and  (4)  signally  indicative  of  the 
interposition  of  heaven  (ch.  vii.  10).  3.  He  will  extend  its  borders  to  the  ends  of  the 
earth.  4.  And  he  vtill  clothe  with  strength,  honour,  and  majesty  the  king  whom  he 
appoints  and  anoints  for  the  accomplishment  of  his  purposes.  Hannah  commenced 
her  song  with  rejoicing  on  account  of  the  strength  and  honour  conferred  upon  her- 
self, and  she  closes  it  with  rejoicing  on  account  of  the  strength  and  honour  which 
would  be  conferred  on  him  who  should  be  "  higher  than  the  kings  of  the  earth." 
"  Let  the  children  of  Zion  be  joyful  in  their  king."  "  The  anointed  of  the  Lord, 
of  whom  Hannah  prophesies  in  the  spirit,  is  not  one  single  king  in  Israel,  either 
David  or  Christ,  but  an  ideal  king,  though  not  a  mere  personification  of  the  throne 
about  to  be  established,  but  the  actual  king  whom  Israel  received  in  David  and  the 
race,  which  culminated  in  the  Messiah.  The  exaltation  of  the  horn  of  the  anointed 
of  Jehovah  commenced  with  the  victorious  and  splendid  expansion  of  the  power  of 
David,  was  repeated  with  every  victory  over  the  enemies  of  God  and  his  kingdom 
gained  by  the  successive  kings  of  David's  house,  goes  on  in  the  advancing  spread 
of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  and  will  eventually  attain  to  its  eternal  consummation  in 
the  judgment  of  the  last  day,  through  which  all  the  enemies  of  Christ  will  be  made 
nis  footstool "  (Keil).— D. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — The  prayer-song  of  Hannah.  In  her  prayer  of  asking  Hannah 
was  intent  not  merely  on  having  a  child,  but  on  giving  to  the  service  of  God  a  priest, 
and  to  the  government  of  Israel  a  judge,  very  different  from  the  sons  of  Eli — a 
Kazarite,  a  second  and  a  better  Samson.  No  wonder,  then,  that  when  she  brought  her 
son  to  the  sanctuary,  her  prayer  of  thanksgiving  took  a  large  scope,  and  revealed  even 
a  prophetic  fervour.  What  religious  poetess  has  njade  such  an  impression  as  Hannah 
with  one  ode?  Reproduced  in  Ps.  cxiii.,  and  yet  again  in  the  song  of  the  blessed 
Virgin  Mary,  commonly  called  the  Magnificat,  it  may  be  said  to  have  continued  in 
devout  minds,  Hebrew  and  Gentile,  for  about  3000  years.  The  first  verse  is  the  intro- 
duction, and  striV<"=  the  key  in  which  all  that  follows  is  pitched — a  tone  of  warm  and 
grateful  confidence  in  God.  Then  follow  the  praises  of  the  Lord,  with  some  antici- 
pation of  better  days  to  come. 

I.  Pbaisb  op  Jehovah  (vers.  2 — 8).  1.  Because  of  his  sublime  attributes  (vers. 
2,  3).  "  There  is  none  holy  as  Jehovah."  The  root  idea  of  holiness  is  always  that 
oJE  separateness  from  what  is  evil  or  profane.  The  God  of  Israel  was  the  Holy  One, 
absolutely  unique,  immaculate,  inviolate,  and  inviolable.  None  among  the  gods  of 
the  nations  might  be  likened  to  him.  So  he  called  and  required  Israel  to  be  a  holy 
nation,  i.  e.  separate  from  the  nations  of  the  world,  who  are  idolatrous  and  unclean. 
So  under  the  New  Testament  the  saints  are  the  separated  ones  who  touch  not  the 
unclean  thing.  "  Neither  any  rock  like  our  God."  His  protection  cannot  be  invaded. 
His  purpose  does  not  vacillate.  His  power  does  not  fail.  He  is  the  Rock  of  Ages. 
This  was  what  made  Israel  unconquerable  so  long  as  faithful  to  God.  The  "  rocks  " 
of  the  nations,  ♦'.  «.  the  gods  in  whom  they  trusted,  were  not  as  Israel's  Rock.  "  Je- 
hovah is  a  God  of  knowledge. "  Let  not  the  wicked  boast  proudly.  No  word  of  scorn 
cast  at  the  humble,  no  haughty  glance  of  the  eye,  is  unobserved  by  the  Lord  ;  and 
nothing  is  more  certain  than  that,  sooner  or  later,  he  will  abase  the  proud.  "  And  by 
him  actions  are  weighed."  In  his  estimate  of  human  conduct  he  holds  the  balances 
of  a  perfect  equity.  2.  Because  of  his  mighty  works  (vers.  4 — 8).  Ruling  in  holy 
sovereignty,  God  often  reverses  the  conditions  of  men,  lowering  the  exalted  and 
exalting  the  lowly.  He  even  kills  and  makes  alive,  leads  down  into  Hades,  and  leads 
up  from  it  again.  Sheol  or  Hades  was  no  mere  pit  of  extinction  from  which  there 
could  be  no  uprising.  God  was  able  to  raise  even  the  dead.  Such  being  his  power, 
what  could  the  boastful  efEect  against  Jehovah  ?  What  might  not  the  humble  hope 
from  hiin?  This  is  the  central  thought  of  Hannah's  so;ig,  and  it  is  still  more  finely 
•xpressed  in  that  of  the  blessed  Virgin.     "  He  hath  showed  strength,"  Stc.  (Luke  i 


OH.  n.  1—10.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  U 

51 — 53).  0£  the  elevation  of  the  despised,  celebrated  here  and  in  Ps.  cziii.,  how 
many  illustrations  in  sacred  story  I  Joseph,  Mosea,  Gideon,  before  the  time  of 
Hannah ;  and  afterwards,  David,  and  the  great  Son  of  David,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus, 
and  his  Galilean  apostles.  This  fact  is  not  to  encourage  contempt  of,  or  impatience 
under,  earthly  dignities ;  but  it  is  to  cheer  those  who  are  or  may  be  depressed  by 
worldly  disadvantage  of  poverty  or  obscurity.  God's  grace  is  no  appanage  of  the 
rich  or  powerful.  Was  not  Martin  Luther  a  poor  miner's  son  ?  David  Brainerd  a 
small  farmer's  son  ?  John  Bunyan  a  tinker's  son,  brought  up  to  follow  the  same 
craft  ?  Were  not  the  good  missionaries  Carey  and  Knibb  apprentices,  the  one  bound 
to  a  cobbler,  the  other  to  a  printer  ?  And  are  not  such  men  among  the  princes  of 
God's  people  ?  The  house  of  Elkanah  was  of  no  eminence  in  Israel ;  but  thence  God 
was  raising  up  this  child  Samuel,  whom  Hannah  brought  to  his  courts,  to  be,  if  not 
king,  king-maker,  and  to  stand  at  the  head  of  a  line  of  prophets  who  should  be  the 
guides  of  the  kings  and  the  people  so  long  as  the  kingdom  stood. 

II.  Anticipation  of  bbttbr  things  to  comb.  The  end  of  this  prayer-song  has  a 
prophetic  strain  (vers.  9,  10).  Hannah  was  confident  of  God's  preservation  of  his 
saints,  and  of  the  correlative  truth  of  the  perdition  of  ungodly  men.  Not  that  he 
has  any  pleasure  in  their  death ;  but  that  if  men  will  fight  against  eternal  order  and 
righteousness,  they  must  fail  in  the  struggle,  they  must  perish.  "As  for  Jehovah, 
those  who  contend  against  him  are  broken."  The  prophetic  element  shows  itself  in 
the  closing  expressions  of  the  song.  The  government  of  Israel  at  the  time  may  be 
described  as  that  of  a  commonwealth,  so  far  as  concerns  human  administration.  It 
was  a  theocracy,  as  it  had  been  from  the  time  of  the  exodus ;  but  the  actual 
administration  was  carried  on  through  leaders,  or  judges.  The  eye  of  Hannah 
opened  on  a  new  epoch,  foresaw  a  king  to  whom  Jehovah  would  give  strength  as  his 
Anointed.  It  is  the  first  mention  of  a  Messiah  in  Holy  Writ.  No  doubt  Hannah's 
words  are  a  prediction  of  David,  whose  horn  of  power  the  Lord  was  to  exalt,  giving 
him  a  career  of  victory  over  all  his  enemies.  But  whether  or  not  it  was  clear  to 
Hannah's  mind,  the  Spirit  who  rested  on  her  signified  a  King  greater  than  David, 
and  a  more  illustrious  kingdom.  It  is  he  of  whom  the  angel  said  to  Mary,  "  He 
shall  be  great,"  &c.  (Luke  i.  32,  33).  We  see  not  yet  his  kingdom.  We  see  not  all 
things  put  under  him.  But  we  see  Jesus  crowned  with  glory  and  honour  ;  and  we 
wait  for  his  appearing  and  his  kingdom.  The  longings  of  many  generations,  the 
hopes  of  many  Hannahs,  the  visions  of  many  seers  and  prophets,  O  may  they  come 
to  pass  speedily  1 — F. 

Ver.  2.  (Shiloh.) — The  Rock  of  Israel.  "Neither  is  there  any  rock  like  our  God.' 
The  figurative  representations  of  God  which  are  given  in  his  word  enable  us  to  attaii^ 
exalted,  varied,  and  most  impressive  views  of  his  character.  They  are  derived  from 
objects  with  which  the  lands  of  the  Bible  abounded ;  and  no  other  lands  on  eartl. 
were  equally  adapted  to  be  the  theatre  of  a  Divine  revelation  for  men  universally 
Of  these  representations,  this  is  one  of  the  most  common.  It  was  first  employed  b 
Jacob  (Gen.  xlix.  24 — stone,  ehen,  or  rock),  with  allusion,  perhaps,  to  Gen.  xxvi 
11,  22 ;  afterwards  by  Moses  (Deut.  xxxii.  4, 18,  &o. — rock,  tzur  ^  what  is  solid,  firm 
enduring;  a  support,  foundation,  as  in  the  text),  who  was  so  familiar  with  the  rooks 
and  mountains  of  Sinai ;  frequently  by  David  (2  Sam.  xxii.  3 — rock,  sela  =  height. 
cliff  or  crag,  resorted  to  as  a  refuge)  and  the  prophets.     Notice — 

I.  His  character  in  itself.  1.  His  power.  "  To  know  thy  power  is  the  root  of 
immortality."  2.  His  unchangeahleness  and  faithfulness.  "I  change  not"  (Mai. 
iii.  6),  with  reference  to  his  merciful  covenant.  3.  His  eternity.  "  From  everlasting 
to  everlasting. "  These  attributes  are  ascribed  to  Christ : "  all  power"  (Matt,  xxv  iii.  1 8) 
"the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever"  (Heb.  i.  8 — 12;  xiii.  8).  "Thai 
Rock  was  Christ "  (1  Cor.  x.  4).  He  is  the  highest  and  the  only  perfect  manifesta- 
tion of  God.  "  Jesus  is  that  Divine  Being  to  whom  we  can  draw  near  without  pride, 
and  before  whom  we  can  be  abased  without  despair  "  (Pascal). 

II.  His  superiority  to  others.  They  are — 1.  Weak.  Their  very  strength  is 
weakness  compared  with  His  infinite  power,  i.  Changeoible.  "  All  men  are  liars," 
false,  unworthy,  and  disappointing  objects  of  trust.  3.  Transitory.  They  and 
their  works  pass  away,  whilst  the  rock  endures  for  ever  (see  Swumock, — "Um 

9  8 


M  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  lOB.  u.  1—10. 

incomparablenesB  of  God,  — '  Works,'  vol.  iv.).  Expect  not  true  or  lasting  satis- 
faction from  any  created  object.  "  Cease  ye  from  man  "  (Isa.  ii.  22).  Fear  him 
not  (Isa.  li.  12,  13). 

III.  HiB  EBLATioN  TO  HIS  PEOPLE.  "  Our  God."  His  people  are  those  who  live 
in  direct  fellowship  with  him,  and  show  the  reality  of  their  fellowship  by  walking 
in  the  light  and  keeping  his  commandments.  To  them  he  has  promised  to_  be  all 
that  their  true  welfare  requires.  1.  A  support:  "the  immovable  fomidation  on 
which  they  may  stand  firm,  impregnable,  secure.  2.  A  defence,  protecting  them 
against  their  enemies ;  "  a  shadow  from  the  heat,  a  refuge  from  the  storm  ; "  bearing 
on  himself  the  tempest  that  would  have  fallen  on  them.  "  He  that  believeth  shaU 
not  make  haste,"  or  be  terrified.  3.  A  source  of  strength,  of  peace,  and  of  consola- 
tion. "  Babbi  Maimon  has  observed  that  the  word  tsur,  which  we  translate  rock, 
signifies,  when  applied  to  Jehovah,  fountain,  source,  spring.  There  is  no  source 
whence  continual  help  and  salvation  can  arise  but  our  God  "  (A.  Clarke). 

IV.  His  claims  upon  all.  1.  To  trust  in  him.  2.  Abide  in  him;  not  merely 
fleeing  to  him  in  a  time  of  trouble  and  danger  (as  a  traveller  may  seek  shelter  in  a 
hovel  while  the  storm  lasts,  and  immediately  afterwards  leave  it),  but  making  him 
our  habitation  and  home.  3.  To  make  him  our  portion  and  "exceeding  joy." 
"  Trust  ye  in  the  Lord  for  ever  ;  for  the  Lord  Jehovah  is  the  Bock  of  Ages  "  (Isa. 
zxvi.  4). 

"  Rock  of  Ages,  cleft  for  me  ; 
Let  me  hide  myself  in  thee."  IX 

Ver.  3. — The  Divine  judgment  of  human  actions.  "  By  him  actions  are  weighed." 
It  is  customary  to  determine  the  worth  of  many  things  by  weighing  them.  For 
this  purpose  a  fixed  standard  is  used,  and  a  comparison  is  made  with  it  by  means  of 
a  balance  and  scales  or  other  instrument.  Nothing  can  be  more  natural  than  to 
speak  of  determining  the  moral  worth  of  actions  in  the  same  manner,  and  Justice 
is  commonly  represented  as  a  woman  holding  in  her  hand  a  pair  of  scales  in  which 
"actions  are  weighed."  In  this  sense  the  above  expression  is  employed;  not, 
however,  of  men,  whose  judgment  is  often  mistaken  or  unjust ;  but  of  "  God,  the 
Judge  of  all."     His  judgment  is — 

I.  A  PBBSBNT  JUDGMENT.  They  are  (now)  weighed.  According  to  the  ancient 
Egyptians,  there  was  erected  at  the  entrance  of  the  unseen  world  a  balance  or  scales, 
over  which  the  Judge  of  the  dead  presided,  and  by  it  the  character  of  every  man 
was  tested  as  soon  as  he  died.  In  one  of  the  scales  the  figure  or  emblem  of  truth 
was  placed,  and  in  the  other  the  heart  of  the  deceased ;  and  the  result  determined 
his  destiny.  This  is  not  an  unworthy  conception  of  the  judgment  to  come.  But 
their  religion  pertained  chiefly  to  what  would  be  in  the  future,  rather  than  to  what 
exists  in  the  present.  And  there  are  many  at  the  present  day  who  never  think  that 
they  have  anything  to  do  with  God  or  his  judgment  except  when  they  come  to  die. 
They  forget  that  the  living  and  all-seeing  God  "  pondereth  their  goings  "  (Prov.  v. 
21),  "  judgeth  according  to  every  man's  work  "  (1  Pet.  i.  17),  and  that  to  him  they 
stand  responsible  (Heb.  iv.  18 — "  with  whom  is  the  account "). 

II.  AocoRDlNa  TO  A  PERFECT  STANDARD.  The  estimate  which  men  form  of  them- 
selves and  others  is  often  false,  because  it  is  not  formed  by  means  of  such  a  standard. 
As  "  weights  and  measures  "  need  to  be  examined  and  to  be  rectified  by  an  imperial 
standard,  so  the  human  judgment  and  conscience  need  to  be  examined  and  to  be 
rectified  by  the  righteousness  of  God  as  declared  in  the  Law  and  the  Prophets  and 
the  Gospel  of  Christ.     What  is  our  relation  to  this  standard  ? 

III.  According  to  motives.  The  moral  worth  of  actions  does  not  depend  upon 
their  "  outward  appearance,"  but  upon  the  heart.  In  the  sight  of  God,  who  sees 
hearts  as  we  see  faces,  the  inward  motives,  principles,  and  intentions  are  in  reality 
the  actions  which  are  weighed  (Prov.  xvi.  2 ;  xxi.  2 ;  xxiv.  11,  12 ;  Isa.  xxvi.  7). 
Our  ignorance  .of  these  necessarily  makes  our  judgment  imperfect,  even  in  relation 
to  ourselves.  But  "he  is  a  God  of  knowledge,"  "  searches  the  heart,"  and  perceives 
the  motives  which  underlie  aU  actions,  and  which  are  often  so  different  from  what 
they  are  thought  to  be  (Ps.  czxxix.  33). 

tf.  Umitzbial.    "The  Jud^e  of  all  the  earth."    It  pertains  to  all  actions  HaX 


liH.  n.  1—10.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  K 

have  in  them  a  moral  element ;  to  the  actions  of  every  individual  soul  (for  each  sou] 
stands  before  him  in  its  separate  personality,  bearing  its  own  burden  of  responsibility 
and  of  sin,  and  is  dealt  with  by  him  as  though  there  were  no  other) ;  and  to  every 
one  of  its  actions,  however  apparently  insignificant,  though  it  cannot  be  really  such 
because  of  its  relation  lO  God,  and  its  bearing  upon  character  and  destiny. 

V.  Exercised  with  a  view  to  eewakding  evebt  man  according  to  his  works. 
It  is  not  useless  and  ineffective;  but  is  attended  with  important  consequences 
(Jer.  xvii.  10).  This  life  is  not  simply  one  of  probation  ;  it  is  also,  in  part,  one  of 
retribution.  The  approbation  or  disapprobation  of  God  is  always  followed  by 
corresponding  effects  in  the  mind  and  heart  and  conscience  of  men,  and  often  by 
startling  providential  occurrences ;  as  when  it  was  said,  "  Thou  art  weighed  in  the 
balances,  and  art  found  wanting  "  (Dan.  v.  27,  30)  ;  "  The  world's  history  is  the 
world's  judgment; "  and,  "  We  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ" 
(Rom.  xiv.  12;  2  Cor.  v.  10).  Application: — 1.  "Let  a  man  examine  himself." 
2.  Seek  forgiveness  of  the  ains  that  are  past  3.  "  Walk  before  me,  and  be  thon 
perfect."— D. 

Ver.  9.  (Shiloh.) — God's  guardianship  of  Ms  saints.  "  He  will  keep  the  feet  of  hia 
saints."  Who  are  his  saints  ?  1,  The  term  is  sometimes  used  as  one  of  reproach,  by 
persons  who  are  destitute  of  religious  life,  concerning  those  who  bear  the  Christian 
name.  Pointing  to  the  inconsistency  of  some  of  the  latter,  they  would  thereby  fain 
persuade  themselves  and  others  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  true  godliness  to  be  found 
in  the  world.  There  are,  doubtless,  many  who  "  profess  to  know  God,  but  in  works 
deny  him."  But  there  would  be  no  counterfeit  money  unless  there  were  some 
genuine  coin.  2.  The  word  is  also  used  to  designate  those  who  have  been  "  canon- 
ised ; "  and  who,  having  gone  into  heaven,  are  supposed  to  have  influence  with  God 
in  the  granting  of  petitions  presented  on  earth.  But  such  a  use  of  it  is  imscriptural, 
and  the  doctrine  is  false  and  injurious.  3.  The  saints  of  God  are  those  who  have 
been  accepted  by  him  through  faith  in  Christ,  who  do  his  will  and  walk  in  the  way 
to  heaven.  Their  way,  indeed,  is  often  dif&oult  and  painful,  like  the  uneven,  intri- 
cate, and  stony  paths  of  Palestine,  and  beset  by  numerous  dangers.  But,  for  their 
consolation  and  encouragement,  it  is  promised  that  "  he  that  keepeth  Israel "  will 
"  keep  their  feet "  firm  and  safe,  so  that  they  may  not  fall  and  perish.  The  promise 
is  directly  of  preservation  from  temporal  calamity,  but  it  may  be  regarded  as 
including  also  preservation  from  spiritual  failure  and  destruction.    Consider — 

I.  The  SANGER  FROM  WHICH  HE  WILL  KEEP  THEM.  1.  jFrom  Wandering  out  of 
the  viay.  Obscurity  may  gather  over  it.  Other  ways  may  appear  plainer,  easier, 
and  more  pleasant,  and  tempt  them  to  leave  it.  Or  they  may  seem  more  direct  and 
shorter  than  the  circuitous  and  wearisome  path  they  have  to  pursue.  But  kept  by 
him  they  will  not  go  astray.  2.  From  stumbling  in  the  way.  "  It  must  needs  be 
that  offences  (or  occasions  of  stumbling)  come."  Some  of  them  consist  of— (1)  The 
difiSculties  of  Divine  revelation :  "  things  hard  to  be  understood."  (2)  The  mysteries 
of  Divine  providence,  which  have  led  many  to  say,  "  As  for  me,"  &c.  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  2). 
(3)  Direct  solicitations  to  evil.  (4)  "  Affiictions  and  persecutions  that  arise  for  the 
word,  whereby  many  are  offended.  But  "  great  peace  have  they  that  love  thy  law, 
and  nothing  shall  cause  them  to  stumble "  (Ps.  cxix.  165).  3.  From,  failing  to 
reach  the  md  of  the  way.  Some  start  with  bright  hopes  which  are  not  afterwards 
altogether  fulfilled  in  their  experience :  storms  gather,  enemies  threaten,  severe  con- 
flict must  be  waged ;  and  they  become  weary  and  desponding,  and  ready  to  halt 
''  But  the  righteous  shall  hold  on  his  way  "  (Job  xvii.  19 ;  Isa.  xl.  31), 

II.  The  MANNER  IN  WHICH  HE  WILL  KEEP  THEM.  By — 1.  Providing  means  of  help 
for  them  :  the  word,  which  is  an  instrument  of  guidance,  refreshment,  and  deience ; 
prayer ;  the  fellowship  of  those  who  are  travelling  in  the  same  way ;  the  ministra- 
tion of  angels  (Ps.  xoi.  11 ;  Heb.  L  14).  2.  Watching  over  them  at  every  step.  They 
are  not  alone  ;  but  he  is  with  them ;  and  they  are  "  kept  by  the  power  of  God  "  (1 
Pet  i.  6).  3.  Imparting  grace  and  strength  to  them  according  to  their  need.  "  A* 
thy  dav,"  &a  It  matters  not  how  great  the  need  if  "  the  supply  of  the  Spirit " 
(Phil  L  19)  be  equal  to  it    And,  "  My  grace,"  he  says,  "  is  sufficient  for  thee." 

IIL  TBI  auTAorTT  with  ^thioh  he  wnx  kebp  thxm.     1.  He  haa  a  tpeeUl 


99  ,  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [cb.  ii.  1—10, 

interest  in  them,  for  they  are  "his  saints,"  "the  portion  of  his  inheritance."  2.  H« 
has  already  done  much  for  them,  which  is  an  earnest  of  continued  preservation. 
3.  He  has  high  purposes  to  accomplish  in  them  and  through  them.  And,  4.  He  has 
solemnly  promised  "  never  to  leave  them "  (Heb.  xiii.  6),  and  "  he  is  faithful  that 
promised  "  (Heb.  x.  23). 

I.  Kely  upon  the  promise.  2.  Presume  not  upon  your  security,  nor  think  that 
without  fulfilling  his  commandments  you  can  receive  his  promises.  3.  Use  the 
appointed  means  of  grace  with  all  diligence. — D. 

Ver.  10.  (Shiloh.) — The  King  Messiah.  The  last  word  of  the  song  of  Hannah  is  the 
first  mention  of  the  Lord's  Anointed,  Messiah,  Christ.  1.  Her  language  was  a  direct 
prediction  of  the  appointment  of  a  theocratic  king,  for  which  Samuel  prepared  the 
way,  and  which,  under  Divine  direction,  he  was  the  chief  agent  in  efEecting.  2.  It 
was  an  indirect  prediction  of  One  who  had  been  long  expected  (Gen.  iii.  14,  15 ; 
xii.  1—3 ;  xxii.  17,  18  ;  xlix.  10  ;  Num.  xxiv.  17—19  ;  Deut.  xviii.  15 — 19),  and  in 
whom  the  idea  of  such  a  king  would  be  completely  realised.  3.  It  marks  the  dawn 
of  a  splendid  series  of  prophecies  founded  on  the  reign  of  David,  and  ever  brighten- 
ing to  the  perfect  day  (2  Sam.  vii. ;  xxiii.  1 — 7 ;  Ps.  ii.  ;  ex. ;  Isa.  ix.  9 ;  Dan.  ix. 
26 ;  Micah  v.  1 ;  Mai.  iv.  2.  Fairbaim, '  Typology,'  i.  Ill ;  Pye  Smith,  '  Script.  Test.,' 
i.  169).    Consider— 

L  His  eegal  office.  Its  general  purpose  was — 1.  To  unite  a  divided  people 
(Qren.  xlix.  10).  Nothing  was  more  needed  in  the  days  of  the  judges.  2.  To  save 
them  from  their  enemies.  "  Thy  salvation  "  (ch.  ii.  1 ;  Ps.  xviii.  50  ;  xcv.  1 ;  Matt.  i. 
21).  3.  To  rule  over  them,  judge  them  in  righteousness,  and  establish  among  them 
order,  peace,  and  happiness.  "  The  regal  office  of  our  Saviour  consisteth  partly  in  the 
ruling,  protecting,  and  rewarding  of  his  people ;  partly  in  the  coercing,  condemning, 
and  destroying  of  his  enemies  "  (Pearson  '  on  the  Creed,'  Art.  ii.).  It  was  the  fatal 
mistake  of  Israel  in  all  ages  to  look  for  an  outward,  worldly,  and  imposing,  rather 
than  an  inward,  moral,  and  spiritual  fulfilment  of  this  purpose.  The  same  mistake 
has,  to  some  extent,  pervaded  Christendom.  "My  kingdom  is  not  of  this  world." 
"  The  kingdom  of  God  is  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  "  Alex- 
ander, Caesar,  Charlemagne,  and  myseK  have  founded  empires.  But  upon  what  did 
we  rest  the  creations  of  our  genius  ?  Upon  force.  Jesus  Christ  alone  founded  his 
empire  upon  love ;  and  at  this  moment  millions  would  die  for  him  "  ('  Table  Talk  and 
Opinions  of  Napoleon  Buonaparte '). 

II.  His  Divine  appointment.  "Sis  King."  "Sis  Anointed"  (Ps.  ii.  6;  xviii. 
60).  1.  The  choice  was  of  God.  "  Chosen  out  of  the  people "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  19). 
Even  Saul,  a  man  after  the  people's  heart  rather  than  after  God's  heart,  was  selected 
and  appointed  by  him.  The  invisible  King  of  Israel  did  not  relinquish  his  authority. 
2.  Founded  on  personal  eminence.  David.  The  ancient  Persians  believed  that  their 
ruler  was  an  incarnation  of  the  eternal  light,  the  object  of  their  worship,  and  there- 
fore rendered  him  Divine  honour.  This  was  a  reality  in  Christ.  3.  Confirmed  and 
manifested  by  the  anointing  of  his  Spirit  (ch.  x.  1 ;  xvi.  13 ;  2  Sam.  ii.  4)  ;  the  out- 
ward act  being  a  symbol  of  the  inward  endowment  (Matt.  iii.  16 ;  Luke  iv.  18). 
"  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure  unto  him  "  (John  iii.  34 ;  Heb.  i.  9). 

III.  His  GLOEions  exaltation.  1.  After  a  state  of  humiliation;  implied  in  the 
language  here  used ;  also  indicated  in  ver.  8 ;  and  typified  by  the  lowly  origin  of 
David  and  his  course  to  the  throne.  2.  By  the  right  hand  of  God.  "  He  will  give 
strength ;  "  "  All  power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in  earth  "  (Matt,  xxviii.  18) ; 
exhibited  in  his  resurrection,  ascension,  and  possession  of  supreme  honour,  authority, 
and  power.  3.  To  a  kingdom  universal  and  eternal.  "  The  Lord  shall  judge  the 
ends  of  the  earth  "  (Ps.  ii.  8 ;  Ixxii.  2^5 ;  cxxxii.  18 ;  Luke  i.  31—33,  69).  Whilst 
Jesus  lives  and  reigns  in  heaven,  he  also  lives  and  reigns  on  earth.  He  does  so  by  the 
continued  and  ever-increasing  power  of  his  example  and  teachings,  his  wondrous  life, 
and  still  more  wondrous  death.  The  truths  and  principles  which  he  declared  and 
embodied  are,  at  this  moment,  accepted  by  the  loftiest  intellects,  the  purest  con- 
■ciences,  and  the  tenderest  hearts  amongst  men.  Who  now  reverses  a  single  judgment 
which  he  pronounced  upon  men  or  things?  Who  can  conceive  any  character  more 
worthy  o£  reverence  and  affection  than  his  ?    The  lapse  of  time  has  only  wrved  to 


a.  n.  11—26.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


t9 


invest  his  words  and  character  with  fresh  interest  and  power.    Other  kings  and  con- 

auerors  are  fading  away  amidst  the  shadows  of  the  past ;  but  he  is  ever  rising  before 
le  view  of  mankind  more  distinctly,  and  living  in  their  thoughts,  their  consciences, 
and  their  hearts  more  mightily.  Yea,  more,  he  lives  and  reigns  on  earth  by  his 
Divine  presence,  his  providential  working,  and  the  power  of  his  Spirit.  Just  as  the 
Bun,  shining  in  mid-heaven,  sheds  down  his  rays  upon  the  earth ;  so  Christ,  the  Sun 
of  righteousness  (though  no  longer  seen  by  mortal  eye),  pours  down  the  beams  of 
his  influence  upon  us  continually,  and  rules  over  all  things  for  the  compUt*  establish- 
ment of  his  kingdom. — ^D. 


EXPOSITION. 


SAMTTBIi'S      HimSTRATIONS      AT      SHILOH 

(vers.  11—21).  Ver.  11.— The  child  did 
minister.  Left  by  his  parents  at  Shiloh, 
Samuel  ministered  unto  the  Lord  ;,  that  is, 
certain  duties  were  allotted  him  to  perform 
suited  to  his  age ;  but  few  at  first,  when  he  was 
but  three  years  old,  but  increasing  in  import- 
ance as  time  went  on  ;  for  the  words  refer  to 
the  whole  period  of  his  service,  untU  Eli's 
death.  Atmrst  Samuel  would  be  but  a  scholar, 
for,  as  we  have  mentioned  on  ch,  i.  21,  there 
were,  no  doubt,  regulations  for  the  training 
of  children  devoted  to  the  service  of  the  sanc- 
tuary. The  peculiarity  about  Samuel  was 
that  he  was  devoted  for  life,  for  possibly  it 
was  a  not  uncommon  practice  for  young  per- 
sons to  receive  some  training  at  Shiloh ;  just 
as  we  find  that  Samuel  himself  subsequently 
gathered  youths  round  him  at  Naioth  in 
Ramah  for  educational  purposes.  Learning 
practically  was  confined  to  the  priesthood, 
and  we  can  scarcely  imagine  that  the  know- 
ledge which  Phinehas  and  the  family  of 
Aaron  brought  with  them  out  of  E^ypt 
would  be  allowed  to  perish.  Samuel  certainly 
had  himself  received  careful  instruction  (see' 
on  ch.  X.  26),  and  this  could  scarcely  have 
happened  if  the  training  of  young  persons 
had  not  been  part  of  the  priests'  duties  at 
Shiloh.  This  then  explains  why  Samuel 
was  brought  to  Eli  at  so  tender  an  age,  and 
why  the  charge  of  so  young  a  chUd  was 
undertaken  without  a  murmur.  Before  Eli 
means  under  his  general  superintendence. 
Everything  done  at  Shiloh  was  done  before 
Eli,  as  being  the  chief  ruler  there. 

Ver.  12. — Now  the  sons  of  Eli  were  sons 
of  Belial,  i.  e.  worthless  men  (see  on  ch. 
L  16).  They  knew  not  Jehovah.  He  had 
never  been  revealed  to  their  consciences, 
and  so  his  fear  had  no  influence  upon  their 
lives.  The  next  words,  in  ver.  13,  are  diffi- 
cult, but  lit.  mean,  "  The  legal  right  of  the 
priests  towards,  or  as  respecte,  the  people. " 
On  this  account  the  Vulgate  and  several  com- 
mentators couple  the  sentence  with  what  pre- 
cedes: "they  knew  neither  Jehovah,  nor  their 
own  legal  rights. "  But  the  word  also  in  ver. 
15  is  incompatible  with  this  rendering ;  for  if 
what  is  mentioned  there  be  illegal,  so  must 
(Iw  the  practice  be  which  is  recorded  here. 


But  neither  does  custom  give  the  sense ;  for 
the  Heb.  has  not  priest's  (sing.)  as  the  A  V., 
but  of  the  priests,  of  all  priests  generally,  and 
not  of  Eli  merely  and  his  sons.  The  right 
translation  is  that  given  by  the  Sept.,  Syriac, 
and  Chaldee,  namely,  "the  due  of  the  priests 
from  the  people,"  on  which  see  Lev.  vii 
31 — 35.  In  the  original  this  is  put  absolutely 
"And  as  to  the  priests'  due  from  the  people, 
when,"  &c,  but  our  language  requires  soma 
insertion  to  make  it  read  more  smoothly. 
"  And  as  to  the  due  of  the  priests  from  the 
people,  the  manner  of  its  exaction  was  as 
follows  :  When,"  &c.  But  besides  the  due 
and  legal  portion,  which,  nevertheless,  they 
took  in  an  illegal  way,  they  demanded  a 
part  of  the  flesh  reserved  for  the  feast  of 
the  offerer,  and  to  which  they  had  abso- 
lutely no  right  (see  Lev.  viii.  31 ;  2  Chrou. 
XXXV.  13). 

The  legal  due  of  the  priest  was  the  right 
shoulder  and  the  wave  breast ;  but  before  he 
took  them  they  were  to  be  consecrated  to 
God  by  the  burning  of  the  fat  upon  the  altar 
(Lev.  iii.  5  j  vii.  31,34).  It  is  worth  observing 
that  the  people  seem  well  acquainted  with 
the  words  of  the  Law,  and  are  indignant 
because  the  priests,  its  proper  guardians,  do 
not  abide  literally  by  them.  This  contempt 
of  the  Law  distressed  their  religious  suscep- 
tibilites,  while  the  cupidity  of  Eli's  sons 
offended  their  moral  nature.  And  so  men 
abhorred  the  offering  of  Jehovah.  Lit.  it 
is  the  minchah,  the  unbloody  sacrifice,  or 
meat  ofiering,  but  it  is  put  here  for  every 
kind  of  sacrificial  offering. 

Ver.  18. — But  Samuel  ministered.  While 
the  misconduct  of  Eli's  sons  was  thus  bring- 
ing religion  into  contempt,  and  sapping  the 
nation's  morals,  Samuel  was  advancing  in 
years  and  piety,  and  was  gaining  that  educa- 
tion which  made  him  fit  to  retrieve  the  evil 
of  their  doings.  He  is  stiU  styled  ndar,  a 
boy  ;  for  the  word,  according  to  the  Rabbins, 
may  be  used  up  to  fifteen  years  (ch.  L  24). 
In  the  sense  of^  servant  there  is  no  limit  of 
age ;  and  as  it  is  the  word  translated  "young 
men"  in  ver.  17,  it  probably  means  there 
not  Eli's  sons,  but  the  servants  by  whose 
instrumentality  their  orders  were  actually 
carried  out    Samuel's  dress,  an  ephod  of 


40 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  8AMUBI» 


[oB.  n.  U—M. 


white  linen,  was  probably  that  worn  by  the 
Levites  in  their  ordinary  ministrations  ;  for 
the  ephod  of  the  priests  was  richer  both  in 
matenal  and  colour  (Exod.  xxviii  6 — 8).  As 
being  thus  the  simplest  ministerial  garment, 
it  was  apparently  worn  also  by  laymen  when 
taking  part  in  any  religious  service,  as  by 
David  when  he  danced  before  the  ark  (2 
Sam.  vL  H). 

Yer.  19. — His  mother  mads  Mm  a  little 
coat.  The  coat,  meU,  was  worn  by  priests 
(Lev.  viii.  7),  by  kings  and  their  sons  (1  Sam. 
xviii.  4),  by  prophets  {ibid,  xxviii.  li),  and 
even  by  women  (2  Sam.  xiii.  18).  It  was  an 
under  garment  of  wool,  woven  throughout 
without  seam,  with  holes  for  the  head  and 
arms,  and  reaching  nearly  to  the  ground ; 
when  used  by  women  It  had  sleeves  {ibid. ). 
Under  it  they  had  a  timic  or  shirt  fitting  so 
closely  that  a  man  simply  so  clad  was  con- 
sidered naked  (1  Sam.  xix.  24),  and  over  it 
priests  and  Levites  wore  the  ephod,  and  so 
also  David  on  the  occasion  mentioned  above 
(1  Chron.  xv.  27).  The  meU  seems,  more- 
over, to  have  often  been  a  handsome  dress, 
as  that  of  the  priests  was  of  purple-blue, 
with  embroidery  of  pomegranates  in  three 
colours,  and  golden  bells  (Exod.  xxviii.  81 — 
34) ;  and  when  made  of  delicate  materials  for 
the  use  of  the  rich,  it  and  the  tunic  are  the 
soft  luxurious  clothing  spoken  of  in  Matt. 
XL  8.  As  the  wiei'i  was  the  ordinary  dress 
of  all  classes  of  people,  it  was  made  for 
Samuel  at  home,  and  can  have  no  special 
meaning;  but  the  ephod  shows  that  he  was 
brought  up  in  the  daily  practice  of  holy 
duties.  This  annual  present,  however,  of 
clothing  made  by  the  mother's  hands  proves 
that  the  dedication  of  her  son  to  God  was 
not  allowed  to  interfere  with  home  affections, 
and  both  parents  and  child  must  have  looked 
forward  with  joy  to  happy  meetings  at  each 
recurrence  of  the  family  visit  to  the  sanc- 
tuary. 

Vers.  20,  21. — The  Lord  give  thee  seed, 
&c.  The  manner  in  which  Eli  blesses 
Elkanah  shows  that  this  surrender  of  a 
very  young  child  to  religious  service  was 
not  looked  upon  as  imposing  a  burden  upon 
the  sanctuary,  bvit  as  the  bestowal  of  a 
valued  gift.  Loan  and  lent  by  no  means 
give  the  whole  sense,  which  is  In  fact  beyond 
the  power  of  our  language  to  express  ;  for 
the  Hebrew  is  remarkable  for  its  manner  of 
saying  a  great  deal  in  a  few  words,  by  using 
them  indefinitely.  Besides  the  sense,  then, 
of  lending  the  child  to  God,  the  Heb.  also 
conveys  the  idea  of  Samuel  having  been 
obtained  by  prayer,  but  by  prayer /or  Jeho- 
vah. Hannah  had  not  asked  simply  for  a 
•on,  but  for  a  son  whom  she  might  dedicate 
to  Goi  And  now  Eli  prays  that  Jehovah 
will  giv;  her  children  to  be  her  own  (see  on 
th.i.a8). 


Eli's  complioitt  in  the  sins  o»  his  som 
(vers.  22 — 26).  Ver.  22.  —  Ell  .  .  ,  heard 
all  that  his  sons  did.    To  the  profenity  and 

freed  described  in  vers.  12 — 17  the  sons  o£ 
li  added  imchastity ;  and  their  sin  was  the 
greater  because  the  women  whom  they  cor- 
rupted were  those  dedicated  to  religious 
service  (see  Exod.  xxxviii  8).  The  order 
of  ministering  women  instituted  by  Mosei 
probably  lasted  down  to  the  destruction 
of  the  temple,  and  Anna  may  have  belonged 
to  it  (Luke  il  37) ;  afterwards  it  appeared 
again  in  a  more  spiritual  form  m  the 
widows  and  deaconesses  of  the  Christian 
Church.  The  word  rendered  assembled 
means  "arranged  in  bands,"  and  shows 
not  merely  that  they  were  numerous,  but 
that  they  had  regular  duties  assigned  them, 
and  each  one  her  proper  place  and  office. 
The  frequent  sacrifices,  with  the  feasts  which 
followed,  must  have  provided  occupation  for 
a  large  number  of  hands  in  the  cleaning  of 
the  utensils  and  the  cooking  of  the  food. 
But  though  Eli  heard  of  the  depraved  con- 
duct of  his  sons  in  thus  defiling  those  who 
ministered  in  the  tabernacle,  he  gives  them 
but  the  faintest  rebuke,  and  that  apparently 
only  because  their  misdeeds  were  in  every- 
body's  mouth;  for  the  last  clause  of  ver. 
23  really  is,  "For  1  hear  of  your  evil  doings 
from  all  this  people."  Ells  old  age  may 
have  increased  his  indi£ference,  but  his  re- 
ligious character  could  never  have  had  much 
depth  or  earnestness,  to  allow  him  to  regard 
such  heinous  sins  so  lightly.  It  seems  even 
as  if  he  chiefly  felt  the  annoyance  occasioned 
to  himself  by  the  expostulations  urged  upon 
him  "from  all  this  people."  StUl  all  uiat 
he  says  is  wise  and  thoughtful  The  sins  of 
men  in  high  station  do  not  end  with  them- 
selves ;  they  make  others  also  to  transgress. 
And  as  Eli's  sons  were  Jehovah's  ministers, 
and  they  had  led  into  wickedness  those  who 
also  were  bound  to  holy  service,  their  mis- 
conduct was  a  sin  against  Jehovah  himseli 

Vers.  24,  25. — ^Ye  make,  &c.  Eli's  word* 
are  very  obscure,  but  "Ye  make  Jehovah's 
people  to  transgress  "  is  upon  the  whole  the 
best  rendering  of  the  clause.  Both  the  Sept. 
and  Syriac  have  a  different  reading:  "Ye 
make  Jehovah's  people  cease  to  worship  him. " 
In  the  next  verse  there  is  no  sufficient  reason 
for  supposing  that  Elohim,  God,  here  means  a 
judge.  Elohim  was  the  head  of  the  theocracy, 
the  ruler  of  Israel  in  all  things,  and  he 
would  set  to  rights  these  delinquencies  of 
"  one  man  a^inst  another"  by  the  ordinary 
exercise  of  his  judicial  functions.  So  far  all 
is  easy,  and  we  must  translate,  "  If  one  man 
sin  gainst  another,  God  shaU  judge  him." 
But  in  the  last  clause  there  is  one  of  those 
plays  upon  words  to  which  the  Hebrew 
language,  with  its  nomerous  eoigogatioiUL 
M  readily  lends  itaelf  (•••  oa  ch.  L  88}  ;  IM 


COL  n.  11—86.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


41 


it  is  raiely  posaiUe  to  transfer  to  another 
language  the  force  of  passages  in  'which 
the  sense'  depends  npon  the  terms  in  the 
original  having  a  double  meaning.  The 
verb  rendered  maU  judge  in  the  first  clause 
is  used  again  by  Eli  in  the  second,  but  in  a 
different  conjugation,  in  which  its  usual 
meaning  is  to  pray.  According  to  the 
lexicon,  therefore,  we  must  translate  :  "  If  a 
man  sin  against  Jehovah,  who  shall  pray  for 
him  t "  But  surely  it  was  just  the  occasion 
in  which  the  only  remedy  left  was  inter- 
cessory prayer.  Bearing  then  in  remem- 
brance the  use  made  by  Eli  of  the  verb  in 
the  first  clause,  we  must  translate :  "  Who 
shall  act  as  judge  for  him  ?"  "Who  shall 
interpose  as  arbitrator  between  him  and 
Jehovah  to  settle  the  quarrel  1 "  The  verb 
itself,  moreover,  is  a  rare  and  old-fashioned 
one,  and  apparently  means  to  settle  a  dis- 
pute. So  it  is  used  of  Phinehas,  who  by  his 
righteous  zeal  put  an  end  to  the  rebellion 
against  God's  laws  ;  and  accordingly  in  Ps. 
ovi  30,  where  our  version  renders  "  executed 
judgment,"  the  Vulgate  has  placavit,  ap- 
peased Jehovah's  anger. 

The  sense  then  is.  In  case  of  wrong  done 
between  man  and  man,  God  as  the  supreme 
Arbitrator  settles  the  dispute  ;  but  where  the 
two  parties  are  God  and  man,  what  third 
power  is  there  which  can  interfere  I  The 
quarrel  must  go  on  to  the  bitter  end,  and  God, 


who  is  your  opponent,  will  also  punish  yon. 
The  same  idea  is  found  in  Job  ix.  88. 
Naturally  to  so  mild  a  remonstrance,  an<> 
founded  npon  so  low  a  view  of  the  Divine 
nature,  the  sons  of  Eli  paid  but  slight  atten- 
tion, and  by  thus  hardening  themselves  in 
sin  they  made  their  punishment  inevitable, 
"  because  it  pleased  Jehovah  to  slay  them." 
Man  can  brmg  upon  himself  neither  good 
nor  evil  except  by  the  working  of  God's  will, 
and  the  punishment  of  sin  is  as  thoroughly 
a  part  of  God's  will  as  the  rewarding  of 
righteousness.  An  intense  conviction  of  the 
personality  of  God  was  the  very  foundation 
of  the  religious  life  of  the  Israelites,  nnd  lies 
at  the  root  of  the  words  of  Eli  here  and  of 
those  of  Job ;  and  it  was  this  which  made 
them  ascribe  to  God  that  hardening  of  the 
wicked  in  sin  which  is  the  sure  means  of 
their  punishment  We  ascribe  it  to  the 
working  of  natural  laws,  which  after  all  is 
but  saying  the  same  thing  in  a  round-about 
way ;  for  the  laws  of  nature,  in  things  moral 
as  well  as  in  the  physical  world,  are  t)ie  laws 
of  God.  In  ver.  26,  in  contrast  with  Eli's 
sons  ripening  for  punishment,  and  daily  more 
abhorred  of  God  and  man,  we  have  Samuel 
set  before  us  advancing  in  age  and  "in  favour 
with  Jehovah  and  also  with  men,"  like  him  of 
whom  in  so  many  respects  he  was  a  tyne 
(Luke  iL  62),  our  blessed  Lord. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  11 — 19. — Degenerate  sons.  The  facts  given  are— 1.  Eli's  nong  manifest 
their  extreme  wickedness  by  profaning  the  worship  of  God.  2.  As  a  consequence, 
a  grievous  scandal  is  caused,  and  Divine  worship  comes  into  disrepute.  3.  In  spite 
of  many  evil  surroundings,  Samuel  grows  up  in  the  blameless  discharge  of  reli- 
gious duties.  4.  Hannah  continues  to  visit  and  take  a  deep  interest  in  her  son's 
spiritual  life.  The  sorrowful  experience  of  Eli  in  old  age  is  sometimes  repeated 
in  modern  times.  Many  a  good  man  is  bowed  down  even  to  the  grave  by  the  irre- 
ligion  of  sons  of  whom  better  things  had  been  expected.  No  more  painful  condition 
can  a  father  be  in  than  when  he  scarcely  dare  name  his  children  to  those  who  ask 
after  their  welfare.  The  world  and  the  Church  look  on  with  wonder  and  pain  at  the 
spectacle  of,  vile  children  issuirg  from  a  pious  home.  The  feeling  of  surprise  virith 
which  men  read  of  the  family  of  the  high  priest  of  Israel  becoming  so  utterly  wicked 
is  attended  with  the  conviction  that  desperately  bad  youths  ought  never  to  issue  from 
Christian  homes.  Such  an  event  is  contrary  to  all  just  expectations.  The  presump- 
tion that  the  offspring  of  pious  parents  would  he  holy  is  based  on  various  considera- 
tions, which  for  the  most  part  apply  to  the  case  of  Eli.  1.  There  are  various 
promises  and  statements  to  encourage  the  belief  that  the  children^  of  the  pious  wrill 
share  in  special  mercies  («.  g.  Deut.  xxx.  2, 6 ;  Prov.  xxii.  6  ;  Isa.  xHv.  7 ;  Mai.  ii.  15 ; 
1  Cor.  vii.  14).  2.  In  so  far  as  susceptibility  to  religious  impressions  is  affected 
by  inherited  qtudilies,  they  have  an  advantage  over  others.  3.  The  m^ans  of  grace, 
instruction,  example,  and  prayer  are  more  employed  for  them  than  for  the  majority. 
4.  The  pcxwer  of  early  habit,  which  plays  so  important  a  part  in  the  formation  of 
character,  is  likely  to  he  (m  the  side  of  godliness  where  religious  influences  early 
operate.  The  causes  which  account  for  the  ungodliness  of  the  children  of  the  pious 
are  diverse,  intricate,  and  partly  inscrutable.  A  broad  margin  must  be  left  for  the 
nyiteriona  aotiaMi  at  •  £>••  befaig,  even  under  the  most  favourable  oonditiona.    It 


41  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  u.  11—26, 

is  not  possible  to  trace  the  lines  and  say  where  parental  responsibility  ends  and  the 
responsibility  of  the  child  begins.  The  two  factors  are  to  be  recognised.  Moreover, 
anterior  physical  causes,  operating  perniciously  through  ancestors,  may  act  detri- 
mentally on  the  mental  and  moral  condition.  But  allowing  for  these  and  other  mi- 
traceable  elements  of  the  case,  there  are  causes  of  this  sad  feature  of  domestic  Ufe — 

I.  In  the  children.  The  natural  depravity  of  the  heart  is  a  grave  fact.  It  is 
the  first  foe  to  be  encountered  in  seeking  a  child's  salvation.  Its  subtle  power  is 
beyond  all  knowledge.  There  may  not  be  the  complications  of  wickedness  which 
exist  in  the  full-grown  nature  of  the  adult  after  years  of  developed  sin,  but  the 
power  is  persistent  aijd  insinuating.  Eli's  children  shared  this  tendency  in  common 
with  others.  The  special  propensities  inherited  are  sometimes  very  strong,  and 
seem  to  partake  of  the  force  of  the  old  habits  of  the  ancestors  from  whom  they  were 
derived.  It  is  also  a  fact  that  where  a  malformation,  or  unequal  development  of 
the  physical  system,  supervenes  on  the  inheritance  of  special  evil  propensities,  these 
latter  gain  immensely  in  force.  A  line  of  pious  ancestors,  as  a  rule,  would  guarantee 
freedom  from  such  abnormal  developments,  because  continuous  piety  tends  to  the 
symmetrical  development  of  the  entire  man ;  but  occasionally  there  are  backward 
leaps  in  nature,  and  old  elements  reappear.  Possibly  some  of  Eli's  blood-relatives 
were  not  so  good  as  they  ought  to  have  been.  No  doubt  grace  can  subdue  even 
the  worst  natures,  but  the  elements  referred  to  must  be  considered  in  connection 
with  other  causes. 

II.  In  the  training.  It  cannot  be  supposed  that  Eli  was  perfect  in  this  respect. 
Few  persons  consider  how  much  of  care,  of  wisdom,  of  forethought,  of  yearning  sym- 
pathy, of  specific,  well-adapted  guidance,  and  of  prayer  is  involved  in  the  "  nurture 
and  admonition  "  required  in  training  children  for  God.  There  may  be  a  fatal  lack 
of  faith  in  the  very  possibility  of  infant  piety  ;  an  expectation  that,  as  a  matter  of 
course,  a  child  will  grow  up  in  sin  till  an  age  for  conversion  arrives  ;  a  cold,  cruel  cast- 
ing of  the  spiritual  welfare  of  a  child  on  teachers,  attendants,  ofttcial  aids — the  parent, 
under  pressure  of  business,  declining  to  bear  his,  offspring  ever  on  his  heart  before 
God ;  or  a  lack  of  discretion  in  dealing  with  each  soul  according  to  its  temperament. 
Absence  of  a  mother's  deep  and  tender  interest  tells  most  prejudicially.  An  unwise 
method  of  instilling  religious  truth ;  an  assertion  of  mere  authority  in  severe  tones ; 
a  lack  of  discipline  to  check  wrong  tendencies ;  a  constant  appeal  to  a  sense  of  fear ; 
an  avoidance  of  the  essential  truths  of  the  gospel,  or  a  low,  grovelling  representation 
of  them,  may  create  aversion,  awake  silent  resistance,  and  finally  set  the  entire  nature 
against  what  is  falsely  supposed  to  be  religion.  Perhaps  there  is  no  department  oj 
religious  obligation  so  little  studied  as  this.  The  tender,  susceptible  nature  of  children 
cannot  be  safely  treated  without  much  thought  and  prayer.  No  wonder  if  the  pro- 
raise  which  hangs  on  a  faithful  discharge  of  most  delicate  and  solemn  duties  carried 
on  year  by  year  should  sometimes  not  be  fulfilled.  Parents  have  need  to  pray, 
"  Search  me  and  try  me." 

III.  In  example.  This  is  part  of  training,  but,  as  exercising  a  perpetual  and  uncon- 
scious influence,  it  may  be  regarded  as  distinct  from  direct  efforts.  Children  learn 
more  of  religion  from  what  they  observe  in  parents  than  by  any  other  means.  The 
life  they  see  lived  is  their  daily  book  of  lessons.  If  it  is  selfish,  hard,  formal, 
worldly,  no  amount  of  verbal  teaching  or  professed  interest  will  avail.  There  is  no 
surer  encouragement  for  a  child  to  despise  all  religion  than  a  discovery  of  insincerity 
in  the  professions  of  a  parent.  Real  character  comes  into  clear  view  in  the  home, 
and  those  who,  under  influence  of  public  considerations,  restrain  themselves  in  the 
world,  but  give  freedom  to  unhallowed  feelings  in  private,  cannot  wonder  if  children 
do  not  covet  the  piety  they  witness. 

IV.  In  associations.  Associations  out  of  the  home  circle,  both  in  youth  and  early 
manhood,  exercise  much  influence  over  character.  It  is  not  every  youth  that  is  solely 
formative  on  others.  Most  young  people  receive  more  from  companions  than  they 
impart.  The  good  of  home  may  be  largely  neutralised  by  the  tone  of  society  outside 
the  home.  Eli's  sons  were  not  strong  enough  to  coimteract  the  evil  tendencies  of  the 
age,  and  their  father  erred  in  not  taking  precautions  adequate  to  the  occasion 
Probably  one  reason  why  the  sons  of  good  and  eminent  men  sometimes  become 
notorioutly  godless  is,  that  the  utter  absorption  of  the  parent  in  public  affairs, 


OH.  II.  H— 26.]  THE  FlltST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  4S 

albeit  religious,  gradually  issues  in  alienation  of  sons  from  home  interests  and  com« 
mittal  to  friendships  evil  in  tendency.  The  charm  of  novelty  is  powerful  where 
home  life  is  rendered  dull  through  inattention  to  the  tastes  and  enjojonents  of  the 
young,  and  hence  consent  is  given  to  enticing  sinners.  If,  in  any  instance,  there 
are  in  operation  causes,  either  singly  or  combined,  of  the  nature  referred  to,  it  is 
inevitable  that  a  home,  though  in  some  degree  pious,  should  be  distressed  by  the 
presence  of  ungodly  sons.  So  far  as  man's  conduct  determines  religion  or  irreligion 
in  ofEspring,  it  would  be  contrary  to  the  action  of  natural  laws  for  pious  sons  to  be 
the  product  of  efforts  inadequate  to  the  end  in  view.  If  sons  are  godly  in  spite  of 
errors  and  bad  infiuence  at  home,  it  is  because  God  in  his  mercy  has  brought  other 
and  more  blessed  influences  to  bear.  Even  defective  training  may  be  ultimately 
remedied  by  a  more  true  use  of  prayer  for  mercy. 

Great  miners.  The  sons  of  Eli  were  the  greatest  sinners  of  their  degenerate 
age.  From  the  most  favoured  home  the  worst  men  came  forth.  All  sin  is  a  great 
evil.  •  It  is  the  curse  of  man,  the  abomination  of  God.  In  its  essence  it  is  rebellion 
against  the  All-wise  and  Holy  One.  For  all  lack  of  conformity  to  his  will  implies  a 
will  supposed  to  be  a  more  desirable  guide  than  his,  which  is  insult  and  insubordina- 
tion. But  the  Bible  represents  some  sins  as  of  deeper  dye  than  others.  There  are 
beings  deserving  to  be  "  beaten  with  many  stripes."  The  tests  by  which  the  enormity 
of  sins  is  estimated  are,  after  reference  of  all  to  the  perfect  purity  of  God — 

I.  The  chakacteb  of  the  deeds.  The  deeds  perpetrated  by  the  sons  of  Eli  were 
of  the  vilest  kind.  In  themselves  they  were  calculated  to  awaken  the  intensest  dis- 
gust and  abhorrence  of  every  pure  and  reverent  mind.  It  is  hard  to  conceive  how 
men  blessed  with  early  privileges  could  sink  so  low,  were  it  not  that  modem  Christian 
times  have  produced  the  darkest  sins  in  the  professedly  religious.  The  sins  of 
open  profanation  of  the  sanctuary,  of  despite  to  the  solemn  sacrifice,  of  pollution  in 
guiltiest  lust,  were  but  the  outward  expression  of  a  state  of  soul  foul,  reckless, 
defiant  beyond  all  description.  So,  generally,  the  dark,  horrid  deeds  on  which  men 
look  are  but  the  indicators  of  a  very  hell  of  iniquity  deep  down  in  the  soul.  There 
are — 

II.  The  privileges  enjoyed.  It  added  guilt  to  the  sin  of  the  young  men  that 
they  were  the  sons  of  the  priest  of  God.  It  is  a  grave  responsibility  to  be  bom  of 
parents  endued  with  any  degree  of  piety.  Especially  are  they  under  strong  obliga- 
tion to  avoid  sin  who  are,  by  virtue  of  their  connection  with  the  ordinances  of 
worship,  taught  out  of  the  law  of  the  Lord,  and  surrounded  by  the  hallowed  influ- 
ences of  the  sanctuary.  Every  wise  book  read,  every  kind  influence  exercised,  every 
prayer  offered  in  public,  or  by  parents  at  home,  gives  additional  hght  and  power 
wherewith  to  avoid  the  paths  of  sin.  It  requires  a  long  and  hard  inward  struggle 
to  keep  down  conscience  so  as  to  become  a  desperate  sinner.  Men  do  not  sink  to 
lowest  depths  of  vice  suddenly.  Every  successive  step  is  taken  against  clear 
light  and  restraining  powers,  and  when  the  final  surrender  to  guilty  deeds  is 
made,  the  whole  privileges  of  the  past  speak  out  the  greatness  of  the  evil.  The 
poor  idolater  ignorantly  causing  his  sons  to  pass  through  the  fire  to  Moloch  is 
less  guilty  than  the  sons  of  Israel's  high  priest,  when,  crushing  every  sacred  feeling, 
they  turn  from  all  the  light  of  years  to  profane  the  sanctuary  by  violence  and  lust 
Sodom  was  vile,  but  decorous  Capernaum  viler.  The  sin  of  despising  a  holier 
Sacrifice  than  of  bulls  and  lamba  is  often  committed  by  men  blessed  with  faithful 
teaching. 

III.  The  position  occupied.  To  the  eye  of  the  Hebrew  the  office  of  priest  was 
most  sacred.  The  reverence  cherished  for  the  office  was  transferred  in  some  degree 
to  the  person  who  filled  it.  Hence,  perhaps,  the  patience  and  submission  with  which 
the  worshippers  endured  the  greed  and  violence  of  the  guilty  sons  of  Eli.  In  itself, 
being  a  consecration  of  life  to  the  holiest  of  employments,  and  considered,  also,  as 
a  type  of  the  one  perfect  Priesthood,  there  was  solid  reason  for  the  common  senti- 
ment. No  position  is  morally  higher  than  that  of  him  who  stands  between  man  and 
God  for  the  performance  of  most  solemn  duties.  Hence  in  all  ages  it  has  been 
recognised  that  the  ministers  of  the  sanctuary,  whether  priests,  as  anciently,  or 
pastors  and  teachers,  do  exercise  an  influence  which,  while  increasirg  the  force  of 


44  THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  ti.  11—26. 

goodness,  also  aggravates  their  gnilt  when  sin  is  committed.  Power,  when  used 
■infully,  means  magnified  sin.  A  professed  Christian  sinks  relatively  very  low  when 
he  does  what  other  men  do.  A  pastor  hy  one  act  may  come  imder  a  condemnation 
from  which  on  earth  he  will  never  recover.  A  judge  who  sells  justice  is  the  most 
despised  of  men.  A  statesman  who  barters  truth  and  peace  for  personal  greed  is 
worse  than  a  common  forger.  Holiness  is  to  be  loved  and  sought  for  its  own  sake, 
yet  it  is  helpful  to  ask,  "  What  manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be,''  who  stand  out  in 
society  as  rulers,  magistrates,  pastors,  teachers,  parents?  If  the  ordinary  sinner 
cannot  escape  the  swift  judgment  of  God,  where  shall  they  appear  who  by  virtue  of 
exalted  position  become  intensely  and  grievously  sinful  when  they  sin  ? 

IV.  The  nature  of  the  effects.  Some  sins,  like  the  falling  of  heavy  bodies  in 
still  water,  produce  wider  and  more  violent  effects  than  clo  others.  The  effect  is 
always  pernicious,  but  when  prominent  men  and  professed  servants  of  God  sin,  the 
consequences  are  painfully  and  conspicuously  injurious.  The  sons  of  Eli  by  their 
crimes  not  only  debased  their  own  nature  and/ell  to  lower  depths  of  shame,  but  they 
brought  the  holiest  services  into  disrepute,  alienated  from  the  sanctuary  the  feelings 
of  the  people,  caused  intense  anguish  in  the  minds  of  the  pious  Jews,  gave  encourage- 
ment to  wicked  men  more  freely  to  transgress,  and  thus  did  more  than  others  could 
do  to  exterminate  morality  and  religion  from  the  land.  It  is  a  serious  question  for 
every  one,  and  especially  ministers  and  all  persons  in  positions  of  influence,  how  far 
the  neglect  of  religion  hy  multitudes  is  the  natural  effect  of  their  own  short-comings. 
It  is  a  mark  of  a  great  sinner  when,  by  reason  of  his  conduct,  the  "  wick»d  blas- 
pheme." Also,  our  Lord  has  branded  those  as  great  sinners  who  wantonly  cause 
offence  to  "  one  "  of  his  "  little  ones."  If  scepticism  and  antagonism  to  Christianity 
are  most  lamentable  evils,  it  is  a  matter  of  grave  consideration  how  far  the  presence 
of  these  evils  is  due  to  the  formality,  the  greed,  the  gross  inconsistencies  of  those 
professing  to  exhibit  and  love  the  religion  of  Christ.  It  behoves  all  to  see  to  it  that 
they  lift  up  "  holy  hands,"  and  speak  a  "  pure  language."  Otherwise  the  terrible 
woes  pronounced  by  the  Saviour  over  would-be  religious  men  may  find  an  application 
to  modem  great  sinners.     Arising  from  this  subject  we  may  notice  certain 

Practical  lessons. — 1.  The  extreme  importance  of  every  one  forming,  by  the  aid  of 
Scripture  and  of  conscience,  a  proper  estimate  of  the  responsibility  oJE  his  position 
as  a  professed  Christian,  a  parent,  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  a  teacher,  or  civil  ruler. 
2.  The  possibility  of  undergoing  a  process  of  spirittml  decay  by  which  the  finer 
sensibilities  of  earlier  days  shall  become  almost  annihilated,  and  deeds  be  done  with 
impunity  which  once  were  most  abhorrent.  3.  The  need  of  frequent  self-examina- 
tion, to  ascertain  whether  the  elements  of  religious  degeneracy  may  be  unconsciously 
at  work  in  the  soul ;  the  more  so  as  it  is  characteristic  of  spiritual  declension  to  make 
us  blind  to  the  fact  of  declension.  4.  The  necessity  of  much  prayer,  lest,  trusting 
to  early  privileges  and  official  ser^dces,  the  elements  of  decay  should  enter  the 
spiritual  life,  and,  consequently,  the  duties  of  self^scrutiny  and  watchfulnesB  b« 
shunned. 

Youthful  piety.  It  is  not  without  significance  that  the  sacred  historian  breaks  the 
thread  of  his  ordinary  narrative  by  frequent  references  to  the  child  Samuel  (vera. 
11,  18,  21,  26 ;  cf.  iii.  1,  18).  The  contrast  with  ungodly  priests  is  striking.  "  But 
Samuel  ministered  before  the  Lord,  being  a  child."  "  The  child  was  young."  "  The 
child  grew  before  the  Lord."  Beautiful  progression!  "Following  on  "to  "know 
the  Lord."  "  The  path  of  the  just "  grows  brighter.  Here  in  face  of  evil  is  the 
"perseverance  of  the  saints."  The  case  of  Samuel  maybe  regarded  as  a  typical 
instance  of  youthful  piety.  The  frequent  allusions  to  him,  combined  with  the  tenor 
of  his  subsequeat  life,  go  to  prove  that  he  was  a  religious  child  from  earliest  days. 
Humanly  his  piety  was  the  product  o'f  his  mother's  intense  earnestness.  Hannah 
had  faith  to  believe  that  a  child  may  be  God's  from  the  very  dawn  of  life.  In 
essential  features  his  piety  was  the  same  as  that  of  all  God's  people.  There  were 
special  reasons  for  its  assuming  the  form  it  did  in  that  entire  and  early  separation  from 
home.  1.  A  mother's  ormsiow  had  respect  to  a  new  and  higher  office  to  be  created 
and  dul  y  authenticated.  2.  Extraordinary  preparaiicm  was  needful  for  the  great 
irotk  to  be  finally  entered  on,  and  such  as  separation  to  the  hallowed  Bervico  of  tha 


tm.  u.  11—26.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  4SAMUEL.  46 


aanctuary  would  Becure.  3.  The  mother  could  thus  evince  her  freedom  from  mtr* 
tdfish  gratification  in  seeking  a  child  from  the  Lord,  and  at  the  same  time  do  all 
within  her  power  to  advance  the  coming  kingdom.  4.  There  was  a  secret  providence 
in  this  preparing  the  way  for  the  fir^  great  step  in  the  reformation  of  me  people, 
namely,  the  authoritative  announcement  of  national  disaster  (ch.  iii.  11, 20).  Takmg, 
then,  Samuel's  as  an  instance  of  typical  youthful  piety,  we  may  notice — 

L  That  YOUTHFUL  PIETY  IS  A  POSSIBILITY.  Evidently  it  was  in  Samuel's  case.  Since 
all  children  are  psychologically  alike  ;  are  horn  under  the  same  covenanted  mercies ; 
and  are,  therefore,  open  to  the  same  Divine  regenerating  influence,  the  position 
might  be  considered  as  established.  But  the  Church  has  been  slow  to  believe  the 
truth  ;  and  much  of  the  nurture  of  families  seems  to  proceed  on  the  supposition  that, 
as  a  rule,  at  least  early  manhood  must  be  reached  ere  pietybe  regarded  as  trust- 
worthy. The  causes  of  this  unfortunate  distrust  of  child  piety  are  varied.  They 
may  be  indicated  as — 1.  The  habit  of  estimating  all  piety  by  the  forms  and  mani- 
festations appropriate  to  adult  life,  which  habit  is  based  on — 2.  A  misconception,  of 
what  constitutes  the  essence  of  all  true  religion.  3.  The  long  continued  neglect  of 
the  Church,  as  a  consequence  of  this  misconception,  issuing  in  a  scarcity  of  youthfvl 
piety.  But  the  possibility  of  it  is  seen  in — 1.  The  nature  of  a  child  being  capable 
of  the  essentials  of  true  piety.  In  Samuel,  and  so  in  every  child,  there  was  a  capa- 
bility of  recognising  the  Great  Unseen  and  Holy  One ;  of  cherishing  pure  love  for 
the  Uving,  ever-present  Friend  ;  of  trusting  on  Almighty  care  with  an  unusual  abso- 
luteness ;  of  learning  the  truth  concerning  the  works  and  ways  of  God,  both  by 
witnessing  and  sharing  in  acts  of  worship,  and  listening  to  special  instruction  ;  and 
of  obedience  to  a  sovereign  Will.  Indeed,  in  some  respects  the  nature  of  a  child,  being 
free  from  the  carking  cares  of  life  and  the  unhappy  suspicions  of  mature  years,  is 
much  more  susceptible  of  holy,  elevating  influences  than  is  that  of  men.  2.  The 
remarkable  welcome  to  children  given  by  Christ.  The  child  Samuel  was  welcome  in 
the  house  of  Jehovah.  He  "  grew  up  before  the  Lord,"  and  was  in  "favour  with 
God."  Thus  in  his  case  we  see  a  beautiful  congruity  with,  and  may  we  not  say  pro- 
phetic of,  the  loving  welcome  given  later  on  by  the  blessed  Saviour  himself,  in  terms 
never  to  be  forgotten.  Possibly  some  officious  priests  might  deem  the  presence  of 
the  child  clad  in  sacred  ephod  an  innovation  and  a  nuisance  in  the  tabernacle,  just 
as  some  in  excessive  but  erring  zeal  would  not  have  Christ  troubled  with  little  ones 
who  could  not  be  supposed  to  understand  his  profound  teaching.  The  only  recorded 
instance  of  Christ  being  "  mtich  displeased  "  is  when  it  was  supposed  that  he  was 
indifferent  to  the  spiritual  condition  of  little  children.  3.  The  harmony  of  HannaKt 
conduct  and  Samuel's  piety  with  the  general  tone  of  Scripture.  Hannah  both  con- 
secrated and  nurtured  ner  son  for  the  Lord,  thus  exemplifying  the  precepts,  "  Traia 
up  a  child  in  the  way  he  should  go,"  "  Bring  them  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition 
of  the  Lord,"  and  also  illustrating  the  just  expectation  of  the  apostle,  who  seemed 
to  take  for  granted  that  pious  parents  rightly  conforming  to  all  their  covenanted 
duties  and  privileges  would  have  "holy"  children  (1  Cor.  vii.  14). 

II    That  YOUTHFUL  PIETY  IS  VERY  DEPENDENT  ON  CAREFUL  NURTURE.      All  rehgion 

needb  culture.  It  is  the  most  delicate  as  also  the  most  precious  of  our  treasures. 
The  production  of  piety  in  children,  though  of  God,  as  the  Source  of  all  grace,  is 
intimately  connected  with  the  prayers  and  faith  of  parents.  Hannah  travailed  in 
spirit  for  a  holy  child  long  before  Samuel  was  bom,  and  the  succeeding  nurture  was 
only  an  expression  of  the  same  earnestness.  There  is  no  warrant  to  think  that  the 
world  would  have  been  blessed  with  a  pious  Samuel  apart  from  the  deep  piety  of  a 
Hannah ;  and  so  the  presence  and  growth  of  piety  in  our  children  rests  with  the 
Church  of  God.  The  very  condition  of  children  in  a  sinful  world  suggests  a  care  on 
their  behaK  most  wise,  tender,  and  constant.  The  elements  of  true  nurture  are  seen 
in  Hannah's  care  of  Samuel.  There  was — 1.  The  one  and  perpetual  denotement  of 
the  child  to  the  Lord — the  absolute  giving  up  to  the  grace  of  God  with  a  faith  that 
would  take  no  denial.  This  act  was  repeated  in  spirit  day  by  day  for  years.  When 
leaving  him  in  Shiloh ;  when  silently  bowing  before  God  at  home ;  when  engaged 
in  making  the  little  ephod ;  when^  refitting  it,  as  year  by  year  he  grew :  when  with 
joyous  heart  visiting  Shiloh  at  the  annual  festivals — the  mother  earned  Samuel  on  her 
heart  before  Gvd,  and  gave  him  up  to  be  blessed.     This  fis  what  mothers  can  ever  do  for 


46  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  n.  11— 2«. 


their  loved  ones,  and  they  sorely  need  such  care  in  this  sinful  world.  2.  The 
impressive  teaching  imparted.  Surely  Samuel  was  not  placed  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  without  much  teaching  suited  to  his  capacity  as  to  the  holy  life  he  was  to  live. 
It  is  something  to  make  a  child  believe  that  he  is  the  Lord's,  to  see  the  beauty  and 
joy  of  being  given  up  to  his  service.  With  exquisite  delicacy  did  Hannah  teach  her 
son  that  he  must  for  ever  be  holy.  The  girding  with  the  ephod  meant  to  him,  "Thou 
art  a  servant  of  God,  a  child  of  the  sanctuary,  thou  canst  not  do  any  unworthy  deeds 
or  speak  unholy  words.  Bemember  thou  belongest  to  the  Lord,  my  son."  Happy 
they  who  know  the  art  of  showing  their  sons  the  beauty  of  holiness,  and  the  manner 
of  persons  they  ought  ever  to  be.  3.  Association  tiiith  the  sanctuary.  The  hallowed 
associations  of  the  house  of  God  exercised  power  over  the  tender  child ;  and  so  the 
principle  is  set  forth  that  in  our  nurture  of  youthful  piety  we  must  seek  to  encourage 
a  love  for  the  worship  of  the  Lord  and  of  all  pertaining  to  his  service.  It  is  a  great 
gain  when  our  youth  can  rejoice  in  the  Sabbath  services,  feel  that  in  the  sanctuary 
they  have  a  much-loved  spiritual  home.  4.  Ilngagem,ent  in  useful  religious  work. 
It  was  a  wise  choice  of  this  mother  to  divert  the  child's  attention  from  the  evil  habits 
of  the  age  by  absorption  in  works  suited  to  his  little  powers,  and  under  the  imme- 
diate eye  of  a  venerable  man  of  God.  Whatever  love  to  God  may  dwell  in  the  heart 
of  a  child  is  strengthened  and  guarded  by  being  exercised  in  deeds  pertaining  to  Ids 
service.  And  the  service  of  God  is  very  wide  and  varied.  There  are  many  ways  in 
which  youthful  piety  may  be  exercised.  Let  children  be  caused  to  feel  that  they  by 
life,  by  simple  prayers,  and  by  sympathy  can  bless  the  sorrowing  world,  and  their 
piety  will  grow  and  the  world  will  be  enriched.  The  momentous  interests  involved 
in  the  presence  or  absence  of  youthful  piety  should  awaken  deep  concern  on  several 

Practical  questions ; — 1.  To  what  extent  does  it  prevail  in  Church  and  home  ?  _  2. 
How  far  the  lack  of  early  piety  is  due  to  parental  neglect,  erroneous  views,  defective 
Church  organisations,  or  unhealthy  literature  ?  3.  In  what  form  can  the  existing 
piety  of  children  be  more  utilised  for  their  own  benefit  and  for  the  good  of  the  world? 
4.  How  is  it  possible  to  render  the  services  of  the  sanctuary  more  interesting  and 
helpful  to  the  young  ?  5.  How  can  the  missing  link  between  the  youthful  and  more 
mature  piety  of  the  Church  be  restored  ?  6.  By  what  means  can  Christian  parents 
be  led  to  manifest  an  all-absorbing  concern  for  the  development  of  piety  in  their 
offspring  ?  7.  What  would  be  the  effect  on  the  ultimate  conversion  of  the  world  if 
the  Church  could  be  so  wrought  upon  to  exercise  faith  in  the  possibility  of  early 
piety  as  to  save  the  nefed  of  employing  agencies  to  convert  in  adult  age  any  who  have 
passed  through  its  hands  ? 

faith's  symbols.  Judged  by  the  customs  of  the  age,  it  was  a  daring  thing  for 
Hannah  to  clothe  her  child  with  the  ephod,  the  every-day  robe  of  the  priest,  seeing 
that  her  son  was  only  a  Levite  (1  Chron.  vi.  19, 23  ;  cf .  Ex.  xxxix.  27 ;  1  Sam.  xxii.  18). 
She  clearly  intended  him  to  be  invested  with  the  prerogatives  of  the  priest.  The  holy 
daring  went  further  in  her  making  for  him  the  "  little  coat,"  which  properly  was  part 
of  the  dress  of  the  high  priest,  and  sometimes  of  princes  and  nobles.  The  act  is  in 
perfect  keeping  with  the  first  deed  of  consecration,  and  with  the  tenor  of  the  inspired 
song.  To  her  prophetic  vision  this  child  was  from  birth  ordained  to  be  an  extraor- 
dinary servant  of  God,  for  the  reformation  of  that  age  and  the  advancement  of  that 
kingdom  the  glories  of  which  she  saw  afar.  It  is  not  likely  that  a  woman  of  such 
strong  and  exalted  hope  would  be  ready  to  speak  out  in  detail  what  was  in  her  heart, 
and  yet  the  force  of  her  faith  would  demand  adequate  expression.  Some  natures  are 
not  demonstrative  by  words,  but  prefer  silent  acts  to  both  indicate  their  thoughts  and 
to  nourish  their  faith  and  hope.  Therefore  the  clothing  of  Samuel  with  the  pure 
"ephod  "  and  the  "  little  coat"  was  the  creation  of  permanent  symbols  of  faith  for 
his  instruction  and  impressment,  and  her  own  satisfaction  and  support.  It  is  not  for 
mere  notice  of  casual  incident  that  the  sacred  writer  refers  to  the  event,  but  evidently 
to  set  forth  valuable  truth. 

I.  Faith  sees  germs  of  future  good  where  unbelief  would  bee  nothing.  It 
is  probable  that  neighbours  reflected  on  the  eccentric  conduct  of  the  mother  who  so 
unnijoessarily  parted  with  her  child.  To  them  he  was  as  other  children.  The 
spiritual  travail  of  his  birth  was  hidden  from  them.    But  Hannah,  being  in  sympathy 


n.  11— 2C.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  i7 


with  Ood's  merciful  pnrpoBes  to  mankind,  saw  in  her  son  the  man  of  the  fntore,  the 
defender  of  the  faith,  the  restorer  of  pure  worship,  the  consecrated  spirit  which  has 
spiritual  right  to_  do  priestly  work,  and  it  was  rest  to  her  soul  to  express  this  faith 
not  by  words  which  might  be  contradicted,  but  by  a  solemn  act  full  of  instruction  to 
the  child,  uid  a  permanent  record  of  what  she  knew  would  be.  So  is  it  ever.  The  eye 
of  faith  sees  in  the  infant  Church  of  God  the  promise  of  a  "  glorious  Church." 
Simeon  saw  in  a  babe  the  "  Salvation  "  of  God.  A  few  poor  men  saw  in  the  "  Man 
of  sorrows  "  the  coming  "  King  of  gloiy."  The  true  befiuver  now  sees  in  the  occa- 
sional triumphs  of  the  gospel  the  earnest  of  a  world's  subjugation  to  Christ. 

II.  Faith  holds  more  than  can  bb  put  into  wobds.  There  was  no  one  to  whom 
Hannah  could  unfold  in  words  all  that  was  grasped  by  her  faith.  To  her  the  presence 
of  this  holy  child  in  the  house  of  God,  serving  him  in  the  minor  details  of  daily 
routine,  was  virtually  the  realisation  of  the  prophet's  ofSce,  and  the  enhancement  of 
Messiah's  glory.  "  Faith  is  the  substance  of  things  hoped  for."  The  essential  reality 
of  the  remote  is  already  in  the  heart.  The  future  is  as  though  it  were  present. 
Prevision  and  accomplishment  become  subjectively  one.  This  holy  mysticism  of  the 
highest  spiritual  life  is  foolishness  to  the  unspiritual,  but  is  a  profound  and  blessed 
fact  in  the  experience  of  the  true  children  of  God.  God's  word  given  is  as  good  as 
fulfilled,  and  the  soul  finds  more  in  the  consciousness  of  this  truth  than  can  ever  be 
indicated  in  language.  There  is  always  a  vast  reserve  of  religious  feeling  that  can 
never  find  expression.  Life  is  more  than  the  forms  of  life.  The  "  ephod "  and 
"  little  robe,"  and  the  annual  visits  to  the  child,  were  outward  signs — symbolical 
forms — of  a  something  which  was  too  great  for  utterance.  They  were  the  shadows 
of  a  great  reality  too  sacred,  too  rich,  too  varied  in  its  issues  to  be  set  forth  in  ordin- 
ary terms.  So  Ukewise  our  faith  holds  a  Christ  more  glorious  and  precious  than  any 
terms  can  utter.  He  is  "formed  in  the  heart."  He  is  the  ''  unspeakable  gift."  Eye 
hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  heart  conceived  what  is  grasped  by  the  Christian's 
faith  as  an  ever-present  treasure.  Human  speech,  in  prose  or  song,  falls  below  the 
soul's  sense  of  blessedness  in  Christ. 

III.  Faith  is  venturesome  in  adopting  forms  or  expressing  itself.  Holding 
converse  with  realities  which  lie  beyond  the  ordina^  mind,  it  deviates  from  routine,' 
and  carves  out  new  and  rare  modes  of  indicating  its  existence.  Hannah  could  not 
rest  content  with  telling  Elkanah,  Eli,  and  Samuel,  in  casual  conversation  and  fleet- 
ing words,  what  she  knew  this  ministering  child  was  to  be  in  days  to  come,  and 
what  she  knew  of  the  coming  kingdom.  Jacob  made  a  coat  of  many  colours  to 
gratify  a  questionable  feeling  of  partiality.  Jochebed  made  a  covering  of  bulrushes 
to  save  a  precious  life,  possibly  with  a  trust  in  a  wise  Providence.  But  Hannah  had 
a  faith  in  Godwin  the  revival  of  religion,  in  the  Messiah's  glory,  which  not  only  souglit 
vent,  for  itself,  but  dared  to  create  new  and,  to  the  eye  of  man,  questionable  forms 
of  expression.  Persistently,  year  by  year,  as  the  sacred  ephod  required  readjust- 
ment to  varying  stature,  did  the  faith  reassert  itself  in  every  stitch  and  every  trial  of 
approvaL  Innovation  it  might  be,  but  it  was  true  to  faith,  and  faith  loves  reality, 
and  seeks  congruity  between  itself  and  its  outward  forms.  The  apostle  writing  to 
the  Hebrews  on  the  triumphs  of  faith  recognises  its  heroism,  its  superiority  to  con- 
ventional formt,  its  intense  energy  in  asserting  itself  (Heb.  xi.).  Iriere  are  modem 
instances  of  the  same  holy  daring.  Symbolism  may,  hke  other  things,  sometimes  he 
the  resort  of  weak  minds  and  superstitious  tendencies,  yet  it  may  be  a  legitimate 
outgrowth  of  strong  faith.  The  stately  sanctuary ;  the  hushed  feeling  in  listening  to 
the  word  of  God ;  the  sm:render  of  fortune  to  the  propagation  of  the  gospel ;  the 
adoption  of  righteous  usages  against  the  current  of  opinion  and  custoin,  are  only 
some  of  the  symbols  of  a  faith  that  longs  and  dares  to  indicate  its  presence.  As 
feelingSi  grow  in  power  when  exercised,  so  faith  nourishes  itself  by  fit  permanent 
(xpressions,  especially  when  in  some  bold  and  truthful  deed. 

Practical  considerations: — 1.  How  far  the  faith  of  these  times  is  a  reality  as  dis- 
tinguished from  a  formal  consent  to  what  is  commonly  believed.  2.  Whether  the 
Church  of  Christ  sufficiently  lays  hold  of  the  fruition  of  all  future  toil  in  the  acquired 
results  of  present  toil.  3  To  what  extent  the  individuality  of  a  powerful  leligious 
life  proves  itself  by  deeds  of  daring  devotion.  4.  The  distinction  to  be  drawn 
between  a  safe  or  unsafe  symbolism  in  stated  forms  of  worship,  and  the  natara) 


48  THB  FIfiST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  n.  11—28. 

gpontaneous  Bymboliam  of  an  energetic  personal  faith.  6.  The  posBibility  of  • 
masterful  faith  in  degenerate  times,  rightfully  deviating  from  established  practices, 
and  being  used  by  Ood  as  preliminary  to  great  reformations. 

Vers.  20,  21. — Solid  eharacter.  The  facts  are— 1.  Eli  forms  a  faTonrabl* 
estimate  of  the  conduct  and  character  of  Elkanah  and  Hannah.  2.  Ood  enriches 
them  with  several  children.  3.  Samuel  advances  in  years  and  gains  in  repute.  4. 
The  sons  of  Eli,  becoming  more  dissolute,  are  rebuked  by  their  father.  Time  had 
gradually  brought  out  to  9ie  view  of  Eli  the  solid  character  of  Elkanah  and  his  wife. 
Their  regular  attendance  on  worship  at  the  appointed  seasons,  and  their  reverent 
spirit,  were  in  striking  contrast  with  the  degenerate  habits  with  which  Eli  was  too 
fiimiliar.  Their  quiet,  unassuming  conduct  harmonised  with  Hannah's  early  pro- 
fessions of  piety,  and  the  child  which  they  had  presented  to  assist  Eli  in  his 
ministrations  had  fully  answered  his  expectations.  Here,  then,  we  have  solid 
character : — 

I.  Appreciated  by  man.  The  opportunities  given  through  a  succession  of  years 
had  enabled  EH  to  form  a  favourable  estimate  of  these  obscure  dwellers  on  Mount 
Ephraim.  He  was  the  more  glad  to  give  them  his  priestly  benediction  because  of 
the  rash  words  with  which  he  once  (ch.  i.  13,  14)  wounded  a  "  sorrowful  spirit."  It 
is  a  blessed  thing  to  enjoy  the  approval  of  the  good.  A  good  name  is  a  precious 
treasure.  There  is  a  sweet  reward  for  years  of  toil,  and  possibly  under  misappre- 
hension and  neglect,  in  being  at  last  fairly  appreciated  for  what  one  is  and  has  done. 
Although  there  are  proud  ungodly  men  who  will  despise  the  godly  poor,  yet  the  con- 
ditions of  character  being  appreciated  by  the  better  sections  of  society  are  within 
the  reach  of  the  most  lowly.  These  conditions  are — 1.  Conttaney  in  the  discharge 
of  religious  duties.  Observance  year  by  year  of  public  worship  and  of  all  the  ordin- 
ances of  God  is  a  good  sign  of  a  religioiu  spirit.  Eli  was  not  wrong  in  supposing 
that  there  must  be  solid  worth  in  a  family  that  kept  to  the  ways  of  the  Lord  when 
so  many  neglected  religious  duties.  A  man  cannot  claim  a  reputation  by  asking  for 
it.  The  testimony  of  faithfulness  in  religious  worship  is  admitted  by  all.  Fluctua- 
tions in  religious  zeal  always  awaken  distrust.  Constancy  is  an  element  always 
iionoured.  2.  Man^estation  of  an  unostentatious  spirit.  This  must  have  impressed 
Eli  very  strongly.  The  quiet,  unpretending  spirit  of  the  Levite  and  his  wife  gained 
on  the  venerable  man  year  by  year.  And  so  always  the  quiet,  even  tenor  of  life  tells 
an  irresistible  story.  All  sensible  men  shrink  from  the  egotism-  and  ostentation 
which  sometimes  assume  the  garb  of  religion.  The  proper  thing  for  all  ia  an 
earnest,  lowly  mind,  more  concerned  with  quietly  doing  what  is  right  and  pleasing 
to  God  than  with  making  an  impression  on  man.  Those  who  think  much  of  what 
men  will  say  and  think,  and  make  corresponding  demonstrations  of  zeal,  are  sure  to 
fall  into  the  snare  of  "  eye  service."  Like  the  steady  influence  of  light  and  dew, 
quiet  goodness  at  home  and  in  the  Church  and  world  is  a  real  power.  There  are 
thousands  of  such  lives  in  Christian  homes.  3.  Self-denial  in  Gfod's  serrice. 
Though  Hannah's  joy  in  giving  her  heart  to  God  took  off  the  edge  of  self- 
denial,  yet  Eli  could  not  but  be  deeply  impressed  with  the  unusual  self-sacrifice  of 
both  husband  and  wife.  The  true  religious  spirit  of  a  man  comes  out  in  spontaneous 
offerings  to  the  efficiency  of  the  services  of  the  sanctuary  and  the  advancement  of 
Christ's  kingdom.  Character  expressed  in  free,  unconstrained  surrender  of  money, 
or  time,  or  sons  for  religious  purposes  cannot  but  be  appreciated.  It  is  in  the 
power  of  all  to  perform  some  acts  of  self-denial  for  God,  and  apart  from  such  acts, 

'  no  professions  will  establish  a  reputation  in  the  true  Church  of  God.  The  intrinsic 
value  of  self -denial  lies  much  in  its  freeness,  its  timeliness,  its  form.  The  surrender 
of  a  Samuel  at  such  a  time,  in  such  a  spirit,  is  an  example  to  all  ages.  Are  there  no 
other  Hannahs  ?     Is  all  the  "  precious  ointment "  of  the  Christian  Church  exhausted  ? 

II.  HoNOUnKD  BY  God.  God  does  not  save  by  virtue  of  human  merit,  but  through 
Christ ;  yet  he  honours  fidelity  by  his  special  favour  and  greater  blessing.  Hannah 
had  been  honoured  variously ;  «.  g.  in  being  heard,  in  having  a  so/i  according  to 
promise,  in  being  permitted  to  consecrate  him  to  the  special  service  of  God,  in 
receiving  grace  to  part  with  him  from  home  if  not  from  heart,  and  in  being  enabled 
to  enjoy  \  blessed  vision  of  One  greater  and  more  holy  than  Samuel.     But  the  fidelity 


OH.  II.  11—26.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  49 

wherewith  she  and  her  husband  had,  during  the  period  covered,  served  God  in  home 
and  in  public  life,  as  also  by  the  general  tenor  of  their  lives,  was  crowned  with  a 
great  increase  of  domestic  joy.  The  home  of  Hannah  emptied  for  God  became  full. 
The  surrendered  child  was  returned  in  fivefold  form.  The  long,  pining  years  of 
early  life  were  followed  by  old  age  of  blessed  satisfaction.  Thus  do  all  ages  show 
that  "  there  is  that  scattereth  and  yet  increaseth."  "  I  sent  you  forth ;  "  "  lacked  ye 
anything  ?  "  There  is  a  promise  of  a  "  hundredfold  "  for  all  that  has  been  forsaken 
for  Christ.  In  one  way  or  another  God  will  prove  that  he  is  not  unrighteous  to 
forget  the  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love.  "  Them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour." 
Practical  lessons  •■ — 1.  Let  the  lowly  be  patient  in  their  endeavour  to  follow  out 
the  light  they  enjoy  in  worship  and  in  service.  2.  Many  individuals  and  families 
C(tn  win  for  themselves  the  precious  treasure  of  human  and  Divine  favour,  even 
though  the  wealth  and  fame  coveted  in  the  world  fall  not  to  their  lot.  3.  The 
multiplication  of  quiet,  unostentatious  religious  characters  is  an  end  earnestly  to  he 
sought,  as  adding  in  every  sense  to  the  welfare  of  the  world.  4.  The  severity  of  our 
trials  in  the  cause  of  Christ,  if  entenid  into  rightly,  is  sure  tu  be  crowned  with 
blessing. 

Vers.  22 — ^26. — AbancUmed.  The  facts  are — 1.  Eli  in  advancing  years  hears  of  the 
abominable  deeds  of  his  sons.  2.  He  remonstrates  with  them,  pointing  out  the  con- 
sequences of  their  conduct.  3.  Heedless  of  the  warning,  they  persist  in  sin,  being 
abandoned  by  God.  The  narrative  of  the  sacred  historian  seems  to. take  in  two 
extremes — ^two  elements  working  on  in  moral  antagonism  till  the  one  passes  away  and 
the  other  becomes  ascendant.  The  abominations  and  profanations  of  Eli's  sons,  and 
Samuel's  purity  and  entire  devotion  to  God,  are  placed  in  striking  contrast.  The 
history  of  the  former  is  sketched  as  explaining  the  course  of  Providence  in  the  de- 
liverance wrought  by  Samuel's  subsequent  conduct.  The  stage  in  the  course  of 
the  dissolute  priests  here  indicated  brings  into  view — 

I.  FBABrm.  FBOGBGSSION  IN  BIN.  The  iniquity  of  years  culminates  in  the  most 
abominable  crimes  men  could  commit.  The  descent  to  shamelessness  and  utter 
corruption  becomes  very  rapid.  One  can  hardly  imagine  these  vile  sons  of  Belial  as 
once  having  been  gentle  youths  taught  to  revere  Jehovah's  name,  and  to  tread  his 
courts  with  awe.  The  Tnomentum  gained  by  evil  desires  when  once  let  loose  is 
among  the  most  fearful  features  of  human  experience.  It  is  the  same  sad  stoiy  as 
often  told  now  to  the  hearts  of  wailing  parents : — disobedience,  aversion  to  holy 
things,  formal  observances,  secret  associations  of  evil,  seared  conscience,  loss  of  self- 
respect,  profanation  of  sacred  places,  contempt  for  religion,  self-abandonment  to 
lust,  defiance  of  God.  What  tears  fall  to  earth  nightly  over  erring  ones  I  What 
blasted  hopes  lie  on  life's  pathway  I  What  cruel  triumphs  of  sin  over  all  that  is 
fair  and  strong  in  human  nature  I  Holy  Saviour,  many  of  thy  followers  share  in 
thy  tears  once  shed  over  sin  finished  in  righteous  doom  1  (James  i.  15).  When,  when 
shall  the  mighty  power  come  in  answer  to  the  cry  of  thy  Church  to  turn  back  the 
tide  of  woe,  and  drive  the  curse  from  the  heart  and  home  of  man  ?  "  How  long,  0 
Lord,  how  long  ?  "    , 

II.  Defective  discipline.  No  doubt  Eli,  as  a  good  man,  deplored  the  vices  of  the 
age,  and  above  all  the  crimes  of  his  sons,  and  he  performed  a  father's  part  in 
remonstrating  with  them  on  account  of  their  deeds,  warning  them  of  the  dangers  to 
which  they  were  exposed  at  the  hand  of  the  invisible  Judge.  But  the  day  for 
warning  and  remonstrance  was  past,  and  the  day  for  swift,  unsparing  punishment 
had  come.  As  judge  in  civil  capacity,  and  as  high  priest  in  spiritual  capacity,  the 
course  of  Eli  was  clear — immediate  banishment  from  office  and  capital  punishment 
(Lev.  xviii.  6,  20,  29 ;  xx.  10 ;  xxi.  6,  7,  17,  23^.  We  see  how  a  man  good  in  many 
respects,  may  recognise  duty  and  not  perform  it.  Eli  knew  that  the  sin  of  contempt 
for  the  ordinance  of  sacrifice,  utter  disregard  of  the  honour  due  to  God,  prostitution 
of  the  holiest  office  to  the  vilest  uses,  was  past  condoning,  past  covering  even  by 
sacrifice.  For  God,  as  Eli  puts  it,  makes  no  provision  to  pardon  and  save  those 
who  wantonly  scorn  the  means  of  pardon  and  salvation.  No  sacrifice  1  no  inter- 
cessor I  Yet  the  appointed  judge  in  Israel  is  content  with  a  bare  declaration  of 
truth,  refraining  from  an  exercise  of  the  powers  wherewith  he  is  invested  for  the 

1  BAH.  ■ 


«0  THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  ii.  11—26. 

vindication  of  justice  and  the  maintenance  of  order.  Moral  weakness  was  the  sin  of 
Bli.  The  imperious  claims  of  God,  of  puhlio  welfare,  of  religious  purity,  appealed 
to  the  sense  of  duty  in  vain,  because  of  some  personal  sentiment  or  lack  of  resolu- 
tion. Cases  often  arise  in  national  affairs,  Church  discipline,  home  life,  where  duty 
comes  into  collision  with  private  sentiments  and  personal  affection.  Sometimes, 
as  with  Nathan  in  accusing  David,  and  Ambrose  in  placing  Theodosius  under  the 
ban,  moral  strength  is  conspicuous.  Often,  as  with  Eli,  Jonah,  and  David  in  one 
instance,  sense  of  duty  yields  to  inferior  impulses.  True  moral  courage  is  a  quality 
of  high  order.  It  confers  great  honour  on  those  in  whom  it  appears,  and  is  a  most 
important  element  in  securing  the  welfare  of  the  individual,  the  homCj  and  the 
public.  Its  presence  in  most  perfect  Christian  form  may  be  ascribed  to  the  com- 
bination of  various  elements,  (a)  A  natural  sense  of  justice — a  psychological  con- 
dition in  which  moral  perceptions  have  more  prompt  influence  than  transitory 
emotions.  (6)  A  earefvl  culture  of  the  conscience  through  early  years,  and  in  relation 
to  the  minutiffi  of  life,  (c)  Intelltgent  faith  inthe  inviolability/  of  m,orat  law.  {d) 
Formation  of  the  haMt  of  immediate  submission  to  moral  dictates,  on  the  general 
principle  that  in  morals  first  thoughts  are  truest.  («)  Strength  of  will  to  endure  pre- 
sent suffering,  as  not  being  the  worst  of  evils.  (/)  A  nature  brought  fully  under  the 
quickening  irifluence  of  practical  Christianity,  as  consisting  in  radical  renewal, 
obedience  to  the  precepts  of  Christ,  fellowship  with  a  holy  God,  and  perpetual  aspira- 
tion after  holiness.  There  are  instances  still  in  which  failure  in  moral  courage  is  the 
one  great  blot  on  an  otherwise  excellent  life.  Where  such  occur  sin  flourishes,  and 
the  righteous  mourn.  The  severe  hand  of  justice  is  frequently  the  hand  of  true 
kindness.  Favouritism  and  subordination  of  righteousness  to  personal  ends,  in 
public  and  domestic  life,  cause  iniquity  to  abound,  and  sooner  or  later  these  will  be 
visited  by  the  judgment  of  God. 

III.  Divine  abandonment.  The  sons  of  Bli  were  given  up  by  God  to  their 
deserved  doom.  They  heeded  not  remonstrance,  for  they  had  gone  so  far  into  sin 
as  to  be  left  destitute  of  that  gracious  influence  from  God,  without  which  the  soul  is 
held  fast  in  the  cords  of  its  iniquity.  The  outward  fact  of  despising  the  father's  warn- 
ing was  evidence  to  the  historian  that  God  had  judicially  abandoned  them.  "  They 
hearkened  not,  because  the  Lord  would  slay  them."  The  solemn  truth  is  clear  that 
men  may  persist  in  sin  so  utterly  as  to  be  given  up  by  God  without  mercy  to  ail  its 
consequences.  1.  The  evidence  of  this  is  full,  (a)  Men  are  sometimes  smitten  with 
deaih  as  a  consequence  of  persistent  sin,  as  in  case  of  Sodom,  and  the  rebellion 
of  Korah,  all  means  of  repentance  being  judicially  cut  ofE.  (6)  The  New  Testa- 
ment references  to  the  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  apostasy  of  counting  the 
blood  of  Christ  an  "  unclean  thing."  (c)  The  fact  that  at  the  end  of  life  the  impeni- 
tent are  given  over  to  look  for  "tribulation  and  anguish."  2.  The  rationale  of  this 
is  partly  discoverable.  It  is  not  mere  arbitrariness,  nor  is  it  the  efEect  of  imperfect 
benevolence,  (a)  It  is  consonant  with  the  working  of  natural  law.  Physiology  and 
psychology  prove  that  there  is  a  tendency  to  permanence  of  character  in  all.  This 
is  especially  true  of  those  who  persist  in  strong  unhallowed  desires.  (6)  There  are 
traTUsgressiotis  even  in  society  vrhich.a.dixmtoi.  no  restoration  to  society,  (c)  In  a  wise 
and  endlessly  ramified  moral  government  which  rests  on  an  eternal  right,  there  can 
be  no  proof  that  a  moral  Ruler,  whose  existence  is  bound  up  with  right  and  order,  is 
obliged  to  cover  the  past  of  free  beings  who  have  deliberately  perdsted  in  evil,  by 
giving  them  a  new  power  which  shall  make  them  different  from  what  they  prefer  to 
be.  (d)  "ih^  judicial  ahandonment  of  the  intensely  sinful  acts  as  a.  wholesome  deter- 
rent on  the  moral  universe,  by  vindicating  the  holiness  of  God,  and  the  claim  of 
universal  society  on  the  pure,  loving  life  of  each  of  its  constituents,  and  this  too  while 
giving  to  free  beings  only  what  they  prefer. 

Practical  lessons: — 1.  The  importance  of  guarding  against  first  tendencies  to 
deviate  from  the  path  of  purity  and  truth.  2.  The  value  of  early  habits  oi  devotion, 
regard  for  right  and  purity,  as  &  preventive  of  habits  of  a  reverse  character.  3.  The 
extreme  danger  to  the  Church  of  a  professional  religion  in  alliance  with  a  tendency 
to  sensual  indulgence,  and  the  need  of  watching  closely  against  such  a  possible  com- 
bination. 4.  The  value  of  an  early  training  of  the  moral  sense,  and  its  constant 
culture,  as  againat  the  inferior  elements  of  our  life.     6.  The  use  of  the  lessons  of 


OH.  n.  11—26,]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  £] 


history,  as  illustrating  the  terrible  power  of  sin,  and  the  damage  don*  to  sociatj 
and  the  Ghuroh  by  defective  discipline. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  11.  (SHitOH.)— SiawMteT*  ehUdhood  and  growth.  "  And  the  child  did  minister 
unto  the  Lord  before  Eli  the  priest. "  "  And  the  child  Samuel  grew  on,  and  was  in  favour 
both  with  the  Lord,  and  also  with  men  "  (ver.  26).  (Ch.  i.  24 ;  ii.  18, 19, 21 ;  iii.  1.) 
"  Great  is  the  reverence  due  to  children."  It  is  said  of  -an  eccentric  schoolmaster 
in  Germany,  who  lived  about  300  years  ago,  John  Trebonius,  that  he  never  appeared 
before  his  boys  without  taking  off  his  hat  and  bowing  very  humbly  before  them. 
"  Who  can  tell,"  said  he,  "  what  may  not  rise  up  amid  these  youths  ?  There  may 
be  among  them  those  who  shall  be  learned  doctors,  sage  legislators,  nay,  princes  of 
the  empire."  Even  then  there  was  among  them  "  the  solitary  monk  that  shook  the 
world.'  But  a  much  greater  than  Luther  (with  whom  he  has  been  compared — 
EviaM)  was  the  little  Nazarite,  who  with  unshorn  locks  ministered  in  the  taber- 
nacle at  Shiloh ;  and  at  a  very  early  age  he  gave  signs  of  his  future  eminence. 
"  Even  a  child  is  known  by  his  doings  "  (Prov.  xx.  11).  "  The  child  is  father  to  the 
man."  But  what  he  will  be  depends  greatly  on  his  early  training ;  for  "  the  new 
vessel  takes  a  lasting  tincture  from,  the  liquor  which  is  first  poured  in"  (Horace)  ; 
"  the  soft  clay  is  easily  fashioned  into  what  form  you  please  (Persius)  ;  and  "  the 
young  plant  may  be  bent  with  a  gentle  hand,  and  the  characters  engraved  on  the 
tender  bark  grow  deeper  with  the  advancing  tree  "  (Quinctilian).    Consider — 

I.  His  education,  or  the  influences  to  which  he  was  subject,  consisting  of — 1. 
Impressions  under  the  parental  roof.  He  did  not  leave  his  home  at  an  age  too  early 
to  prevent  his  receiving  deep  and  permanent  impressions  from  the  example,  prayers, 
and  instructions  of  his  parents.  His  destination  would  be  explained  to  him  by  his 
mother,  and  made  attractive  and  desirable ;  so  that  when  the  time  came  for  the 
fulfilment  of  her  vow  he  might  readily  make  it  his  own.  The  memory  of  those 
early  days  must  have  been  always  pleasant  to  him ;  and  the  sacred  bond  of  filial 
affection  would  be  renewed  and  strengthened  by  the  annual  visit  of  his  parents,  and 
by  the  yearly  present  which  his  mother  brought  to  him  (ver.  19).  The  making  of 
the  "  little  coat "  was  a  work  of  love,  and  served  to  keep  her  absent  boy  in  mind, 
whilst  the  possession  of  it  was  to  him  a  constant  memorial  of  her  pure  affection. 
The  first  impressions  which  he  thus  received  were  a  powerful  means  of  preserving 
him  from  evil,  and  inciting  him  to  good.  "  Every  first  thing  continues  for  ever  with 
the  child ;  the  first  colour,  the  first  music,  the  first  flower  paint  the  foreground  of 
life ;  every  new  educator  affects  less  than  its  predecessor,  until  at  last,  if  we  regard 
all  life  as  an  educational  institution,  the  circumnavigator  of  the  world  is  less  influ- 
enced by  all  nations  he  has  seen  than  by  his  nurse  "  (Locke).  2.  Association  with 
holy  things.  Everything  in  the  tabernacle  was  to  his  childish  view  beautiful  and 
mpressive,  and  overshadowed  by  the  mysterious  presence  of  the  Lord  of  hosts. 
"  Heaven  lies  about  us  in  our  infancy."  And  the  veil  which  separates  the  invisible 
from  the  visible  is  then  very  attenuated.  When  he  afterwards  saw  how  much 
beneath  the  outward  form  was  hollow  and  corrupt,  he  was  strong  enough  to  endure 
the  shock,  and  distinguished  between  "  the  precious  and  the  vile."  Association 
with  sacred  things  either  makes  men  better  than  others,  or  else  very  much  worse. 
3.  Occupation  in  Imoly  services.  Even  when  very  young  he  could  perform  many 
little  services  in  such  a  place  as  the  tabernacle,  and  in  personal  attendance  on  Eli, 
who  was  very  old  and  partially  blind.  A  part  of  his  occupation  we  know  was 
to  open  the  doors  (ch.  iii.  15).  By  means  of  such  things  he  was  trained  for  a 
higher  ministry.  4.  Instruction  in  sacred  truth,  given  by  his  kind-hearted  guardian 
in  explanation  of  the  various  objects  and  services  in  the  tabernacle,  and,  still  more, 
gained  by  the  perusal  of  the  religious  records  stored  up  therein  (ch.  x.  26).  6. 
Familiarity  with  public  life.  "  There  at  the  centre  of  government,  he  must  early 
have  become  conversant  with  the  weightiest  concerns  of  the  people. '  6.  Ohsema^ 
ti<m  ofihe  odiotis  practices  of  many,  especially  Hophni  and  Phinefaas.  For  this  alsc 
miut  be  mentioned  among  the  influences  that  went  to  form  his  character.     It  i> 

■  2 


6S  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  il  11— SM. 

impoasible  to  keep  a  child  altogether  from  the  sight  of  vice.  External  safegnards 
are  no  protection  without  internal  purity.  On  the  other  hand,  outward  circum- 
Btances  which  are  naturally  perilous  have  often  no  effect  on  internal  purity,  except 
to  make  it  more  decided  and  robust.  "  The  jarring  contrast  which  he  had  before 
his  eyes  in  the  evil  example  of  Eli's  children  could  but  force  more  strongly  upon  his 
mind  the  conviction  of  the  great  necessity  of  the  age,  and  impel  to  stifl  more 
unflinching  rigour  to  act  up  to  this  conviction  "  (Ewald).  But  this  could  only  take 
place  by — 7.  The  power  of  Divine  grace,  which  is  the  greatest  and  only  effectual 
teacher  (Titus  ii.  11, 12).  The  atmosphere  of  prayer  which  he  breathed  from  earliest 
life  was  the  atmosphere  of  grace.  The  Holy  Spirit  rested  upon  him  in  an  eminent 
degree,  and  he  grew  up  under  his  influence,  "  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  rivers  of 
water,"  gradually  and  surely  to  perfection. 

II.  His  ceabacteb,  or  the  dispositions  which  he  developed  under  these  influences. 
He  "  grew  on  "  not  only  physically  and  intellectually,  but  also  morally  and  spiritu- 
ally, manifestmg  the  dispositions  which  properly  belong  to  a  child,  and  make  him 
a  pattern  to  men  (Matt,  xviii.  3).  1.  Mumble  submission.  2.  Great  doeilitv,  or 
readiness  to  learn  what  he  was  taught  3.  Ready  obedience  to  what  he  was  told  to 
do.  How  promptly  did  he  respond  to  the  voice  of  Eli,  who,  as  he  thought,  called 
him  from  his  slumber  (ch.  iii.  5).  The  watchword  of  childhood  and  youth  should 
be  "  Obey."  And  it  is  only  those  that  learn  to  obey  who  will  be  fit  to  command. 
4.  Profound  reverenee.  For  "  he  ministered  before  the  Lord,"  as  if  under  his  eye, 
and  with  a  growing  sense  of  his  presence.  "  He  was  to  receive  his  training  at  the 
sanctuary,  that  at  the  very  earliest  waking  up  of  his  spiritual  susceptibilities  he  might 
receive  the  impression  of  the  sacred  presence  of  Grod  "  (Keil).  6.  Tramparent 
truthfulness  and  guilelessness.  6.  Purity  and  self-control  (1  Tim.  iv.  12 ;  2  Tim. 
ii.  22).  7.  Sincere  devotion  to  the  purpose  of  his  dedication  to  the  Lord.  In  this 
manner  he  gradually  grew  into  the  possession  of  a  holy  character,  and  needed  not, 
like  many  others,  any  sudden  or  conscious  "  conversion  "  from  the  ways  of  sin  to 
the  ways  of  God.  Like  John  the  Baptist,  "he  grew  and  waxed  strong  in  spirit' 
(Luke  i.  80) ;  and  his  childhood  is  described  in  the  very  words  employed  to  describe 
the  childhood  of  our  Lord :  "  And  Jesus  increased  in  favour  with  6od  and  man  " 
(Luke  ii.  40,  61,  62). 

III.  His  acceptancb,  or  the  favour  he  obtained  (Prov.  iii.  4).  1.  With  God,  who 
looked  down  upon  him  with  delight,  beholding  in  him  the  effect  of  his  grace,  and  a 
reflection  of  his  light  and  love.  For  "  the  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  his  people ' 
(Ps.  cxlix.  4).  2.  With  men.  The  gratification  which  Eli  felt  in  his  presence 
and  service  appears  in  the  benediction  he  uttered  on  his  parents  when  they  visited 
the  tabernacle,  and  in  accordance  with  which  they  were  compensated  with  three 
sons  and  two  daughters  for  "  the  gift  which  they  gave  imto  the  Lord  "  (ch.  ii.  20, 
21).  Even  Hophni  and  Fhinehas  must  have  regarded  the  young  Nazarite  with 
respect.  And  the  people  who  brought  their  offerings  to  the  tabernacle  looked  upor 
him  with  admiration  and  hope.  So  he  was  prepared  for  the  weik  that  lay  before 
him.— D. 

Vers.  12 — 17.  (Shiloh.) — A  degenerate  priesthood.  "  The  best  things  when  cor- 
rupted become  the  worst."  It  is  thus  with  official  positions  such  as  were  held  by  the 
driests  of  old.  Their  positions  were  an  hereditary  right,  and  their  duties  consisted 
largely  of  a  prescribed  routine  of  services.  It  was  required,  however,  that  their  per- 
sonal character  should  accord  with  their  sacred  work  (Mai.  ii.  7)  ;  and  their  influence 
was  great  for  good  or  evil.  Whilst  they  reflected  in  their  character  and  conduct  the 
moral  condition  of  the  times,  they  also  contributed  in  no  small  degree  to  produce  it. 
The  sons  of  Eli  employed  their  high  ofBce  not  for  the  welfare  of  men  and  the  gloiy 
of  Qod,  but  for  their  own  selfish  and  corrupt  purposes,  and  afford  an  example  of 
"great  and  instructive  wickedness."  Concerning  them  the  following  things  are 
recorded : — 

I.  Culpable  ignoeanch  of  God  (ver.  12).  They  had  no  proper  conception  of 
him  as  hply  and  just,  and  they  did  not  consider  that  he  observed  and  hated  ain  by 
whomsoever  it  was  committed,  and  would  surely  punish  it.  They  had  no  coidf 
munion  with  him,  no  sympathy  with  ins  purposes,  and  no  sense  of  their  own  obliga- 


SB.  a.  11—26.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  68 

tions  to  him.    They  were  unspiritual  men,  and  practically  infidel.    And  they  wer« 
■uch  notwithstanding  the  instructions  they  received,  the  opportunities  they  possessed, 
and  the  services  they  rendered.   Although  the  servanU  of  God, "  they  knew  not  God, 
and  were  "  without  excuse."    Amidst  a  blaze  of  light  men  may  be  dark  within. 
"  And  if  the  light  within  thee  be  darkness,  how  great  is  that  darkness  I  " 

II.  Official  bobbery  of  men  (vers.  13,  14).  Not  satisfied  with  the  liberal  por- 
tions of  the  peace  offerings  which  were  legally  assigned  to  them  (the  breast  and 
shoulder),  they  claimed  other  and  larger  portions,  to  which  they  were  not  entitled, 
and  robbed  the  people  for  the  gratification  of  their  own  appetites.  What  they 
would  have  fiercely  denounced  in  others  they  deemed  venial  offences  in  privileged 
men  like  themselves.  How  often  do  ofScial  positions  and  selfish  indulgences  blind 
men  to  the  injustice  of  their  conduct,  and  harden  them  in  iniquity. 

III.  Wilful  violation  of  the  law  (ver.  15),  It  was  required  by  the  Levitical 
law  that  the  fat  should  be  burnt  on  the  altar  before  the  offering  was  divided  between 
the  priest  and  the  offerer  ;  but  instead  of  doing  this,  the  priest  sent  his  servant  before- 
hand to  demand  his  portion  with  the  fat,  that  it  might  be  better  fitted  for  roasting 
than  boiling,  which  was  not  to  his  taste.  He  thus  appropriated  to  his  private  use 
what  belonged  to  the  Lord,  and  "  robbed  God  "  of  his  due.  It  was  a  gross  act  of 
disobedience,  sacrilege,  and  profanity,  prompted  by  the  same  pampered  appetite  as 
his  dishonesty  toward  men  ;  and,  in  addition,  it  hindered  the  people  from  fulfilling 
their  religious  purposes,  and  made  his  own  servant  a  partner  in  his  sin. 

IV.  Despotic  exercise  of  adthobitt  (ver.  16).  When  the  people  gently  remon- 
strated, and  promised  to  give  up  their  own  portion  if  the"  fat  were  first  burnt  on  the 
altar,  it  was  said  to  them,  "Nay,  but  thou  shalt  give  it  me  now,  or  else  I  will  come 
and  take  it  by  force."  Reason  as  well  as  right  was  overridden.  Instead  of  regard- 
ing himself  as  a  servant  of  God  for  the  good  of  men,  the  priest  made  himself  a  "  lord 
over  God's  heritage "  (1  Pet.  v.  3).  Having  cast  aside  the  authority  of  God,  he 
made  his  own  arbitrary  dictum  the  law  of  others,  and  urged  obedience  to  it  by  the 
threatening  of  force.  By  the  same  means,  backed  by  spiritual  terrors,  ho  has  often 
■ought  to  accomplish  his  wishes  in  every  age. 

V.  Injurious  influence  on  religion  (vers.  17,  24).  Men  abstained  from  present- 
ing as  many  offerings  as  they  would  have  given,  or  even  from  presenting  them  at 
all,  being  repelled  from  the  service  of  God  by  the  evil  conduct  of  his  ministers.  "  Ye 
make  the  Lord's  people  to  transgress  "  (ver.  24).  One  unworthy  priest  has  often 
made  many  unbelievers.  Instead  of  strengthening  what  is  noblest  and  best  in  men, 
he  has  destroyed  it,  and  made  its  restoration  impossible.  And,  generally,  imgodly 
conduct  on  the  part  of  professed  servants  of  God  is  a  great  hindrance  to  the  spread  of 
truth  and  righteousness,  and  a  powerful  influence  in  extending  error  and  evil  in  the 
world.  "One  sinner  destroyeth  much  good."  To  complete  the  picture,  two  other 
things  must  be  added,  viz.— 

VI.  Shameless  indulgence  in  vice  (ver.  22).  They  knew  nothing  of  self-control, 
gave  the  rein  to  their  lusts,  and  indulged  in  vices  which  the  heathen  commonly  asso- 
ciated with  their  idol  worship,  and  which  made  that  worship  so  terrible  a  temptation 
to  Israel.  The  idol  feasts  at  Shiloh  were  doubtless  scenes  of  gross  sensuality ;  and 
the  sons  of  Eli  scarcely  cared  to  disguise  their  participation  in  similar  indu%ences, 
and  made  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord  like  a  heathen  temple. 

VII.  Superstitious  use  of  sacred  things  (ch.  iv.  11).  Having  become  insensible  to 
the  presence  of  the  invisible  King,  they  treated  his  services  as  a  mere  outward  ritual, 
which  may  he  performed  without  any  felt  inconsistency  between  it  and  any  amount 
of  immorality.  Why  should  they  observe  it  at  all  ?  From  self-interest  and  from 
superstition.  They  still  supposed  that  there  was  some  mysterious  benefit  inseparably 
connected  with  the  ark,  and  enjoyed  by  those  who  possessed  it,  apart  from  their 
moral  and  spiritual  state.  Their  religion  had  become  a,  superstition,  like  that  of  the 
heathen.  And  hence  they  took  the  ark  into  the  battle-field,  in  sure  confidence  of 
their  safety,  and  were  deprived  of  it  by  the  heathen,  and  they  themselves  destroyed. 
1.  It  is  possible  for  men  to  possess  the  highest  privileges,  and  yet  sink  into  the 
deepest  degradation.  2.  The  patience  of  Heaven  toward  sinners,  is  wonderful,  and 
designed  to  lead  them  to  repentance.  3.  When  men  despise  the  goodness  of  God, 
and  persist  In  transgression,  they  are  certain  to  meet  with  signal  punisliment. — D 


M  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  n.  11— 2«. 

Vers.  22 — 25.  (Shiloh.  ) — Ineffective  reproof.  A  man  may  possess  many  amiable 
qnalities,  and  be,  on  the  whole,  a  good  man,  and  yet  be  marked  by  some  defect  which 
mars  his  character,  prevents  his  usefulness,  and  makes  him  the  unintentional  cause  of 
much  mischief.  Such  a  man  was  Eli.  Of  his  early  life  nothing  is  recorded.  He  was 
a  descendant  of  Ithamar,  the  youngest  son  of  Aaron,  and  held  the  office  of  high  priest, 
which  formerly  belonged  to  the  elder  branch  of  the  Aaronic  family,  that  of  Kleazar 
PTum.  XX.  26),  but  which  was  now  transferred  to  the  younger,  from  some  unknown 
cause,  and  which  continued  therein  until  the  time  of  Solomon.  At  the  age  of  fifty- 
eight  he  became  judge,  and  "  judged  Israel  forty  years  "  (ch.  iv.  18).  When  first 
mentioned  he  must  have  been  at  least  seventy  years  old.  His  sons  were  children  of 
his  old  age ;  for  some  time  afterwards  they  weve  spoken  of  as  youngmen  (ch.  ii.  17), 
and,  as  is  not  uncommon  in  such  cases,  he  treated  them  with  undue  indulgence.  He 
was  hasty  and  severe  in  reproving  Hannah,  but  slow  and  mild  in  reproving  them. 
The  inefiBciency  of  his  reproof  appears  in  that — 

I.  It  was  not  administered  in  peopee  time.  The  tendency  to  go  wrong  genei^ 
ally  appears  at  an  early  age ;  and  it  must  have  been  seen  by  him  in  his  sons  long 
before  the  rumour  of  their  flagrant  transgressions  reached  him,  if  he  had  not  been 
blind  to  their  faults.  But  he  had  no  adequate  sense  of  his  parental  responsibility, 
was  old  and  weak,  of  a  gentle  and  easy-going  temperament,  and  omitted  to  reprove 
them  (1  Kings  i.  6)  until  they  had  become  too  strongly  devoted  to  their  evil  ways  to 
be  amenable  to  expostulation.  A  little  plant  may  be  easily  rooted  up,  but  when  it 
has  grown  into  a  tree  it  can  only  be  removed  by  extraordinary  efiorte.  If  some 
children  are  "  discouraged  "  (Col.  iii.  21)  by  too  much  strictness,  far  more  are  spoiled 
by  too  much  indulgence.'  "  Indulgence  never  produces  gratitude  or  love  in  the  heart 
of  a  child." 

n.  It  was  hot  given  with  sufficient  eaenestness  (vers.  23,  24).  Gentle  re- 
proof may  sometimes  be  most  effective,  but  here  it  was  out  of  place.  1.  It  was  not 
sufficiently  pointed  in  its  application ;  being  given  to  them  collectively  rather  than 
individually,  in  indefinite  terms,  by  way  of  question,  and  concerning  things  which  he 
had  heard,  but  into  the  certainty  of  which  he  had  not  troubled  himself  to  inquire. 
2.  It  exhibited  no  sufBcient  sense  of  the  evil  of  sin  (ver.  25).  He  spoke  of  the  con- 
sequences rather  than  of  the  nature,  the  "exceeding  sinfulness"  of  sin,  and  spoke  of 
them  in  a  way  which  indicated  little  deep  personal  conviction.  3.  It  showed  no 
tufflcietit  determination  to  correct  it.  He  did  not  say  that  he  would  judge  them  for 
tlieir  injustice  toward  men  ;  and  with  reference  to  their  sin  against  the  Lord,  which 
was  their  chief  offence,  he  simply  confessed  that  he  could  do  nothing  but  leave  them 
to  the  judgment  of  a  higher  tribunal.  "  In  the  case  where  the  rebuke  should  have 
descended  like  a  bolt  from  heaven  we  hear  nothing  but  low  and  feeble  murmnrings, 
coming,  as  it  were,  out  of  the  dust.  Cruel  indeed  are  the  tenderest  mercies  of  parental 
weakness  and  indulgence.  And  the  fate  of  Eli  shows  that  by  such  tender  mercies 
the  father  may  become  the  minister  of  vengeance  unto  his  whole  house  "  (Le  Bas). 

IIL  It  was  not  followed  by  adequatb  chastisement.  The  law  of  Moses  in 
the  case  of  disobedient  children  was  very  severe  (Deut.  xxi.  18 — 21).  But  Eli 
neither  observed  this  law  "  when  they  hearkened  not  to  his  voice "  (ver.  26),  nor 
took  any  further  steps  to  prevent  the  continuance  of  the  evil  which  he  reproved.  He 
had  none  of  the  zeal  for  which  Phinehas  the  son  of  Eleazar  was  approved  (Num.  xxv. 
1 1 — 13)  ;  but  as  a  father,  a  high  priest,  and  a  judge  he  was  guilty  of  culpable  infirmity 
and  wilful  disobedience  (ch.  iii.  13).  "  Osiers,  says  an  old  writer,  "  can  never  bo 
pillars  in  the  State  or  in  the  Church. 

IV.  It  did  not  eesult  iu  any  improvement  (ver.  25).  Their  contempt  of  reproof 
showed  that  tliey  were  already  infatuated,  hardened,  and  abandoned  to  destruction  ; 
or  (reading  for  =  therefore),  it  filled  up  the  measure  of  their  iniquities,  and  exposed 
them  to  inevitable  judgment.  "  He  that  hateth  reproof  shall  die  "  (Prov.  xv.  10). 
1.  Beproof  is  often  a  solemn  obligation.  2.  It  should  be  given  in  an  e£Eective 
manner.  3.  When  not  so  given  it  does  more  harm  than  good.  4.  When  justly 
given  it  should  be  humbly  and  obediently  received. — D. 


OH.  n.  27—36.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


65 


EXPOSITION. 


Trb  DrvTNE  fwawvsT  itpon  Eli  and 
HIS  HOUSE  (vers.  27—36).  Ver.  27.— There 
eame  a  man  of  Ood.  The  title  man  of 
God  is  the  usual  appellation  of  a  prophet 
in  the  books  of  Judges,  Samuel,  and  Emgs, 
and  as  such  is  appUed  by  Manoah  to  vaa 
angel  who  appeared  to  nim  (Judges  ziii 
6,  8).  Though  the  recorded  interpositions 
of  the  Deity  in  those  times  were  generally 
by  angels,  still  the  readiness  with  which 
Manoah  gave  his  visitant  this  title  makes 
it  probable  that  prophets  did  appear  &om 
time  to  time;  and  the  mission  of  one, 
though,  as  here,  without  a  name,  is  re- 
corded in  Judges  vl  8.  As  regards  the 
date  of  this  visitation  of  the  man  of  God,  we 
find  that  Eli  was  ninety-eight  jears  of  age 
when  the  ark  was  captured  (ch.  iv.  15).  At 
that  time  Samuel  was  not  merely  a  man, 
but  one  whose  reputation  was  established 
throughout  the  whole  land,  and  who  was 
probably  regarded  not  merely  as  a  prophet, 
but  as  Eli's  successor  in  the  office  of  judge 
(ch.  i-'i.  19,  20).  But  EU  was  "very  old" 
(ch.  ii.  22)  when  he  rebuked  his  sons,  pro- 
bably between  seventy  and  eighty,  for 
Samuel  ia  then  called  a  child  (ver.  26); 
whereas  he  can  scarcely  have  been  much  less 
than  thirty  years  of  age  when  the  Philistines 
destroyed  Shiloh.  In  ch.  viiL  1 — 3,  when  the 
misconduct  of  Samuel's  own  sons  led  to  the 
revival  of  the  agitation  for  a  king,  he  is  him- 
self described  as  already  "  old ;  but  as  he 
lired  on  till  nearly  the  end  of  Saul's  reign, 
he  could  not  at  that  time  have  been  much 
more  than  sixty.  Even  when  God  spake 
by  him  to  Eli  he  is  still  described  as  a  boy, 
na'ar  (oh.  iii  1),  though  the  higher  position 
to  which  he  had  attained,  as  is  proved  by  his 
duties,  would  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  he 
was  then  verging  on  manhood.  As  some  time 
would  natui3.11y  elapse  between  two  such 
solemn  warnings,  we  may  feel  sure  that  the 
visit  of  the  man  of  God  occurred  shortly 
after  Samuel's  dedication.  Then,  as  EU 
neglected  the  warning,  and  the  wickedness 
of  his  sons  grew  more  inveterate,  some  eight 
or  ten  years  afterwards  the  warning  was 
repeated  in  sharper  tones  by  the  voice  of  his 
own  youthful  attendant.  Meanwhile  Eli 
seems  himself  to  have  grown  in  personal 
-piety,  but  he  could  do  nothing  now  for  his 
sous.  Past  eighty  years  of  age,  the  time  of 
activity  had  gone  by,  and  resignation  was 
the  sole  virtue  that  was  left  for  him  to  prac- 
tise. And  so  the  warning  given  by  the 
mouth  of  Samuel  is  stem  and  final.  Ten  or 
fifteen  more  years  must  elapse  before  the 
ruin  came.  Bat  the  gloom  was  deepening  ; 
the  Philistines  were  increasing  in  power,  and 
the  valonr  of  Israel  was  decaying  as  iti 


morality  declined ;  then  there  was  a  short 
violent  crash,  and  the  house  of  Eli  met  iti 
doom. 

The  prophet  begins  by  enumerating  Jeho- 
vah's mercies  to  the  house  of  thy  father," 
that  is,  the  whole  family  of  Aaron,  in 
selecting  them  for  the  priesthood  (on  the 
choice  of  the  house  of  Aaron,  see  Exod. 
zzviiL,  zxiz.),  and  in  richly  endowing  the 
office  with  so  large  a  portion  of  every  sa- 
crifice. These  portions  are  termed  literally 
firings,  or  fire-sacrifices,  but  the  term  soon 
became  general,  and  in  Lev.  zxiv.  7,  9  is 
applied  even  to  the  shew-bread.  Added 
then  to  the  tithes,  and  to  the  cities  with 
their  suburbs  given  them  to  inhabit,  this 
share  of  every  sacrifice  gave  the. house  of 
Aaron  great  wealth,  and  with  it  they  had  also 
high  rank.  There  was  no  one  above  them 
in  Israel  except  the  kings.  In  Sparta  we 
find  that  one  of  the  endowments  of  the 
kings  was  the  skins  of  animals  offered  in 
sacnfice  (Herod.,  vi.  56).  Why  then  do 
Eli  and  his  sons,  who  benefit  so  greatly  by 
them,  "  kick  at  Jehovah's  sacrifices  and 
offerings  ? "  The  word  is  taken  from  Deut. 
xxxiL  15,  and  refers  to  the  efforts  of  a  pam- 
pered steer  violently  to  shake  off  the  yoke, 
EU's  sons  treat  the  ordinances  which  have 
raised  them  to  rank,  and  given  them  wealth 
and  power,  as  if  they  were  an  injury  and 
wrong.  And  Eli,  instead  of  removing  them 
from  the  office  which  they  disgraced,  pre- 
ferred the  ties  of  relationship  to  his  duty  to 
God  and  the  moral  welfare  of  the  people. 

Ver.  SO.  — I  said  indeed.  By  thus  acting 
EU  became  an  accomplice  in  the  irreligion 
of  his  sons,  and  God  therefore  revokes  his 
grant  of  a  perpetual  priesthood.  The  pro- 
mise had  been  made  to  Aaron's  family  ■■ 
a  whole  (Exod.  xxix.  9),  and  had  then  been 
renewed  to  the  house  of  Eleazar  (Kum.  ixv. 
13).  But  the  house  of  Ithamar  was  now 
in  the  ascendant,  probably  owing  to  Eli's 
own  ability,  who  during  the  anarchical  times 
of  the  Judges  had  won  for  himself,  first,  the 
civil  power,  and  then,  upon  some  fitting 
opportunity,  the  high  priesthood  also,  though 
I  suppose  the  heads  oi  the  houses  of  Eleazar 
and  Ithamar  were  always  persons  of  great 
importance,  and  high  priests  in  a  certain 
sense.  Eli  had  now  the  priority,  and  had 
he  and  his  family  proved  worthy,  the  pos- 
session of  this  high  station  might  have  been 
confirmed  to  them.  Like  Saul  in  the  king- 
dom, they  proved  unworthy  of  it,  and  so  they 
lost  it  for  ever.  Their  names,  as  we  have 
seen  above,  do  not  even  occur  in  the  gene- 
alogiea. 

I  laid  ....  but  now  Tehovah  saith. 
Can  then  a  promise  of  God  be  withdrawn! 


56 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


C<a.ii.S7— S& 


Tea,  aainiedly.  Not  from  mankind  as  > 
whole,  nor  from  the  Church  as  a  whole,  bat 
from  each  particular  nation,  or  Church,  or 
indiyidual.  To  each -separate  person  God's 
promises  are  conditional,  and  human  action 
everywhere  is  a  co-worker  with  the  Divine 
volition,  though  only  within  a  limited  sphere, 
and  so  as  that  the  Divine  purposes  must 
finally  be  accomplished.  Eli  then  and  his 
sons  may  suffer  forfeit  of  the  promise  by  not 
fiiUUling  the  obligations  which,  whether 
expressed  or  implied,  are  an  essential  con- 
dition of  every  promise  made  by  God  to 
man.  But  the  high  priesthood  will  con- 
tinue, and  will  perform  its  allotted  task  of 
preparing  for  the  priesthood  of  Christ. 
"Them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour," 
states  one  of  these  conditions  essential  on 
man's  part  to  secure  the  frilfilment  of  God'i 
promises. . 

Ver.  31.  — I  will  out  off  thine  arm. 
The  arm  is  the  usual  metaphor  for  strength. 
As  Eli  had  preferred  the  exaltation  of  his 
sons  to  God's  honour,  he  is  condemned  to 
see  the  strength  of  his  house  broken.  Nay, 
more;  there  is  not  to  be  aji  "old  man  in 
his  house."  The  young  men  fuU  of  energy 
and  vigour  perish  by  the  sword ;  the  sur- 
vivors fade  away  by  disease.  The  Jews  say 
that  the  house  of  Ithamar  was  peculiarly 
short-lived,  but  the  prophecy  was  amply  ful- 
filled in  the  slaughter  of  Eli's  house,  first  at 
Shiloh,  and  then  at  Nob  by  Doeg  the  Edomite 
at  the  command  of  SauL  There  is  nothing 
to  warrant  an  abiding  curse  upon  his  family. 
The  third  or  fourth  generation  is  the  limit 
of  the  visitation  of  the  sins  of  the  fathers 
upon  the  children. 

Yer.  82.  —  Thon  shalt  see  an  enemy. 
The  translation  of  ver.  32  is  very  difficult, 
but  is  probably  as  follows :  "  And  thou 
ghalt  behold,  i.  e.  see  with  wonder  and  aston- 
ishment, narrowness  of  habitation  in  all  the 
wealth  which  shall  be  given  unto  Israel." 
The  word  translated  narrowness  often  means 
an  "enemy,"  but  as  that  for  habitation  is 
the  most  general  term  in  the  Heb.  language 
for  a  dwelling,  being  used  even  of  the  dens 
of  wild  beasts  (Jer.  ix.  10  ;  Nahum  iL  12), 
the  rendering  an  "enemy  of  dwelling  "  gives 
no  sense.  Hence  the  violent  insertion  of  the 
pronoun  my,  for  which  no  valid  excuse  can 
ue  given.  But  narrowness  of  dwelling  means 
distress,  especially  in  a  man's  domestic  rela- 
tions, and  this  is  the  sense  required.  In 
the  growing  public  and  national  prosperity 
which  was  to  be  Israel's  lot  under  Samuel, 
Saul,  David,  and  Solomon,  Eli  was  to  see, 
not  in  person,  but  prophetically,  calamity 
attaching  itself  to  his  own  family.  His  house 
was  to  decay  in  the  midst  of  the  progress  of 
all  the  rest  Upon  this  denunciation  of 
private  distress  naturally  follows  the  repe- 
tition of  the  threat  that  the  house  of  Ithamar 


I   should  be  left'  without  an  old  man  to  guide 
its  course  onward  to  renewed  prosperity. 

Ver.  S3.— Ihemanof thine.&c.  Tb»  mean- 
ing of  the  Heb.  is  here  again  changed  by  the 
insertion  of  words  not  in  the  original  Trans- 
lated literally  the  sense  is  good,  but  merciful, 
and  this  the  A.  V.  has  so  rendered  as  to  make 
it  the  most  bitter  of  all  denunciations.  The 
Heb.  is,  "Yet  I  will  not  cut  off  every  on:* 
of  thine  from  my  altar,  to  consume  thine  eyes 
and  to  grieve  thy  soul ;"  that  is,  thy  punish- 
ment shall  not  be  so  utter  as  to  leave  thee  with 
no  consolation  ;  for  thy  descendants,  though 
diminished  in  numbers,  and  deprived  of  the 
highest  rank,  shall  still  minister  as  prieata 
at  mine  altar.  "  But  the  majority  of  thy 
house — lit  the  multitude  of  thy  houses- 
shall  die  as  men."  This  is  very  well  ren- 
dered in  the  A.  V.  "in  the  flower  of  their 
age,"  only  we  must  not  explain  this  of  dying 
of  disease.  They  were  to  die  in  their  vigour, 
not,  like  children  and  old  men,  in  their  beds, 
but  by  violent  deaths,  such  as  actually  befell 
them  at  Shiloh  and  at  Nob. 

Ter.  34. — With  this  the  si^  here  given 
exactly  agrees.  Hophni  and  Phinehas  died 
fighting  valiantly  in  battle,  and  then  came  the 
sacking  of  Shiloh,  and  the  slaughter  of  the 
ministering  priests  (Fs.  IxxviiL  64).  Up^D 
this  followed  a  long  delay.  For  first  Eli's 
grandson,  Ahitub,  the  son  of  Phinehas,  was 
nigh  priest,  and  then  his  two  sons,  Ahiah 
and  Ahimelech,  and  then  Abiathar,  the  son 
of  Ahimelech.  It  was  in  Ahimelech's  days 
that  the  slaughter  took  place  at  Nob,  from 
which  the  house  of  Ithamar  seems  never  to 
have  fully  recovered. 

Yer.  86.  — I  will  raise  me  up  a  faith- 
ful priest  This  prophecy  is  explained  in 
three  several  ways,  of  Samuel,  of  Zadok,  and 
of  Christ  St.  Augustine,  who  considers  the 
whole  passage  at  length  in  his  '  De  Civ.  Dei,' 
xviL  5,  argues  that  it  cannot  be  reasonably 
said  that  a  change  in  the  priesthood  foretold 
with  so  great  circumstance  was  fulfilled  in 
SamueL  But  while  we  grant  that  it  was  an 
essential  characteristic  of  Jewish  prophecy 
to  be  ever  larger  than  the  immediate  fulfil- 
ment, yet  its  primary  meaning  must  never 
be  slurred  over,  as  if  it  were  a  question 
of  slight  importance.  By  the  largeness  of 
its  terms,  the  grandeur  of  the  hopes  it 
inspired,  and  the  incompleteness  of  their 
immediate  accomplishment,  the  Jews  were 
taught  to  look  ever  onward,  and  so  became 
a  Messianic  people.  Granting  then  that 
Christ  and  his  Church  are  the  object  and 
end  of  this  and  of  all  prophecy,  the  question 
narrows  itself  to  this— In  whom  was  this 
prediction  of  a  faithful  priest  primarily 
fulfilled  ?  We  answer,  Not  m  Zadok,  but  in 
SamueL  Zadok  was  a  commonplace  per- 
sonage, of  whom  little  ur  nothing  is  said 
after  the  time  that  he  join«d  David  wit} 


CH.  H.  27— 36.J 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  Oif  HAMUEL. 


SI 


•  powerfiil  <x>ntmgeiit  (1  Chion.  xiL  28). 
Samuel  is  t^  4  one  petson  in  Jewish  history 
who  approaches  the  high  rank  of  Moses, 
Israel's  founder  (Jer.  xv.  1).  The  argument 
that  he  was  a  Leyite,  and  not  a  priest,  takes 
too  narrow  and  technical  a  view  of  the 
matter ;  for  the  essence  of  l^e  priesthood 
lies  not  in  the  offering  of  sacrifice,  hut  in 
mediation.  Sacrifice  is  but  an  accident, 
bejng  the  appointed  method  by  which  the 
priest  was  to  mediate  between  God  and  man. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  Samuel  often  did  dis- 
charge priestly  functions  (1  Sam.  vii.  9,  17  ; 
xiiL  8,  where  we  find  Saul  reproved  for  invad- 
ing Samuel's  office  ;  rvi  2),  and  it  is  a  point 
to  be  kept  in  mind  that  the  regular  priests 
disappear  from  Jewish  history  for  about 
fifty  years  after  the  slaughter  of  themselves, 
their  wives,  and  families  at  ShUoh ;  for  it  is 
not  until  Saul's  time  that  Ahiah,  the  great- 
grandson  of  Eli,  appears,  as  once  again  minis- 
tering at  the  altar  (1  Sam.  xiv.  3).  The 
calamity  that  overtook  the  nation  at  the  end 
of  Eli's  reign  was  so  terrible  that  all  ordinary 
ministrations  seem  to  have  been  in  abeyance. 
We  are  even  expressly  told  that  after  the 
recoveiy  of  the  ark  it  was  placed  in  the 
house  of  Abinadab  at  Kirjath-jearim  in 
Judsea,  and  that  for  twenty  years  his  son 
Eleazar,  though  d  Levite  only,  ministered 
there  before  it  by  no  regular  consecration, 
but  by  the  appointment  of  tbe  men  of  that 
town.  During  this  time,  though  Ahitub, 
Ahiah's  father,  was  probably  high  priest 
nominally,  yet  nothing  is  said  of  him,  and 
all  the  higher  functions  of  the  office  were 
exercised  by  SamueL  Instead  of  the  Urim 
and  Thummim,  he  as  prophet  was  the  direct 
representative  of  the  theocratic  king.  Sub- 
sequently this  great  duty  was  once  again 
discharged  by  Abiathar  as  priest,  and  then 
a  mighty  change  was  made,  and  the  pro- 
phets with  the  living  voice  of  inspiration 
took  the  place  of  the  priest  with  the  ephod. 
For  this  is  a  far  more  important  matter 
than  even  the  fact  that  Samuel  performed  the 
higher  functions  of  the  priesuiood.  With 
him  a  new  order  of  things  Degan.  Prophecy, 
from  being  spasmodic  and  irregular,  became 
an  established  institution,  and  took  its 
place  side  by  side  with  the  priesthood  in 
preparing  for  Christ's  advent,  and  in  forming 
the  Jewish  nation  to  be  the  evangelisers  of 
the  world.  The  prediction  of  this  organic 
change  followed  the  rule  of  all  prophecy  in 
taking  its  verbal  form  and  expression  from 
what  was  then  existent.  Just  as  the  gospel 
dispensation  is  always  described  under  figures 
taken  from  the  Jewish  Church  and  common- 
wealth, so  Samuel,  as  the  founder  of  the 
prophetic  schools,  and  of  the  new  order  of 
thineswhich  resulted  from  them,  is  described 
to  ISu  under  terms  taken  from  his  priestly 
•ffloa,    B*wua"fiithMpriast,"  and  much 


more,  just  as  our  Lord  was  a  "  prophet  lilie 
unto  Moses  "  (Dent  xviii  15),  and  a  "  King 
set  npon  the  holy  hill  of  Zion  "  (Ps.  ii  6), 
but  in  a  far  higher  sense  than  any  would 
have  supposed  at  the  time  when  these  pro- 
phecies were  spoken. . 

As  regards  the  specific  terms  of  the  pro- 
phecy, "the  buildmg  of  a  sure  house  (1 
Sam.  XXV.  28  ;  2  Sam.  vii.  11  ;  1  Kings  ii 
24,  xi  38 ;  Isa.  xxxii.  18)  is  a  metaphor 
expressive  of  assured  prosperity.  The  mass 
of  the  Israelites  dwelt  in  tenia  (2  Sam.  jo. 
11 ;  XX.  1,  &c  ;  1  Kings  xiL  16),  and  to 
have  a  fixed  and  permanent  dwelling  was  a 
mark  of  greatness.  From  such  passages  as 
1  Kings  iL  24 ;  xL  38,  it  is  plam  that  the 
idea  of  founding  a  family  is  not  contained 
in  the  expression.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
Samuel's  family  was  prosperons,  and  his 
grandson  Heman  had  high  rank  in  David's 
court  and  numerous  issue  (1  Chron.  xxv.  6). 
Probably  too  the  men  of  Bamah,  who  willi 
the  men  of  the  Levite  town  of  Gaba  madu 
up  a  total  of  621  persons  (Neh.  vii  80). 
represented  the  descendants  of  Samuel  at  thu 
return  from  Babylon.  Nevertheless,  the  con- 
trast is  between  the  migratory  life  in  tenti 
and  the  ease  and  securi^  of  a  solid  and  firm 
abode,  and  the  terms  of  the  promise  are  abund- 
antly fulfilled  in  Samuel's  personal  greatness. 

In  the  promise,  "  he  shall  walk  before  mine 
anointed  for  ever,"  there  is  the  same  out- 
look upon  the  office  of  king,  as  if  already  in 
existence,  which  we  observed  in  Hannah's 
hymn  (ch.  ii  10).  Apparently  the  expecta- 
tion that  Jehovah  was  about  to  anoint, 
i.  e.  consecrate,  for  them  some  one  to  re- 
present him  in  civil  matters  and  war,  as 
the  high  priest  represented  him  in  fhinga 
spiritual,  had  taken  possession  of  the  minds 
of  the  people.  It  had  been  clearly  promised 
them,  and  regulations  for  the  office  made 
(Deut.  xvii  14  —  20) ;  and  it  was  to  be 
Samuel's  office  to  fulfil  this  wish,  and  all  his 
life  through  he  held  a  post  of  high  dignity 
in  the  kingdom. 

But  the  promise  has  also  a  definite  mean- 
ing as  regards  the  prophets,  in  whom  Samuel 
lived  on.  For  St.  Augustine's  error  was  in 
taking  Samuel  simply  in  his  personal  rela- 
tions, whereas  he  is  the  representative  of  the 
whole  prophetic  order  (Acts  iii  24).  They 
were  his  successors  in  his  work,  and  con- 
tinued to  be  the  recognised  mediators  to 
declare  to  king  and  people  the  will  of  Jeho- 
vah, who  was  the  supreme  authority  in  both 
Church  and  state ;  and  in  polilical  matten 
they  were  the  appointed  check  npon  the 
otherwise  absolute  power  of  the  kings,  with 
whose  appointment  their  own  formal  organ- 
isation exactly  coincided.  From  Samuel'i 
time  prophet  and  king  walked  together  tiD 
the  waiting  period  began  which  imiMdimttly 
preceded  Om  Brnti^ity  of  Chiiat 


S8 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  n.  27— 3ft 


Ver.  36. — Piece  of  silver  is  lit.  a  small  silver 
coin  got  by  begging,  and  the  word  marks 
the  extreme  penunr  into  which  the  race  of 
Eli  felL  Gathered  round  the  sanctuary  at 
Shiloh,  they  were  the  chief  sufferers  by  its 
ruin,  and  we  have  noticed  how  for  a  time 
they  fall  entirely  out  of  view.  During  the 
miserable  perioa  of  Philistine  domination 
which  followed,  Samuel  became  to  the 
oppressed  nation  a  centre  of  hope,  and  by 
his  wise  goyeminent  he  first  reformed  the 


people  iuterually,  and  then  gave  them  free> 
dom  from  foreign  rule.  During  this  period 
we  may  be  sure  that  he  did  much  to  raise 
from  their  misery  the  descendants  of  Eli,  and 
finally  Ahiah,  Eli's  grandson,  ministers  as 
high  priest  before  SauL  Though  his  grand- 
son, Abiathar,  was  deposed  from  the  office 
by  Solomon,  there  is  no  reason  for  imagining 
that  the  family  ever  again  fell  into  distress, 
nor  do  the  terms  of  the  prophecy  warrant 
such  a  supposition. 


HOMILETICa 

■  Vers.  27 — 36. — Impending  retr^tion.  The  facts  in  this  section  ate — 1.  A 
Divine  message  declares  to  Eli  the  coming  doom  of  his  house.  2.  The  justice  of  the 
judgment  is  brought  home  to  him  by  a  reference  to  past  privileges  enjoyed  and  sins 
committed.  3.  A  painful  sign  of  the  certainty  of  the  whole  prediction  being 
ultimately  fulfilled  is  given  in  a  reference  to  the  sudden  death  of  his  two  sons,  in  due 
time  to  be  realised.  4.  Another  faithful  servant  of  God  is  to  be  raised  up  to  vindicate 
the  honour  which  has  been  despised.  The  patience  of  Ood  in  allowing  men  free  scope 
to  develope  what  is  in  them  has  its  limits.  Eli  and  his  sons,  though  difEering  in  kind 
and  degree  of  sin,  alike  are  amenable  to  a  law  which  must  be  maintained.  Although 
the  sons  were  in  the  ordinary  sense  the  most  guilty,  it  is  significant  that  the  weight 
of  the  doom  here  indicated  is  intended  to  fall  on  the  aged  parent,  thus  showing  to  all 
ages  the  solemn  responsibility  attached  to  public  conduct,  and  the  certainty  of 
terrible  chastisement  of  oflScial  transgressors,  even  though  they  be  not  cat  off  from 
the  covenant  mercies  that  cover  sin  and  save  the  soul. 

I.  Duty  NEaLBCTBD  and  teotjblb  bvaded  arb  sure  to  reassert  themselves 
Eli  got  rid  of  the  pressing  duty  of  punishing  his  sons  by  substituting  a  paternal 
remonstrance,  and  thus  for  the  time  evaded  the  pain  of  suppressing  the  urgency 
of  personal  affection  and  the  distress  of  a  family  exposure.  But  "  duty "  never 
dies  ;  and  the  trouble  it  entails,  always  passing  away  when  duty  is  done,  continues 
in  aggravated  form  when  duty  is  neglected.  No  safer  rule  in  life  than  to  do  duty 
when  it  is  due.  The  demands  of  justice  will  be  asserted  sooner  or  later,  and  they 
gather  in  force  the  more  they  are  shunned.  The  whole  visible  and  invisible  forces 
of  nature,  the  undeveloped  resources  that  lie  in  the  womb  of  the  future,  are  on  the 
side  of  right,  and  will  converge  some  day  on  its  maintenance.  The  first  trouble  in 
the  path  of  duty  is  the  least.  Embarrassments  are  bom  of  procrastination  ;  for  the 
rule  applicable  to  imperfect  knowledge  in  the  midst  of  difficult  circumstances  does 
not  apply  to  the  clear  decisions  of  conscience.  No  time  should  ever  be  lost  in  vindi- 
cating the  honour  of  Ood,  the  purity  of  the  sanctuary,  and  the  claims  of  national 
righteousness.  If  tee  do  not  execute  God's  will  because  of  the  personal  inconveni- 
■ince  and  pain  it  may  cause,  he  mill  execute  it  by  other  means,  and  nameless  griefs 
shall  follow  us.  History  shows  how  true  this  is  in  national,  Church,  domestic,  and 
private  life. 

II.  Clear  indications  of  coming  bbtbibution  are  sometimes  given,  and  thbt 
become  in  their  immediate  effects  part  of  the  retribution.  Many  are  the 
"  servants  "  of  God  that  come  visibly  or  invisibly  to  the  disobedient  with  intimations 
of  what  is  in  store  for  them.  The  "  man  of  God  "  who  came  to  Eli  is  representative 
of  the  forms  of  the  Divine  voice  which  comes  to  the  guilty  to  disturb  the  ease  they 
had  hoped  for  in  neglecting  onerous  duties.  To  the  fraudulent,  the  sensual,  the 
unrighteous  ruler,  the  unfaithful  parent  and  pastor,  conscience,  leading  events,  and 
converging  circumstances  tell  the  sad  tale  of  coming  woe.  The  lines  of  justice  are 
straight,  and  the  wicked  are  compelled  to  look  along  them  far  ahead.  Two  import- 
ant dements  enter  into  the  forebodings  of  coming  retribution.  1.  A  revived  power 
of  eomeience.  The  privileges  and  favours  conferred  on  the  house  of  Eli  are  brought 
home  to  the  dormant  conscience  in  contrast  with  his  personal  and  ofBcial  conduct. 
So  likewise,  by  the  inUnotion  of  the  laws  of  though^  or  by  converging  of  painful 


OH.  n.  27—86.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  M 

events,  or  by  some  strong  passage  of  Scripture,  or  by  a  faithful  friend,  or  by 
the  silent,  reflected  light  of  some  holy  Christian  life,  the  privileges  and  favouis  of 
bygone  jrears  are  flashed  before  the  spirit,  to  the  sudden  terror  and  quickened  action 
of  conscience.  Past  mercies  cannot  be  thought  of  in  isolation  ;  by  a  well-known 
mental  law  they  raise  up  the  ghosts  of  former  sins  committed  in  the  face  of  mercies. 
As  the  aged  Eli  saw  the  truth  of  the  words  of  the  "  man  of  God,"  so  do  others  see 
their  former  selves,  and  feel  their  inward  condemnation.  2.  A  conviction  of  the 
fixed  character  of  coming  events.  "  Behold,  the  days  come."  The  guilty  man  sees 
the  dismal  train  of  events,  and  knows,  on  highest  authority,  that  the  decree  is  fixed. 
T  .  the  prophetic  eye  the  future  is  as  the  present ;  events  that  are  to  be  are  recorded 
on  the  spirit  as  done,  with  all  their  natural  effects  realised  by  the  discerning  mind. 
Nature,  with  her  usual  quiet  certainty,  was  at  work  elaborating  events  out  of  the  sins 
perpetrated  by  father  and  sons ;  and  therefore  to  the  Hebrew  mind  that  recognises 
nature  only  as  the  dumb  instrument  of  the  Eternal,  the  coming  disasters  are  recog- 
nised properly  as  the  fixed  elements  of  the  deserved  retribution.  There  is  the  same 
conviction  in  others  who  have  sinned.  The  human  mind,  in  spite  of  its, sins,  answers 
(0  the  course  of  nature.  It  mirrors  in  its  conviction  of  certain  punishment  the  regu- 
larity and  fixity  with  which  the  laws  of  nature  are  at  work.  In  the  instance  of 
many  a  man,  powers  have  been  set  at  work  by  his  sins  in  virtue  of  the  operation  of 
which  family  reputation  will  fade  and  perish ;  premature  decay  will  fall  to  the  lot 
of  descendants ;  sorrow  and  trouble  will  cast  shadows  over  their  pathway ;  and  life 
generally  will  be  marred.  Yes ;  and  he  knows  it  now.  The  committal  of  sin  is  as 
the  unloosing  of  forces  of  ill  which  enter  of  necessity  into  all  the  ramifications  of 
subsequent  life.  The  sorrow  and  pain  consequent  on  this  certain  knowledge  is  no 
slight  element  in  the  retribution  experienced, 

III.  Reteibdtion  apfkcts  the  livinq  through  the  unborn,  and  the  unborn 
THROUGH  THE  LIVING.  Sin  injures  and  degrades  the  sinner,  but  does  not  end  in  him- 
self. Every  being  is  related  to  every  other  being.  Interactions  are  as  real  and 
constant  in  the  moral  sphere  as  in  the  sphere  of  physics.  An  act  of  sin  is  an  act  of 
will,  and  therefore  the  production  of  a  wave  of  influence  which  moves  on  and 
modifies  the  totality  of  life.  Wisely  and  beautifully,  then,  does  the  Bible  teach 
truth  in  harmony  with  the  usual  order  of  things  when  it  represents  Eli's  sin  as  cutting 
ofE  the  arm  (strength)  of  his  father's  house,  shortening  the  days  of  his  children, 
lowering  their  position  in  the  world,  and  causing  them  to  bear  the  sorrow  of  seeing 
a  culmination  of  their  ancestor's  sin  in  the  "  presence  of  an  enemy  "  to  mar  the 
wealth  of  blessing  properly  enjoyed  by  Israel.  1.  A  general  law  is  exemplified  in 
Eli's  punishment.  The  Bible  teaches  that  the  sins  of  the  fathers  biing  woe  on 
children.  The  course  of  nature  establishes  the  fact.  No  man  can  give  out  from 
himself  any  influence  above  what  his  real  constitution  and  character  are  fitted  to  pro- 
duce. A  defective  moral  courage  works  detrimentally  on  descendants  by  example 
as  truly  as  do  imperfect  manners.  Social  laws  insure  that  a  lost  reputation  modi- 
fies the  relative  position  of  offspring.  The  degenerate  habits  of  a  Hophni  and  a 
Phinehas  cannot  but  lessen  the  years  and  enfeeble  the  moral  and  physical  vigour  of 
several  generations.  God's  laws  are  uniform  in  all  ages  and  climes.  The  experi- 
ence of  Eli's  family  is  repeated  in  the  home  of  the  drunkard,  the  sensual,  the  educa- 
tionally neglected,  the  morally  weak,  and  in  the  effects  of  wicked  statesmanship. 
But  the  law  has  two  aspects.  The  living  affect  the  unborn,  but  also  the  known 
future  condition  of  the  unborn  affects  the  condition  of  the  living.  Wisely  men  are 
constituted  so  as  to  be  deeply  affected  by  what  may  happen  to  their  future  reputa- 
tion and  their  descendants.  That  the  good  fame  of  his  house  should  perish ;  that 
his  descendants  should  be  reduced  in  social  position,  and  variously  injured  in  con- 
sequence of  the  guilt  of  himself  and  sons,  was  a  bitter  element  in  Eli's  punishment. 
Nor  is  this  a  rare  case,  for  as  a  rule  men  are  more  influenced  by  what  comes  to  their 
children  than  by  what  personal  pain  they  themselves  suffer.  In  his  descendants 
man  sees  himself  repeated  in  multiplied  form.  2.  I%e  general  law  is  subject  to 
limitatioiu.  The  evil  that  comes  to  posterity  through  sin  of  ancestors  doen  not  shut 
out  from  the  mercy  that  Haves  the  soul.  Disgrace,  loss  of  health,  early  death, 
poverty  may  be  part  of  the  curse  of  a  father's  sin ;  but  through  the  mercy  of  God 
in  Christ  these  sufferers  may  find  renewal  o:f  spirit,  pardon,  and  eternal  life.    "  By 


aO  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  ii.  27—36 

one  man's  disobedience  "  wn  all  have  suflEered  physically  and  spiritually ;  but  by 
one  Redeemer  we  may  find  power  to  become  the  true  children  of  God.  It  is  true 
Eli's  descendants,  if  renewed,  would  not  become  so  good  and  physically  perfect  men 
as  though  the  ancestors  had  not  sinned  ;  and  we  on  earth,  though  saved  in  C!hrist,.can- 
Bot  be  so  physically  perfect  as  though  the  curse  had  never  fallen  on  us ;  yet  the 
spirit  will  at  length  be  set  free  from  the  bondage  of  corruption,  and  be  perfect 
before  God.  3.  This  law  is  a  great  and  beneficent  power  in  life.  Those  who  rail 
against  these  Biblical  announcements  of  retribution,  because  they  afiect  descendants, 
are  profoundly  ignorant  or  perverse.  The  Bible  tells  only  what  is  in  nature,  with 
the  additional  information  that  God  vindicates  his  holiness  by  what  occurs  in  nature. 
Any  objection  to  the  Biblical  doctrine  is  therefore,  this  fact  being  admitted,  the 
result  of  a  perverse  spirits  Human  experience  testifies  how  beneficially  the  law  of 
retribution  works  in  ordinary  affairs.  No  arithmetic  can  calculate  the  amount  of 
woe  escaped  by  the  restraining  action  of  a  knowledge  of  this  law  on  human  tend- 
encies. On  the  other  hand,  the  reverse  side  of  the  law — ^the  reward  of  goodness  in 
the  happiness  of  a  posterity — is  one  of  the  most  healtltful  stimulants  and  guides  of 
human  exertion.  It  is  only  the  morally-indisposed  that  do  not  like  law.  Did  we 
but  know  the  whole  intricate  relationships  of  a  moral  universe  stretching  through  all 
time,  even  the  severest  laws  would  then  be  seen  to  be  an  expression  of  broadest 
oenevolence. 

IV.  Betbibution  on  thb  instruments  op  accomplishing  an  ultimate  pukposk  is 
COMPATIBLB  WITH  THE  REALISATION  OP  THAT  PURPOSE.  As  factors  in  the  develop- 
ment of  the  Jewish  economy,  both  Eli  and  his  sons  were  instruments'  in  preparing 
the  way  for  the  coming  Messiah  and  the  final  supremacy  of  his  kingdom.  The 
house  of  Ithamar  inherited,  in  common  with  others,  the  promise  made  to  the  Aaronic 
house.  As  long  as  there  was  need  for  an  earthly  high  priest  to  shadow  forth  the 
enduring  high  priesthood  of  Christ,  the  promise  (ver.  30)  to  Aaron  would  hold  good. 
But  the  completion  of  that  purpose  was  not  frustrated  by  the  disgrace  and  displace- 
ment of  the  section  of  the  house  represented  by  Eli  in  consequence  of  unfaithfulness. 
God  has,  in  his  foreknowledge  of  what  will  be  required,  as  also  in  his  resources  to 
provide  for  the  erratic  action  of  human  wills  according  to  that  foreknowledge, 
legions  awaiting  his  creative  call  to  come  forth  and  prepare  the  way  for  the  Christ. 
He  who  could  "  of  these  stones  raise  up  children  to  Abraham  "  was  at  no  loss  to  dis- 
pense with  the  leadership  in  his  ancient  Church  of  a  degenerate  family.  If  the  old 
injured  instruments  are  judicially  confined  to  lower  forms  of  service,  as  in  the  case 
of  Ahiah,  grandson  of  Phinehas  (ch.  xiv.  3),  a  holy  Samuel  is  raised  up  for  the  emerg- 
ency till  a  Zadok  assumes  the  orderly  high  priestly  functions ;  thus  teaching  us 
that  in  spite  of  all  sins  and  their  punishment  the  kingdom  of  God  must  advance. 
Men  may  rise  and  fall,  dark  seasons  of  priestly  corruption  may  afBict  the  Church, 
apostates  may  spread  consternation ;  but,  foreseeing  all,  the  Eternal  has  in  reserve, 
and  is  quietly  sending  forth,  men  like  Samuel  and  David  and  Paul  and  Luther,  men 
who  shall  not  cease  to  be  employed  in  the  high  service  of  the  "  Anointed  "  even  when 
they  cease  to  speak  by  words. 

General  suggestions: — 1.  It  is  worth  considering  how  much  is  lost  to  the  world  of 
mental  and  physical  power  by  the  indwelling  of  sin,  and  what  a  valuable  contribu- 
tion to  the  sum  total  of  a  nation's  welfare  is  a  righteous  life,  by  conserving  and  im- 
proving and  making  the  most  of  all  the  powers  of  body  and  mind.  2.  The  essential 
folly  of  all  sin  is  capable  of  being  illustrated  in  what  it  entails,  fails  to  avoid,  and 
also  takes  away  from  the  elements  of  individual  and  public  well-being.  3.  There  is 
a  philosophical  argument  in  support  of  the  claims  of  Christianity  in  the  fact  that,  as 
it  seeks,  and  is  proved  by  numerous  facts  to  have  the  power  of  perfecting,  the  moral 
life,  it  thereby  contains  the  solution  of  all  our  physical  and  economical  difiiculties, 
and  needs  only  to  become  actual  in  individual  life'  to  constitute  a  real  inilleniiium. 
4.  There  is  ample  ground  in  history  for  confidencn  in  the  vindication  of  right,  even 
though  rulers  may  for  a  season  avoid  disaster.  6.  In  the  lives  of  moat  men  there 
must  be  seasons  when  they  are  visited  by  a  messenger  from  God ;  and  it  is  a  ques- 
tion whether,  if  that  messenger  be  disregarded,  another  may  not  come  bringing 
tidings  of  more  terrible  things.  6.  In  any  case,  where  by  former  sins  physical  and 
(ocial  evils  have  come  on  others,  it  is  an  encouragement  to  know  that  we  may  labour 


oa.  n.  17— M.]  THB  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUBL.  61 

to  bring  those  so  Buffering  to  the  great  Physician  for  spiritual  healing,  and  that  the 
spiritual  health  will  in  some  measure  counteract  the  inherited  evils.  7.  The  com- 
forting aspect  of  retribution  lies  in  that  for  every  one  who  suffers  from  it,  possibly 
thousands  and  millions  indirectly  gain  permanent  good  in  the  influence  it  exerts  on 
existing  evils  and  on  otherwise  fonhcoming  evils ;  and  also  that  the  same  purpose 
which  thus  works  out  deserved  judgment  insures  the  fulfilment  of  all  the  promises. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  27 — 36.  (Shiloh.) — A  message  of  approaching  judgment  1.  This  message 
came  from  God,  who  observed,  as  he  ever  does,  the  sins  of  his  people,  and  especially 
his  ministers,  with  much  displeasure,  and  after  long  forbearance  resolved  to  punish 
them  (Amos  iii.  2 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  17).  2.  It  came  through  a  man  whose  name  has  not  been 
recorded,  and^who  was  probably  unknown  to  him  to  whom  he  was  sent.  When  God 
sends  a  message  it  matters  little  by  whom  it  is  brought.  He  often  makes  his  most  im- 
portant communications  in  a  way  the  world  does  not  expect,  and  by  men  who  are 
unknown  to  fame.  The  authority  of  the  Lord  invests  his  messengers  with  dignity 
and  power.  And  their  beat  credentials  are  that  they  "  commend  themselves  to  the 
conscience  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  2).  3,  It  came  through  a  "  man  of  God,"  a  seer,  a  prophet, 
and  not  directly  from  God  to  Eli,  the  high  priest.  He  chooses  for  special  service 
men  who  live  near  to  him,  and  are  in  sympathy  with  his  purposes,  in  preference  to 
those  who  occupy  ofBcial  positions,  but  are  possessed  of  little  personal  worth.  For 
a  long  season  no  prophet  had  spoken  (Judges  iv.  4  ;  vi.  8 ;  xiiL  6)  ;  and  when  the 
silence  of  heaven  is  suddenly  broken,  it  is  an  intimation  that  great  changes  are 
impending.  4.  It  came  some  time  before  the  events  which  it  announced  actually 
transpired.  "  The  Lord  is  slow  to  anger  "  (Nahum  i.  3),  and  executes  judgment 
only  after  repeated  warnings.  Predictions  which  are  absolute  in  form  must  often  be 
understood  as  in  their  fulfilment  conditioned  by  the  moral  state  of  those  whom  they 
concern  (Jer.  xviii.  7  ;  Jonah  iii.  4,  9,  10).  The  purpose  for  which  this  message  was 
sent  was  to  lead  to  repentance,  and  it  was  not  until  all  hope  of  it  had  disappeared 
that  the  blow  fell.     In  substance  the  message  contains — 

L  A  EEMINDEBOF  SPECIAL  PBIVILEGE8  bestowed  by  the  favour  of  God,  and  shown— 
1.  By  the  revelation  of  himsdf  to  those  who  were  in  a  condition  of  abject  servitude 
(ver.  27).  2.  By  his  selection  of  some,  in  preference  to  others,  for  exalted  and 
honourable  service  (ver.  28).  3.  By  his  liberal  provision  for  them  out  of  the  offer- 
ings made  by  the  people  to  himself.  Religious  privileges  always  involve  respons- 
ibilities, and  should  be  faithfully  used  out  of  gratitude  for  their  bestowment. 

II.  A  CHABQB  OF  QBOSS  UNFAITHFULNESS  (ver.  29).  The  purpose  for  which  the 
priests  were  endowed  with  these  privileges  was  not  the  promotion  of  their  own 
honour  and  interest,  but  the  honour  of  God  and  the  welfare  of  his  people.  But 
they  acted  in  opposition  to  that  purpose.  1.  By  irreverence  and  self-will  in  his 
service.  _  "  Wherefore  do  ye  trample  under  foot  my  sacrifice  ?  "  2.  By  disobedience 
to  his  will.  "  Which  I  have  commanded."  3.  By  pleasing  others  in  preference  to 
him.  "And  honourest  thy  sons  above  me."  Eli's  toleration  of  the  conduct  of  his 
sons,  from  regard  to  their  interest  and  his  own  ease,  involved  him  in  their  guilt.  4. 
By  sdf-enrichmeMt  out  of  the  religious  offerings  of  the  people.  "  The  idol  which 
man  in  sin  sets  up  in  the  place  of  God  can  be  none  other  than  himself.  He  makes 
self  and  self-satisfaction  the  highest  aim  of  life.  To  self  his  efforts  ultimately 
tend,'  however  the  modes  and  directions  of  sin  may  vary.  The  innermost  essence 
of  sin,  the  ruling  and  penetrating  principle,  in  all  its  forms,  is  selfishness  "  (Miiller, 
'  Christian  Doctrine  of  Sin  * ).  When  men  use  the  gifts  of  God  for  selfish  ends  they 
render  themselves  liable  to  be  deprived  of  those  g^,  and  to  be  punished  for  their 
misuse. 

III.  A  8TATBHBNT  OF  AN  EQUITABLE  PEINCIPLE,  according  to  which  God  acts  in  hii 
procedure  with  men  (ver.  30).  They  hav«  been  apt  to  suppose  that  privilegea 
bestowed  upon  themselves  or  inherited  from  their  ancestors  were  absolutely  their 
»wii,  and  would  be  certainly  continuH.    But  it  is  far  otherwise;  for — 1.  The 


6»  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [tin.  ii.  27— S*. 

fulfilment  of  the  promises  of  God  and  the  continuance  of  religions  privilege! 
depend  on  the  ethical  relation  in  which  men  stand  toward  him.  His  covenant  with 
Levi  was  "  for  the  fear  with  which  he  feared  me "  (Mai.  ii.  6,  7) ;  but  when  hi« 
descendants  lost  that  fear  they  "  corrupted  the  covenant,"  and  ceased  to  have  any 
claim  upon  its  promised  blessings.  It  was  the  same  with  the  Jews  who  in  after 
ages  vainly  boasted  that  they  were  "  the  children  of  Abraham."  In  the  sight  of  the 
Holy  One  righteousness  is  everything,  hereditary  descent  nothing,  except  in  bo 
far  as  it  is  promotive  of  righteousness.  2.  Faithful  service  it  rewarded.  Honoue 
FOB  HONOUR.  "Them  that  honour  me  I  will  honour."  Consider — (1)  The  ground: 
not  merely  his  relationship  as  moral  Governor,  but  his  beneficence  in  bestowing  the 
gifts  of  nature,  providence,  and  grace.  (2)  The  method:  in  thought,  word,  and 
deed.  (3)  The  reward:  his  approbiition,  continued  service,  extended  usefulness, 
&c.  3.  Unfaithful  conduct  is  punished.  "  Promises  and  threatenings  are  made  to 
individuals  "because  they  are  in  a  particular  state  of  character ;  but  they  belong  to  all 
who  are  in  that  state,  for  '  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons '  "  (Robertson).  "  He  will 
give  to  every  man  according  to  his  works." 

IV.  A  PBOCLAMATION  OF  SEVERE  RETKIBDTIOK  upon  the  house  of  Eli  (vers.  31 — 34). 
Consisting  of — 1.  The  deprivation  of  strength,  which  had  been  abused.  Their  power 
would  be  broken  (Zech.  xi.  17).  2.  The  shortening  of  life,  the  prolong^g  of 
which  in  the  case  of  Eli  had  been  an  occasion  of  evil  rather  than  of  good.  "  There 
shall  not  be  an  old  man  in  thine  bouse  for  ever ; "  the  result  of  weakness ;  repeated 
in  ver.  32.  3.  The  loss  of  jrrocperity ;  the  temporal  benefits  that  would  otherwise 
have  been  received.  "Thou  shnlt  aee  distress  of  dwelling  in  all  that  brings  pros- 
perity to  Israel "  (Ed.  of  Erdmann).  4.  The  infliction  of  misery  on  those  who 
continue,  for  a  while,  to  minister  at  the  altar,  and  of  violent  death  (ver.  33 ;  xxii. 
18).  5.  Although  these  things  would  not  take  place  at  once,  their  commencement,  as 
a  sign  of  what  would  follow,  would  be  witnessed  by  Eli  himself  in  the  sudden  death 
of  the  two  chief  offenders  "  in  one  day  "  (ch.  iv.  11).  If  anything  could  rouse  the 
house  of  Eli  to  "  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,"  surely  such  a  fearful  message  as  this 
was  adapted  to  do  so.  Fear  of  coming  wrath,  although  it  never  makes  men  truly 
religious,  may,  and  often  does,  arouse  and  restrain  them,  and  bring  them  under  the 
influence  of  other  and  higher  motives.     The  closing  sentences  contain — 

V.  A  PREDICTION  OF  A  FAITHFUL  PRIESTHOOD  in  the  place  of  that  which  had  proved 
faithless  (vers.  35, 36).  "  I  will  raise  up  a  faithful  priest,"  &c.,  t.  e.  a  line  of  faithful 
men  to  accomplish  the  work  for  which  the  priesthood  has  been  appointed,  and  to 
enjoy  the  privileges  which  the  house  of  Eli  has  forfeited.  In  contrast  with  that 
house,  it  will  do  my  will,  and  I  will  cause  it  to  endure ;  and  it  will  continue  to  live  in 
intimate  fellowship  and  co-operation  with  the  anointed  kings  of  Israel.  It  will  also 
be  BO  exalted,  that  the  surviving  members  of  the  fallen  house  will  be  entirely 
dependent  upon  it  for  a  "  piece  of  bread."  The  prediction  was  first  of  all  fulfilled 
in  Samuel,  who  by  express  commission  from  God  acted  habitually  as  a  priest ;  and 
afterwards  in  Zadok,  in  whom  the  line  of  Eleazar  was  restored ;  but  the  true  un- 
derlying idea  of  a  priest,  like  that  of  a  king,  has  its  full  realisation  in  Jesus  Christ 
alone.  The  gloomiest  of  prophetic  messages  generally  conclude  with  words  of 
promise  and  hope. — D. 

Ver.  30. — Honotir  and  dishanowr.    Concerning  the  moral  attitude  assumed  by 

men  toward  God,  which  is  here  described,  observe — 

I.  That  it  is  plainly  op  the  utmost  import anck.  "  Me."  Our  relation  to  others 
is  a  light  thing  compared  with  what  it  is  to  him.  This  is  everjrthing ;  and  know- 
ledge, power,  riches,  reputation,  &c.  nothing.  1.  Because  of  his  nature  ("There 
is  none  holy  as  the  Lord  "),  his  government  (moral,  supreme,  universal),  and  his 
claims.  2.  It  is  the  effectual  teat  of  our  character,  what  we  are  really  and  essentially. 
3.  It  is  the  principal  means  of  forming  and  strengthening  it.  What  are  we  in  hit 
sight?     What  does  he  think  otmsf 

II.  That  it  is  necessarily  one  or  other  of  two  kinds.    "  Honour  me."   _"  Do 
spise  me."    1.  Honour ;  by  reverence  (the  fundamental  principle  of  the  religioui; 
life),  trust,  prayer,  obedience,  fidelity,  living  to  his  glory.     2.  Despise;  by  f orget- 
(ulnesss,  unbelief,  self-will,  pride,  selfishness,  disobedience,  hih  of  every  kind.     9< 


OT.  n.  r— S«.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  a 

There  is  710  otJier  aUematwe.    "  For  me  or  against  me  "  (Exod.  xxzii.  26 ;  Jer.  viiL 
1 ;  Matt.  vi.  24  ;  vii.  13,  14;  zii.  30). 

III.  That  it  is  alwatb  followed  by  cobbesponding  consequences.  "I  will 
honour."  "Shall  be  lightly  esteemed."  1.  Eonour;  by  his  friendship,  appoint- 
ment tu  honourable  service,  giving  success  therein,  open  acknowledgment  before 
men  hero  and  hereafter.  "Enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  Lord.'  2.  Idghtly 
etteemed;  by  himself,  men,  angels,  despised  even  by  themselves,  and  cast  away 
among  the  vile.  "  He  that  saveth  his  life  shall  lose  it."  3.  There  is  a  strict  corre- 
tpondenee  between  character  and  consequences,  both  generally  and  particularly,  in 
kind  and  measure.  And  the  joy  and  misery  of  the  future  will  be  the  consummation 
and  the  ripened  fruit  of  what  now  exists  (Gal.  vi.  7). 

IV.  That  its  connection  with  its  consequences  is  absolutely  cbbtain.  Men 
often  think  otherwise.  But  "  be  not  deceived."  Consider — 1.  T!\ie  natural  constitu- 
tion and  tendencies  of  things,  as  ordained  by  him  who  is  "  above  all,  and  in  all,  and 
through  alL"  2.  The  recorded  and  observed  facts  of  life.  3.  The  express  de- 
darations  of  him  "  who  cannot  lie."  "  /  u/ill  honour. "  "  Thej/  shcUl  be  lightly 
esteemed." — D. 

Ver.  30. — Office  nothing  without  (Jiaraeter.  The  worthlessness  of  rank  or  heredi- 
tary position  without  corresponding  wisdom  or  virtue  is  a  commonplace  of  moral 
reflection.  But  it  is  startling  to  find  how  strongly  it  is  affirmed  in  Holy  Writ  of 
those  who  hold  high  office  in  the  house  of  God.  The  priesthood  in  Israel  was 
hereditary,  though  in  i)oint  of  fact  the  regularity  of  the  succession  was  often 
broken ;  but  such  hereditary  office  was  never  meant  to  protect  unworthy  men  like 
the  sons  of  Eli.  Their  position  was  forfeited  by  their  misconduct,  and  their  priestly 
functions  were  transferred  to  other  hands.  The  principle  is  for  all  time,  and  for 
general  application.  Does  one  reach  and  occupy  a  high  station  in  the  Church  ?  No 
matter  what  his  line  of  "  holy  orders  "  may  be,  or  who  laid  hands  of  ordination  on 
his  head,  or  what  functions  he  is  held  competent  to  perform,  he  must  be  judged  by 
this  test— Does  he  honour  God  in  his  office,  or  honour  and  serve  himself  ?  Does  he  so 
live  and  act  as  to  commend  and  glorify  Christ  ?  And  the  same  test  must  be  applied 
to  the  man  professing  himself  a  Christian  who  occupies  a  throne  on  the  earth,  or  who 
holds  high  dignity  in  the  state,  or  who  has  power  as  a  writer  or  an  orator  over  the 
minds  of  men,  or  who  as  a  capitalist  has  great  means  and  opportunities  of  usefulness. 
Does  he  in  his  station  glorify  God  ?  If  not,  his  rank,  or  office,  or  grand  position 
avails  him  nothing. 

I.  The  pious  Divinely  honoubed.  To  honour  God;  think  what  this  implies. 
To  know  him  truly,  to  reverence  and  love  him.  In  vain  any  verbal  or  formal 
homage  without  the  honour  rendered  by  the  heart  (see  Matt.  xv.  8).  He  whose 
heart  cleaves  to  God  will  show  it  in  his  daily  conduct.  He  will  be  careful  to  consult 
God's  word  for  direction,  and  observe  his  statutes.  He  will  openly  respect  God's 
ordinances,  and  give  cheerfully  for  their  maintenance,  and  for  the  furtherance  of 
righteous  and  charitable  objects.  He  will  honour  the  Lord  with  his  substance,  and 
with  the  first-fruits  of  all  his  increase.  He  will  worship  God  with  his  family, 
and  teach  his  children  "the  fear  of  the  Lord."  In  his  place  or  station  he  will  make 
it  his  aim,  and  hold  it  his  chief  end,  to  glorify  God.  And,  without  any  vaunting  or 
ostentation,  he  will  show  his  colours — avow  his  faith  and  hope  openly.  The  boy- 
king,  Edward  VI.,  showed  his  colours  when  he  sat — alas  1  for  how  short  a  time — on 
the  English  throne.  So  did  Sir  Matthew  Hale  on  the  bench,  and  Robert  Boyle  in  the 
Royal  Society,  and  William  Wilberforce  in  the  highest  circles  of  political  life.  So  did 
Dr.  Arnold  among  the  boys  at  Rugby,  and  Dr.  Abercrorabie  and  Sir  Jamete  Simpson 
among  their  patients  in  Edinburgh ;  Samuel  Budgett  in  his  counting-house  at  Bristol, 
and  General  Havelock  among  his  troops  in  India.  These  men  were  not  in  what  are 
called  religious  offices ;  but,  in  such  offices  or  positions  as  Providence  assigned  to 
them,  they  bore  themselves  as  religious,  God-fearing  men.  And  othera  there  are  in 
places  and  callings  more  obscure  who  are  quite  as  worthy  of  esteem  ;  those  who,  in 
houses  of  business  among  scoffing  companions,  in  servants'  halls,  in  workshops,  in 
barrack-rooms,  in  ships'  forecastles,  meekly  but  firmly  honour  the  Lord,  and  ennoble 
a  lowly  calling  by  fidelity  to  conscience  and  to  God.     The  Lord  sees  and  remembers 


•4  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [OH.  n.  27—86. 

■11  who  honour  him.  Nay,  he  honours  them  ;  but  after  his  own  manner,  not  after 
the  fashion  of  the  world.  He  honours  faithful  servants  in  this  world  by  giving  them 
more  work  to  do.  He  honours  true  witnesses  by  extending  the  range  for  their  testi- 
mony. Sometimes  he  honours  those  with  whom  he  is  well  pleased  by  appointing 
them  to  sufEer  for  his  cause.  St.  Paul  evidently  deemed  this  a  high  honour.  Witness 
his  words  to  the  Philippians :  "  Unto  you  it  is  given  in  the  behalf  of  Christ,  not 
only  to  believe  in  his  name,  but  also  to  suffer  for  his  sake."  Some  he  calls  away  in 
early  years  out  of  the  world,  but  they  leave  behind  a  fragrant  honoured  name,  and 
they  go  to  "  glory,  honour,  and  immortality  "  in  a  better  land.  It  is  right  to  value  the 
good  opinion  of  our  fellow-men ;  but  there  are  always  drawbacks  and  dangers  in 
connection  with  honour  which  comes  from  man.  In  seeking  it  one  is  tempted  to 
tarnish  his  simplicity  of  character,  and  weaken  his  self-respect.  There  is  a  risk  of 
envying  more  successful,  or  exulting  over  less  successful  competitors  for  distinction. 
But  it  heed  never  be  so  in  seeking  "the  honour  which  comes  from  God  only."  We 
seek  it  best  not  when  we  push  ourselves  forward,  but  when  we  deny  ourselves, 
honour  him,  and  by  love  serve  the  brethren.  And  then  in  our  utmost  success  we 
have  no  ground  of  self -glorying,  for  all  is  of  grace.  Nor  is  there  room  for  grudging 
or  envying.  With  the  Lord  there  is  grace  enough  to  help  all  who  would  serve  him, 
and  glory  enough  to  reward  all  who  serve  him  faithfully. 

II.  The  impious  despised.  "  And  they  that  despise  me  shall  be  lightly  esteemed." 
Despise  the  Lord  God  Almighty  I  Amazing  insolence  of  the  human  heart,  yet  not 
infrequent.  The  sons  of  Eli  openly  slighted  Jehovah  by  their  rapacity  in  the  priest's 
office,  and  their  profaning  the  precincts  of  his  house  with  their  debauchery.  Long 
after  this,  priests  of  Judah  are  reproved  by  the  prophet  Malachi  for  despising  the 
name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  making  his  table  contemptible  by  laying  on  it  polluted 
bread,  and  dishonouring  his  altar  by  ofEering  maimed  animals  in  sacrifice.  The 
warning  then,  in  the  first  instance,  is  to  those  who  bear  themselves  profanely  or 
carelessly  in  sacred  offices,  and  in  familiar  contact  with  religious  service.  But  the 
sin  is  one  which  soon  spreads  among  the  people  Ezekiel  charged  the  people  of 
Jerusalem  with  having  "  despised  God's  holy  things,  and  profaned  his  sabbaths  " 
(ch.  xxii.  8).  This  sin  is  a  common  thing  in  Christendom,  Men  do  not  in  terms 
deny  God's  existence,  but  make  light  of  him ;  never  read  his  word  with  any  serious- 
ness ;  never  pray  unless  they  are  ill  or  afraid ;  count  Church  service  and  instruction 
a  weariness.  The  base  gods  of  the  heathen  receive  more  respect  and  consideration 
from  their  votaries.  Allah  has  far  more  reverence  from  the  Moslem  than  the  great 
God  of  heaven  and  earth  obtains  from  multitudes  who  pass  as  Christians.  They  live 
as  if  he  had  no  right  to  command  them,  and  no  power  to  judge  them.  They  lift 
their  own  will  and  pleasure  to  the  throne,  and  despise  the  Lord  of  hosts.  With  what 
result?  They  shall  be  lightly  esteemed.  Even  in  this  world,  and  this  life,  the 
ungodly  miss  the  best  distinctions.  They  are  not  the  men  who  gather  about  them 
the  highest  confidence  or  most  lasting  influence  and  esteem.  After  they  leave 
the  world,  a  few  are  remembered  who  had  rare  force  of  character  or  an  unusually 
eventful  career ;  but  how  the  rest  are  forgotten !  A  few  natural  tears  from  their 
nearest  kindred,  a  few  inquiries  among  friends  about  the  amount  and  disposal  of 
their  property,  a  decorous  silence  about  themselves  on  the  principle  that  nothing 
but  what  is  good  should  be  said  of  the  dead,  and  so  their  memory  perishes.  But 
all  is  not  over.  A  terrible  hereafter  awaits  the  despisers  of  the  Lord.  "As  a 
dream  when  one  awaketh  ;  so,  0  Lord,  when  thou  awakest,  thou  shalt  despise  their 
image."  The  clear  alternative  in  this  text  is  one  that  cannot  be  evaded.  One  may 
try  to  assume  a  negative  attitude,  and  allege  that  he  remains  in  a  state  of  suspense, 
and  does  not  find  the  recognition  of  a  Divine  Being  to  be  an  imperative  necessity; 
but  this  is  practically  to  despise  the  Lord—  making  light  of  his  word,  and  pronouncing 
his  very  existence  to  be  a  matter  of  doubtful  truth  and  of  secondary  importance. 
Reject  not  wisdom's  counsel ;  despise  not  her  reproof.  "  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  the 
voice  of  the  Lord,  harden  not  your  hearts." — F. 

Ver.  35. — A  faithful  priest.  In  the  strictest  sense  Christ  alone  is  now  a  Priest 
In  himself  assuming  the  office,  he  has  for  ever  abolished  it  in  others.  Hence  none 
»re  called  priests  in  the  New  Testament,  except  in  the  modified  sense  in  which  all 


CH.  in.  1—21.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL, 


who  beli«ve  in  him  are  so  called  (1  Pet.  ii.  9  ;  Rev.  1  6).  But  taking  the  expression 
as  eqnivalent  to  "  a  faithful  ministry,"  consisting  of  men  appointed  by  Christ  to  a 
special  service  for  him  (Mai.  ii.  6,  7  ;  Acts  vi.  4 ;  Ephes.  iv.  11  j  Col.  i.  7 ;  2  Tim. 
i£  2),  and  faithfully  fulfilling  the  purpose  of  their  appointment,  it  leads  us  to 
notice — 

I.  WHBNCat  IT  IS  DERIVED.  "I  will  raise  up."  1.  He  alone  can  do  it.  From 
him  come  natural  gifts  and,  still  more,  spiritual  graces,  eminent  faith  and  patience, 
humility,  courage,  meekness,  tender  compassion  "  on  the  ignorant  and  on  them  that 
are  out  of  the  way,"  &c.  2.  He  nas  promised  and  made  provision  for  it  (Jer.  iii. 
16).  "I  will  build  him  a  sure  (enduring)  house."  "The  death  of  Christ  hath  a 
great  influence  unto  this  gift  of  the  ministry.  It  is  a  branch  that  grew  out  of  the 
grave  of  Christ ;  let  it  be  esteemed  as  lightly  as  men  please,  had  not  Christ  died  for  it 
we  had  not  had  a  ministry  in  the  world  (Owen,  vol.  ix.  p.  441).  He  "will  be 
inquired  of"  for  it.  If  Churches  would  have  "  good  ministers  of  Jesus  Christ,"  they 
must  seek  them  from  God  (Matt.  ix.  38). 

II.  Wherein  it  appears.  "  Shall  do  according  to  that  which  is  in  my  heart  and 
in  my  mind."  1.  Supreme  regard  to  his  will  as  the  rule  of  character  and  labour. 
2.  Clear  insight  into  his  mind  in  relation  to  the  special  recpiirements  of  the  time, 
place,  and  circumstances.  3.  Practical,  earnest,  and  constant  devotion  to  it  in  all 
things,  the  least  as  well  as  the  greatest.  Even  as  "  Christ  himself."  "I  have  given 
you  an  example." 

III.  Whereby  it  is  honoured.  "And  he  shall  walk  before  mine  anointed  for 
ever."  1.  Enjoyment  of  the  King's /awwr  (Prov.  xvi.  16).  2.  Employment  in  the 
King's  lervice;  in  continued,  honourable,  beneficent,  and  increasing  co-operation  with 
him.  S.  Participation  in  the  King's  glory  for  ever.  "  Be  thou  faithful,' '  &c.  (Rev. 
ii.  10).  "  To  him  that  overcometh  will  I  grant  to  sit  with  me  in  my  throne  "  (Rev. 
iii.  21).— D. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IIL 


Ths  oaUi  or  Samitel  (vers.  1 — 10).  Ver. 
1. — The  word  of  the  Lord  was  preolonB  in 
those  days.  Or  rather  rare;  it  came  but 
seldom,  and  there  was  no  proper  order  of 
persons  from  whose  ranks  the  "speakers  for 
God  "  would  naturally  step  forth.  It  was  this 
which  made  the  revelation  of  Jehovah's  wUl 
to  Samuel  an  event  so  memorable  both  for 
the  Jewish  nation  and  for  the  Church ;  for 
he  was  called  by  the  providence  of  God  to 
be  the  founder  of  prophecy  as  an  established 
institution,  and  henceforward,  side  by  side 
with  the  king  and  priest,  the  prophet  took 
his  place  as  one  of  the  three  factors  in  the 
preparation  for  the  coming  of  him  who  is  a 
King  to  role,  a  Priest  to  make  atonement, 
and  also  a  Prophet  to  teach  his  people  and 
guide  them  into  all  the  truth.  There  was  no 
open  vision.  Literally,  "  no  vision  that  broke 
forth"  (see  2  Chron.  zxxL  5,  where  it  is 
used  of  the  publication  of  a  decree).  The 
meaning  is,  that  though  prophecy  was  an 
essential  condition  of  the  spiritual  life  of 
Israel,  yet  that  hitherto  it  had  not  been 
promulgated  and  established  as  a  fact.  The 
gift  had  not  absolutely  been  withheld,  but 
neither  had  it  been  permanently  granted  as 
a  settled  ordinance.  There  are  in  Hebrew 
two  words  for  vision  :  the  one  used  here, 
haton,  refers  to  such  sights  as  are  reveled 

1   BAM. 


to  the  tranced  eye  of  the  seer  when  In  ■ 
state  of  ecstasy ;  while  the  other,  mareh,  is 
a  vision  seen  by  the  natural  eye.  From  the 
days,  however,  of  Isaiah  onward,  hazon  be- 
came the  generic  term  for  all  prophecy. 

Ver.  2.— Eli  .  .  .  could  not  see.  /.  « 
clearly.  His  sight  was  fast  failing  him,  and 
Samuel,  stiU  called  a  child,  na'ar,  but  pro- 
bably, as  Josephus  states  ('  Antiq.,'  v.  10,  4), 
now  fuUy  twelve  years  old,  was  in  constant 
attendance  upon  him  because  of  his  increas- 
ing infirmities.  Both  were  sleeping  in  the 
temple ;  for  literally  the  words  are,  And 
Samuel  was  sleeping  in  the  temple  of 
Jehovah,  where  the  ark  of  God  was.  Of 
course  neither  Eli  nor  Samuel  were  in  the 
holy  place ;  but,  as  in  ch.  i.  9,  the  word 
temple  is  used  in  its  proper  sense  of  the  whole 
palace  of  Israel's  spiritual  King,  in  which  were 
chambers  provided  for  the  use  of  the  high 
priest  and  those  in  attendance  upon  him. 

In  ver.  3  the  lamp  is  mentioned  as  fixing 
the  exact  time.  Though  it  is  said  that  the 
seven-branched  candelabrum  was  "to  bum 
always"  (Exod.  xxvii.  20),  yet  this  appar- 
ently was  to  be  by  perpetually  relighting  it 
(ibid.  XXX.  7,  8) ;  and  as  Aaron  was  com- 
manded to  dress  and  light  it  every  morning 
and  evening,  and  supply  it  with  oil,  the 
night  would  be  far  advanced  and  morning 
near  before  it  went  out.  In  the  stillness 
than  of  the  late  night  Samuel,  sank  in  heavy 


M 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  BAMUEL. 


[OH.  m.  1—21 


deep,  hears  a  voice  calling  him,  and  spring- 
ing up,  natnrally  hurries  to  Eli,  supposing 
that  he  needed  his  services.  Eli  luid  not 
heard  the  voice,  and  concluding  that  it  was 
a  mistake,  bids  Samuel  return  to  his  bed. 
Again  the  voixie  rings  upon  his  ear,  and  again 
he  hastens  to  Eli,  only  to  be  told  to  lie  down 
again. 

In  rer.  7  the.  reason  is  given  why  Samuel 
was  thus  thrice  mistaken.  Samuel  did  not 
yet  know  Jehovah,  neither  was  the  word  of 
Jehovah  yet  revealed  unto  him.  Doubtless 
he  knew  Jehovah  in  the  way  in  which  the 
tons  of  Eli  did  not  know  him  (ch.  u.  12), 
t.  e.  in  his  conscience  and  spiritual  life,  but 
he  did  not  know  him  as  one  who  reveals  his 
will  unto  men.  Prophecy  had  long  been  a 
rare  thing,  and  though  Samuel  had  often 
heard  God's  voice  in  the  recesses  of  his  heart, 
speaking  to  him  of  right  and  wrong,  he  knew 
nothing  of  God  as  a  living  Person,  giving 
commands  for  men  to  obey,  and  bestowing 
knowledge  to  guide  them  in  doing  his  wilL 

Ver.  8. — But  Eli  was  neither  so  inexperi- 
•nced,  nor  so  lost  to  all  sense  of  Jehovah 
being  the  immediate  ruler  of  Israel,  as  not 
to  perceive,  when  Samuel  came  to  him  the 
third  time,  that  the  matter  was  Divine. 
Possibly  he  recalled  to  mind  the  visit  of  the 
man  of  God,  and  had  some  presage  of  what 
the  message  might  be.  At  all  events  he  bade 
Samuel  lie  calmly  down  again,  because  the 
best  preparation  for  hearing  God's  voice  is 
obedience  and  trustful  submission. 

Ver.  10. — And  Jehovah  came,  and  stood, 
and  called  as  at  other  times.  It  is  some- 
thing more  than  a  voice ;  there  was  an 
objective  presence ;  and  so  in  ver.  15  it  is 
called,  not  hazon,  a  sight  seen  when  in  a 
state  of  ecstasy,  but  mareh,  something  seen 
when  wide  awake,  and  in  the  fiiU,  calm  pos- 
session of  every  faculty.  As  at  other  times 
simply  means  <w  before,  as  on  the  two  pre- 
vious occasions.  But  now,  instead  of  hurry- 
ing to  Eli,  Samuel  obediently  waits  for  the 
revelation  ofthe  Divine  will,  saying,  "Speak; 
for  thy  servant  heareth." 

The  message  to  Eli  (vers.  11—18).  Ver. 
11. — ^Behold,  I  will  do.  Rather,  J  c^,  I  am 
now  doing.  Though  the  threatened  ruin  may 
be  delayed  for  a  few  years,  yet  is  it  already 
in  actual  progress,  and  the  nil  of  Eli's  house 
wiU  be  but  the  consummation  of  causes 
^eady  now  at  work.  At  which  both  the 
ears  of  every  one  that  heareth  it  shall 
tingle.  This  implies  the  announcement  of 
some  event  so  nightful  and  unlocked  for 
that  the  news  shall,  as  it  were,  slap  both  ears 
at  once,  and  make  them  smart  with  pain. 
And  such  an  event  was  the  capture  of  the 
ark,  and  the  barbarous  destruction  of  the 
priests  and  sanctuary  at  Shiloh.  The  phrase 
u  again  used  of  the  destruction  of  Jerusalem 
bf  Nebuchadnezzar  (2  Eings  zxi.  12 ;  Jer. 


zix.  3),  a  calamity  which  Jeremiah  compares 
to  the  fall  of  Shiloh  (Jer.  vii  12,  14 ;  xxvi 
6,  9),  inasmuch  as  both  of  these  events  in- 
volved the  ruin  of  the  central  seat  of  the 
Jewish  religion,  and  were  both  accompanied 
by  revolting  cruelties. 

Ver.  12. — I  will  perform.  Literally,  "I 
will  raise  up,"  i  «.  I  will  excite  and  stir  up 
into  active  energy  all  the  denunciations  of 
the  man  of  God  (ch.  ii.  27),  which  hitherto 
have  been  as  it  were  asleep  and  at  rest.  All 
things  which.  Better,  quite  literally,  a^2^A<z< 
/  have  spoken.  When  I  begin,  I  will  also 
make  an  end.  In  the  Hebrew  two  infinitives 
used  as  gerunds,  "beginning  and  ending," 
i,  e.  from  beginning  to  end.  The  Hebrew 
language  constantly  thus  uses  infinitives  with 
great  force ;  as,  for  instance,  in  Jer.  vii.  9 : 
"What I  stealing,  murdering,  committing 
adultery,"  &c. 

Ver.  13.— For  I  have  told  him,  ftc.  These 
words  may  be  translated,  with  the  Septuagint 
and  Vulgate,  "  For  I  have  told  him  that  I 
would  judge  his  house,"  referring  back  to  the 
message  of  the  man  of  God;  or,  with  the 
Syriac,  "And  I  will  show  him  that  I  do  judge 
his  house."  Forever.  /.«.  finally;  his  house 
shall  pass  away.  His  sons  made  themselves 
vile.  The  verb  used  here  invariably  means 
to  cwae;  but  "  they  cursed  themselves  "  does 
not,  without  straining,  give  a  good  sense. 
The  Septuagint  for  "themselves '  reads  God, 
and  the  Syriac  the  people.  Buxtorf  says 
('Lex.  Rab.,'  sub  J-lplJ)  that  the  right  reading 
is  me,  and  that  this  is  one  of  eighteen  places 
where  the  scribes  have  changed  me  into 
themselves  or  them.  But  while  thus  there  is 
much  uncertainty  about  the  right  text,  the 
evidence  is  too  uncertain  to  act  upon,  and  it 
is  best  to  translate,  "  His  sons  have  brought 
a  curse  upon  themselves,"  while  acknow- 
ledging that  the  ordinary  rendering  would 
be  "have  cursed  themselves."  And  he  re- 
strained them  not.  The  Versions  generally 
take  the  verb  used  here  as  equivalent  to  one 
differing  only  in  having  a  sorter  medisd  con- 
sonant, nnD  =  riND,  and  translate  rebuked; 
but  that  really  found  in  the  Hebrew  text 
signifies  "to  weaken,  humble,  reduce  to 
powerlessness."  The  A.  V.  takes  neither  one 
verb  nor  the  other  in  the  rendering  re- 
strained. Eli  ought  to  have  prevented  his 
sons  from  persisting  in  bringing  disgrace  upon 
God's  service  by  stripping  them  of  their  office. 
Their  wickedness  was  great,  and  required  a 
stem  and  decisive  remedy. 

Ver.  14.— Sacrifice  nor  offering.  The  first 
of  these  is  zehach,  the  sacrifice  of  an  animal 
by  the  shedding  of  its  blood  ;  the  second  is 
the  minchah,  or  unbloody  sacrifice.  The 
guilt  of  Eli's  sons  could  be  purged,  i.  e.  ex- 
piated, by  none  of  the  appointed  offerings  for 
sin,  because  they  had  hardened  themselves 
in  their  wrong-doing  even  after  ill*  aolema 


<3B.  m.  1—21.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


warnilig  in  ch.  ii  27 — 36.  Hence  the  marked 
repetition  of  the  denunciation  of  finality  in 
their  doom.  Again  it  is  said  that  it  is  for 
over.  It  has,  however,  been  well  noticed 
that  though  the  message  of  Samuel  confirms 
all  that  had  been  threatened  by  the  man 
of  God,  yet  that  no  bitter  or  painful  words 
ire  put  mto  the  mouth  of  one  who  was  still 
a  child.  For  this  there  may  also  be  a  further 
reason.  The  first  message  was  intended  to 
give  Eli  and  his  sons  a  final  opportunity  of 
repentance,  and,  that  it  might  produce  its 
full  effect,  the  severity  of  the  doom  impend- 
ing upon  them  was  clearly  set  before  their 
eyes.  They  did  not  repent.  Eli  hardened 
himself  in  his  weakness,  and  took  no  steps 
to  vindicate  God's  service  from  the  slur  cast 
upon  it  by  an  unworthy  priesthood.  His 
sons  hardened  themselves  in  crime,  and  made 
their  oflBce  a  reproach.  It  was  enough,  there- 
fore, to  repeat  and  confirm  generally  the  terms 
of  the  former  prophecy,  as  no  moral  object 
would  be  gained  by  calling  attention  to  the 
severity  of  the  coming  judgment. 

Yer.  15.— Samuel  .  .  .  opened  the  doors. 
In  Ezod.  xxvi.  36 ;  xxxvi.  37,  the  word 
used,  though  translated  door,  really  means 
an  opening,  protected  by  a  hanging  curtain. 
The  word  used  here  means  double  or  folding 
doors  of  wood,  and  we  must  therefore  conclude 
that  solid  buildings  had  grown  up  round  the 
tabernacle  (see  on  ch.  L  9),  and  a  wall  for  its 
defence  in  case  of  invasion,  or  the  assault  of 
predatory  tribes.  The  confiding  the  keys 
of  these  enclosures  to  Samuel  shows  that  he 
was  no  longer  a  mere  child,  or  he  would  have 
been  incapable  of  holding  a  position  of  such 
high  trust  (on  the  key  as  an  emblem  of 
authority  see  Isa.  xxiL  22).  Vision,  as 
noticed  above  on  ver.  10,  means  something 
seen  by  a  person  awake  and  in  full  possession 
of  his  senses. 

Vers.  16, 17,  18. — God  do  so  to  thee,  ftc 
This  adjuration  shows  how  great  had  been 
,  the  agony  of  Eli's  suspense,  yet,  true  to  his 
sluggish  nature,  he  had  waited  patiently 
till  the  morning  came.  Then  he  summons 
Samuel  to  him,  calling  him  lovingly  my  son, 
and  everything  tends  to  show  that  there  was 
a  real  affection  between  the  two.  He  next 
asks.  What  is  the  thing  that  he  hath  said 
unto  thee  t  The  A.  V.  greatly  weakens  this 
by  inserting  the  words  "The  Lord."  The 
original  is  far  more  suggestive.  Put  quite 
indefinitely,  it  says,  "  Whoever  or  whatso- 
ever be  thy  visitor,  yet  tell  me  aU."  Then, 
when  Eli  has  heard  the  message,  he  says.  It 
U  Jehovah.  Though  he  had  not  had  the 
courage  to  do  what  was  right,  yet  his  sub-  -I 


mission  to  God,  and  the  humility  of  his 
resignation,  prove  that  the  Holy  Ghost  had 
in  these  years  of  waiting  being  doing  its 
work  upon  the  old  man's  heart.  Eli's  ad- 
juration, we  must  further  note,  was  equiva- 
lent to  putting  Samuel  upon  his  oath,  so 
that  any  concealment  on  his  part  would  have 
involved  the  sin  of  perjury. 

Establishment  of  Samuel  in  the  office 
OF  PROPHET  (ver.  19 — iv.  1).  Ver.  19. — And 
Samuel  grew.  His  childhood  up  to  this  time 
has  been  carefully  kept  before  our  view ;  now 
he  passes  from  youth  to  manhood.  And 
Jehovah  was  with  him.  By  special  gifts, 
but  especially  by  establishing  his  words. 
Spoken  by  Divine  inspiration,  they  were  all 
fulfilled.  So  in  Eccles.  zii.  11  the  words  of 
the  wise  are  compared  to  "naUs  fastened" 
securely,  and  which  may  therefore  be  de- 
pended upon.  But  in  their  case  it  is  ex- 
perience and  sound  judgment  that  makes 
them  foresee  what  is  likely  to  happen ;  it 
was  a  higher  gift  which  made  Samuel  s  words 
remain  safe  and  sure,  and  capable  of  firmly 
holding  np  all  enterprises  that  were  hnng 
upon  them. 

Ver.  20. — From  Dan,  upon  the  north,  to 
Beer-sheha,  upon  the  south,  means  "  through- 
out the  whole  country. "  The  phrase  is  inter- 
esting, as  showing  that,  in  spite  of  the  virtual 
independence  of  the  tribes,  and  the  general 
anarchy  which  prevailed  during  the  time  of 
the  judges,  there  was  nevertheless  a  feeling 
that  they  all  formed  one  people.  Was  estab- 
lished. The  same  word  used  in  Num.  xil  7 
of  Moses,  and  there  translated  was  faithful. 
It  is  one  of  those  pregnant  words  common  in 
Hebrew,  containing  two  cognate  meanings. 
It  says,  first,  that  Samuel  was  faithfnl  in 
his  office  ;  and,  secondly,  that  hecanse  he 
was  found  trustworthy  he  was  confirmed  and 
strengthened  in  the  possession  of  it. 

Ver.  21. — And  Jehovah  appeared  again. 
Literally,  "added  to  appear,"  i.  e.  revealed 
himseU  from  time  to  time  on  all  fit  occasions. 
To  appear,  literally,  "to  be  seen,"  is  the  verb 
used  of  waking  vision  (see  on  ver.  15).  By  the 
word  of  Jehovah.  Many  of  the  old  comment- 
ators refer  this  to  the  second  person  of  the 
Holy  Trinity,  but  he  is  himself  Jehovah,  aa 
we  affirm  in  the  Te  Deum :  "  We  believe  thee 
to  be  the  Lord,"  i.  e.  the  Jehovah  of  the  Old 
Testament,  usually  translated,  in  deference 
to  a  Jewish  superstition,  "the  Lord."  Ai 
the  Word,  Christ  is  "the  Word  of  God." 
The  phrase  really  means,  "by  prophetic  in- 
spiration" reveuing  to  Samoel  the  truth 
(comp.  Isa.  li  16 ;  Jer.  L  9). 


H0MILBTIC8. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Light  withheld.    The  facts  pyva  are — 1.  A  lack  of  the  inaiil< 
feat  revelations  of  the  Divine  will  to  which  Israel  had  been  accustomed.    2.  1 

f2 


68  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  in.  1— M. 

consciousness  of  this  want  on  the  part  of  the  few  pious  in  Israel.  3.  The  continued 
service  of  Samuel  in  the  ordinary  routine  of  the  sanctuary.  4.  The  resumption  of 
the  manifest  revelation  by  the  call  of  Samuel  to  receive  it.  6.  Samuel  experiences 
difficulty  in  recognising  the  call  of  God.  6.  Eli  renders  to  him  the  assistance  by 
which  he  becomes  recipient  of  the  Divine  communication.  The  statement  concem- 
»>9f  Samuel's  continued  service  in  the  sanctuary  is  evidently  to  prepare  the  way  for 
ibe  new  prophet's  summons  to  important  duties.  The  historian's  mind  rests  primarily 
on  a  dreary  period  during  which  a  valued  privilege  was  not  enjoyed. 

L  A  PBOGBEssioN  OF  LIGHT  IS  NEEDED  IN  THE  ChtjkcH  OF  GoD.  The  aDcieot 
Jewish  Church  was  very  dependent  for  its  growth  in  knowledge,  in  direction  for 
present  duty,  and  in  advancing  joy  in  life,  upon  well-ascertained  communications  from 
God.  The  fragmentary  history  from  patriarchal  times  onwards  acquaints  us  with 
many  specific  instances  in  which  "  open  vision,"  as  distinguished  from  individual  en- 
lightenment for  private  uses,  was  vouchsafed.  It  is  probable  that  much  other  light 
was  given  than  we  have  record  of,  as  truly  as  that  the  apostles  received  more  from 
Christ  than  is  explicitly  contained  in  the  Gospels.  The  clear  light  of  God  was  necessary 
in  successive  years  to  enable  Israel  to  do  the  work  required  in  paving  the  way  for 
Messiah.  Therefore  men  looked  for  "  vision  "  through  some  chosen  instrument,  and 
felt  that  the  normal  course  of  Providence  was  interrupted  when,  through  long  and 
weary  years,  none  was  granted.  Substantially  the  light  has  now  been  given  to  the 
modem  Church.  No  one  is  to  "  add  to  or  take  away  from  the  words  of  the  book  " 
which  God  has  given  for  the  instruction  and  guidance  of  his  people.  But  rdativdy, 
to  the  perception  of  the  Church  and  of  the  individual,  there  is  still  a  progression  m 
what  is  made  known  to  us.  All  the  truth  was  in  Christ  before  it  gradually  came 
forth  "  in  divers  manners  to  the  fathers ; "  and  all  the  truth  requisite  for  salvation  is 
in  the  word  of  God.  But  as  occasional  manifestations  in  ancient  times  brought 
successive  beams  of  light  from  the  original  Source  to  supply  the  need  of  men,  so  now 
out  of  the  word  of  God  much  light  has  to  break  forth  for  the  instruction,  guidance, 
and  comfort  of  the  Church.  There  is  all  the  difference  imaginable  between  adding 
to  the  sum  of  truth  by  traditions  of  men  or  superior  "  light  of  reason,"  and  having 
the  things  of  Christ  revealed  to  us  by  the  Spirit.  Our  growth  in  knowledge  is  con- 
sequent on  clearer  "  visions  "  from  God's  word. 

II.  Spiritual  eeceptivitt  is  a  condition  of  eeoeiving  fubtheb  light  fbom 
God.  The  absence  of  "  open  visions  "  in  the  days  of  Eli  is  implicitly  accounted  for 
by  the  circumstance  that  the  official  persons  through  whom  the  communicationB 
usually  came  were  not  in  a  state  of  mind  to  be  so  honoured  by  God.  There  seems 
to  be  a  beautiful  adaptation  between  the  fitness  of  the  instrument  and  the  fulness  of 
the  truth  conveyed.  Isaiah's  intense  spirituality  of  mind  made  him  a  fit  instrument 
for  conveying  to  men  the  more  advanced  truth  revealed  to  him.  The  tone  of  the 
Apostle  John's  nature  qualified  him  for  the  special  quality  and  degree  of  truth  charac- 
teristic of  his  writings.  There  seem  to  be  high  regulative  laws  by  which  God  sends 
forth  his  light  to  the  spiritual  man  corresponding  to  those  in  the  lower  sphere  of  ■ 
intellect  and  moral  perception.  The  application,  of  this  principle  is  seen  in  the 
history  of  the  Church  and  of  the  individual.  When  the  leaders  of  the  Church  have 
been  intent  on  earthly  things,  no  advance  has  been  made  in  the  understanding  of 
the  Scriptures.  As  protoplastic  life  must  pre-exist  in  order  to  the  assimilation  of 
protoplasm,  so  a  certain  spiritual  light  and  love  must  dwell  in  man  in  order  to  the 
absorption  into  self  of  light  from  God's  word.  No  wonder  if  irreligious  men  can- 
not know  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom.  The  highest  spiritual  truth  is  not  intel- 
lectually, but  "  spiritually  discerned."  Christ  may  have  many  things  to  say  to  ns, 
but  we,  through  deficient  receptivity,  "  cannot  bear  them  now."  Hence  the  wisdom 
of  God  is  often  foolishness  to  men,  or  the  darkness  is  real  because  the  eye  that  should 
see  is  dim. 

III.  It  is  a  gebat  calamity  fob  any  people  to  be  depeived  of  the  light  which 
ordinarily  comes  from  God  for  human  use.  The  historian  indicates  the  sad  loss  from 
which  the  people  were  suffering  in  this  withholding  of  "  open  vision."  All  light  is 
good,  only  good.  It  is  the  chief  means  of  life.  It  means  cheer,  safety,  develop- 
ment. To  De  without  it  in  any  measure  is,  in  that  degree,  to  be  practically  blind, 
•ad  to  suffer  all  the  •rils  of  blindness.    We  mourn  over  tiiose  who  cannot  im  tha 


OH.  III.  1-ai.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUAL.  M 

Bweet,  beautiful  light  of  day.  Agony  enters  us  when  we  gaze  on  men  devoid  of  the 
light  of  reason.  The  wisest  grope  as  in  perpetual  fear  when  the  pillar  of  fire  and 
Divine  silence  show  not  the  way  to  take.  Worst  of  all  when  the  C!hurch  has  no 
guidance  suited  to  its  need.  There  have  been  periods  when  the  written  word  has 
been  almost  lost  to  the  mass  of  Christians.  There  are  souls  dark,  sad,  hopeless 
beoause  no  "  vision  "  points  to  the  Bef uge  from  sin  and  the  rest  to  come.  If  one 
could  speak  out  the  secret  miseries  of  some  who,  dazed  by  exclusive  gaze  on  the  light 
of  reason,  feel  that  life  is  hopeless,  the  world  would  scarcely  credit  the  story. 

IV.  The  LACK  OF  EECEPTIVITT  BY  WHICH  this  Calamity  is  experienced  is  often  the 

RESULT   OP  A  DEGENERATE,  CORRUPT   STATE  OF  MIND  SBIiF-INDUCED  AND  LOVED.      The 

spiritual  unfitness  of  people  and  leaders  in  Eli's  day  to  receive  more  and  frequem 
"  visions  "  was  the  creation  of  their  own  wicked  wills.  The  calamity  of  being  left 
for  a  while  was  the  fruit  of  their  doings.  Sin  is  a  blinding  power,  as  also  a  creator 
of  positive  aversion.  The  natural  efEect  of  religious  declension  is  to  render  men 
indifferent  to  the  value  of  God's  truth  for  its- own  sake  and  for  its  elevating  influence ; 
incapable  of  appreciating  and  even  discerning  it  in  its  purity  ;  prone  to  get  a  wrong 
interpretation  upon  it  when  in  any  degree  it  is  given  ;  and  even,  in  many  instances, 
disposed  to  refer  that  which  professes  to  be  from  God  to  arey  other  than  the^  true 
source.  It  is  a  fair  question  how  much  of  the  professed  r^ection  of  Christianity  on 
reasonable  grounds  is  really  traceable  to  the  pure  exercise  of  the  reason  under  the 
guidance  of  an  undefiled  love  of  truth.  Is  not  zeal  to  be  free  from  such  holy  re- 
straints as  Christ  imposes  often  an  important  element  in  the  case  ?  The  finer  and  most 
convincing  evidences  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  lie  in  the  spiritual  beauty  and 
glory  of  the  Christ,  and  this  is  a  factor  which  mere  intellectual  processes  cannot 
assess.  How  is  it  that  the  unholy  always  welcome  objections  to  Christianity  ?  It  is 
ever  tme,  "  sin  lieth  at  the  door."  "  Ye  will  not  comj  unto  me."  "  Out  of  the  heart 
are  the  issues  of  life." 

V.  The  CAUSE  OF  THE  DEGENERACY  which  issues  in  a  calamitous  loss  of  spiritual 
light  LIES  IN  A  NEGLECT  OF  SUCH  LIGHT  AS,  IS  ALREADT  GIVEN.  The  inaptitude  of  Eli  to 
receive  "  visions,"  and  of  the  people  to  profit  by  them,  was  the  fruit  of  a  religious 
decay  brought  on  by  inattention  to  the  instructions  given  by  Moses,  and  a  heedless 
performance  of  acts  of  worship.  Thus  calamity  came  of  abuse  or  neglect  of  existing 
privileges.  The  principle  holds  good  over  a  wide  sphere.  Unfaithfulness  in  some 
Churches  of  Asia  led  to  the  dire  calamity  of  a  removal  of  the  "  candlestick. "  Apostles 
sometimes  turned  from  cities  that  failed  to  use  the  opportunities  they  afforded  them. 
Those  who,  seeing  the  "  Eternal  Power  and  Godhead  ''in  the  "  things  that  are  made,'" 
glorified  not  God,  had  their  "foolish  heart  darkened."  An  exclusive  fondness  for 
one  side  of  intellectual  nature,  to  the  habitual  neglect  of  the  secret  and  subtle  moral 
elements  in  conscience,  often  results  in  the  folly  and  wickedness  of  finding  not  even 
a  trace  of  God  in  the  universe.  Of  many  it  may  still  be  true,  "  Hadst  thou  known, 
even  thou,  at  least  in  this  thy  day,  the  things  which  belong  unto  thy  peace  I  but  now 
they  are  hid  from  thine  eyes." 

VI.  The  CORRUPTION  OF  AN  AGE  and  consequent  withholdment  of  Divine  light  is 
NO  PERMANENT  BAB  TO  THE  DEVELOPMENT  OF  TRUTH.  Israel's  degeneracy  brought  its 
chastisement ;  yet  God  had  a  holy  servant  in  reserve  both  to  remove  the  impeding 
corruption  and  to  continue  the  declarations  of  God's  will.  Waters  held  back  by  a 
barrier  retain  and  multiply  their  force,  and  in  course  of  time  will  first  sweep  away 
the  opposition  and  then  flow  peacefully  on.  God's  purposes  are  an  eternal  force 
pressing  on  into  the  future.  In  ancient  times  a  measure  of  truth  was  given  to  the 
world  to  make  ready  a  fit  time  and  condition  for  the  Christ  to  come  ;  and  this  was 
done,  if  not  by  one  unwilling  instrument,  yet  by  another  when  that  was  swept  away. 
Likewise  the  Church  is  to  get  more  truth  from  the  Bible  for  the_  '|  perfecting  of  the 
saints ; "  and  in  spite  of  dark  seasons  it  will  rise  to  a  clearer  vision  of  the  truth  in 
Christ  by  the  providential  removal  of  obstructions  and  the  introduction  of  a  mors 
holy  and  teachable  order  of  men.  Man  lives  and  toils,  and  opposes  and  dies.  God 
ever  lives  in  full  resistless  energy. 

Practical  considerations : — 1.  It  is  a  question  how  far  errors  and  theolog:ioal  con- 
flicts are  to  be  associated  with  a  defective  spirituality  arising  from  either  over- 
•bsorption  in  purely  philosophical  pursuits,  external  Church  order,  or  political  and 


70  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  hi.  1—21. 

party  arrangements.  2.  To  what  extent  ia  it  possible  to  remedy  the  absence  of 
bivinn  truth  in  much  of  the  literature  of  modern  times.  3.  By  what_  means  the 
Church  and  the  individual  may  secure  more  of  that  holy,  teachable  spirit  by  which 
alone  a  fuller  vision  of  truth  shall  be  enjoyed.  4.  How  far  the  conduct  of  contro- 
versies of  the  day  respecting  Divine  truth  is  defective  by  not  sufficiently  taking  into 
account  the  spiritual  condition  of  men  opposed  to  religion,  and  whether  there  ia  a 
proper  dependence  on  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  give  eyes  to  the  blind.  6.  To 
what  extent,  in  personal  seasons  of  darkness,  the  cause  liesin  our  peisonal  indulgence 
in  secret  or  open  sin. 

Lowly  instruments.  The  transition  from  the  employment  of  Eli,  as  the  messenger 
of  God  to  the  people,  to  Samuel,  brings  into  view  important  truths  concerning  the 
instrumentality  by  which  God  effects  his  purposes  concerning  man. 

I.  God  always  has  in  keserve  and  training  suitable  instruments  for  promoting 
the  ends  to  be  sought  in  connection  with  Christ's  kingdom.  Judged  from  the  out- 
ward aspect  of  things,  all  around  appeared  dark  and  hopeless.  There  waa  no  one 
able  to  cope  with  the  difficulties  of  the  position.  A  similar  condition  of  things  has 
been  found  in  certain  countries  during  the  hiatoty  of  the  Christian  Church.  Some 
desponding  minds  would  find  a  correspondence  in  the  prevailing  unbelief  and  daring 
atheism  of  modem  times.  There  are  also  conditions  of  the  individual  spiritual  life 
when  decay  has  apparently  gone  on  to  utter  hopelessness.  Missionaries  have  now 
and  then  felt  almost  the  horror  of  despair  in  view  of  nameless  barbarities.  But  two 
or  three  saw  a  little  beneath  the  surface.  Hannah  was  sure  of  coining  deliverance. 
Elkanah  in  some  degree  shared  her  confidence,  and  Eli  surmised  a  purpose  of  the 
Lord  in  the  presence  of  the  holy  child  of  the  sanctuary.  And,  answering  to  these 
better  spirits  of  a  corrupt  age,  there  are  always  a  few — "  a  remnant " — who  know  and 
are  comforted  in  the  assurance  that  God  has  instruments  in  reserve.  As  in  the  case 
of  Samuel,  they  are  chosen,  in  training,  and  biding  their  time.  There  are  instances 
of  this  general  truth — 1.  In  the  preparation  of  the  earth  for  man.  From  remote 
times  there  were  already  chosen,  and  qualified,  and  retained  in  other  forms  till  fit 
season,  the  agencies  by  which,  in  spite  of  catastrophes  of  fire  and  convulsion  and 
deluge,  the  beautiful  earth  would  come  forth  in  material  realisation  of  the  thought 
and  purpose  of  God.  2.  In  the  infant  Christian  Church.  The  end  of  Christ's 
earthly  life  seemed  most  disastrous  to  his  kingdom.  The  corruption  and  craft  of  the 
wicked  were  dominant,  and  the  removal  of  the  Saviour  seemed  to  human  judgment 
to  be  the  climax  of  disaster.  Yet  God  had  chosen,  was  training  and  holding  in  reserve, 
the  men  by  whom  the  evils  of  the  age  were  to  be  overcome,  and  truth  and  righteous- 
ness and  love  asserted  as  never  before.  3.  In  definite  periods  of  the  ChtircKs  history. 
The  scholastic  subtleties  of  the  middle  ages  on  the  one  side,  the  deplorable  decay  of 
morals  and  the  prostitution  of  Church  ordinances  to  gain  on  the  other,  caused  the 
earth  to  mourn.  Nevertheless,  in  the  seraphic  devotion  of  here  and  there  a  devout 
monk,  in  the  inquiring  spirit  of  Erasmus,  the  clear  intelligence  of  Melancthon,  and 
the  courage  and  firm  grip  of  truth  by  Luther,  God  had  his  chosen  instruments  for 
producing  a  wonderful  advance  in  all  that  pertains  to  freedom,  purity,  and  Christian 
knowledge.  4.  In  the  midst  of  the  evils  indicated  by  modern  antagonism  to  Chris- 
tianity. Doubtless  the  principles  advocated,  logically  wrought  out,  as  they  are  sure 
to  be  when  the  mass  embrace  them,  contain  the  seeds  of  immorality,  anarchy,  and 
decay  of  noblest  sentiments  ;  and  often  there  is  an  eagerness  in  adopting  them  which 
may  well  cause  some  to  tremble.  But  God  is  alive,  not  dead.  He  has  his  agencies, 
fitted,  and,  so  to  speak,  under  restraint.  They  will  be  found  to  consist  in  the  practical 
futility  of  all  endeavour  to  get  substitutes  for  a  holy  religion ;  the  hopeless  miseries 
into  which  individuals  will  be  plunged  ;  the  horror  created  by  the  very  violence  of 
vice ;  the  natural,  never-to-be-quenched  instinct  which  compels  man  to  "  cry  out  for 
the  living  God ; "  the  calling  forth  of  wise  men  of  saintly  life  who  are  masters  in 
secular  knowledge  ;  the  silent  force  of  Christian  lives  in  health,  sickness,  and  sorrow ; 
and  the  aroused  prayerfulness  of  the  Church.  Men  like  Samuel  are  in  existence — 
6.  In  the  conflict  of  the  individual  Christian  life.  The  dire  evils  of  latent  sin,  we»k 
resolutions,  stains  of  early  years,  seem  to  be  a  "  body  of  sin  and  death  "  from  which 
there  is  no  escape.    But  God  has  in  reserve  the  truth,  the  afflictions,  the  tenderness, 


«k.  ni.  1—21.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  Tl 

tlie  qwickpning  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  which  all  these  shall  pass  away,  and  a 
restored  life  shall  result. 

II.  The    CHARACTERISTICS  OF    THE    MOST   EFPECTIVK    INSTEUMENTS  in  working  OUt 

God's  will  are,  so  fab  as  persons  are  concerned,  well  ascertained.  There  is 
great  advantage^  in  having  the  child-life  of  Samuel  sketched  in  contrast  with  the 
habits  and  principles  of  those  no  longer  worthy  to  be  the  instruments  for  doing  the 
highest  work  in  the  world.  The  qualities  in  Samuel  that  fitted  him  for  his  work 
were  purity  of  life,  deep  love  for  God  and  his  sanctuary,  personal  consecration  to  any 
service  in  which  it  might  please  God  to  employ  him,  and  the  humility  that  disdains 
not  even  menial  work  if  God  would  thus  have  it.  These  qualities  are  really  embraced 
in  the  one  supreme  qaaWiy— conformity  ofvdll  to  the  Divinetoill.  In  this  respect  all 
human  instruments  are  alike  when  thoroughly  effective.  In  so  far  as  it  is  our  "  meat 
and  drink  "  to  do  the  Father's  will,  our  nature  becomes  a  fit  channel  for  the  Divine 
energy  to  work  through  for  spiritual  ends.  The  failure  of  moral  agents  lies  in  the 
condition  of  the  will.  The  power  of  Christian  life  in  prayer,  in  work,  in  silent 
influence,  is  in  proportion  as  the  consecration  takes  the  form  of,  "Not  my  will,  but 
thine  be  done." 

III.  The  effectiveness  of  the  instruments  used  lies  essentially  in  the  powee 
WHICH  works  through  them.  The  excellent  qualities  of  Samuel  no  doubt  exercised  a 
power  appropriate  to  their  own  nature ;  but  the  real  work  he  did  was  more  than  the 
mere  natural  influence  of  what  he  was.  It  was  God  who  worked,  not  only  within 
him  to  will  and  to  do,  but  also  with  and  by  him.  Everywhere  in  Scripture  stress  is 
laid  on  the  unseen  energy  of  God  acting  on  the  visible  and  invisible  elements  of 
things,  and  at  last  bringing  all  into  subjection.  The  reality  of  the  Divine  power  in 
the  human  instrument  is  often  conspicvxms-  The  child  Samuel  did  not  secure  of 
himself  the  submission  of  the  people  or  the  deference  of  Eli.  God  wrought  on  their 
spirits  and  made  them  willing  to  take  him  as  prophet.  Saul  was  the  stronger  man, 
but  God  used  David  to  slay  Goliath.  God,  in  the  case  of  apostles,  had  chosen  the 
"weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  mighty."  His  grace  was  sufScient  for 
them.     "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  my  Spirit." 

General  lessons : — 1.  There  is  the  most  perfect  ground  for  confidence  that  agencies 
will  be  found  for  doing  any  work  really  essential  to  the  salvation  of  men.  2.  It  is 
important  for  all  so  to  live  and  labour  that  they  may  be  available  for  any  service 
requisite  in  seasons  of  trial.  3.  The  fitness  of  each  Christian  for  doing  greatest 
possible  good  in  the  world  rests  with  his  own  diligent  seLf-cuIture  and  entireness  of 
consecration.  4.  It  is  essentially  necessary  that  in  all  effort  God  be  recognised  as 
the  Author  of  all  good. 

Call  to  higher  service.  The  service  of  God  is  very  wide  and  varied.  Every  true 
heart  may  find  some  employment  therein.  "  They  serve  who  wait,"  as  also  those 
who  simply  exhibit  a  holy  life.  The  weary  Christian  invalid  conveys  many  an 
impressive  lesson  to  the  strong  and  vigorous.  The  patient  endurance  of  adversity 
ntay  do  more  good  than  the  enjoyment  of  prosperity.  In  making  distinctions  in  the 
value  of  service  rendered,  we  are  not  always  in  a  position  to  pass  perfect  judgment. 
In  one  respect  a  lowly  Christian  may  be  "greater  than  John  the  Baptist."  In 
reference  to  public  functions  there  are  gradations,  and  in  this  respect  Samuel  was 
called  to  a  higher  form  of  service. 

I.  There  ABE  calls  to  a  service  relatively  higher.  In  the  estimation  of 
Hannah  and  Eli,  the  early  occupation  of  Samuel  in  the  tabernacle  was  the  initiatory 
stage  of  a  life-work.  Except  so  far  as  a  pure,  simple  life  in  contrast  with  vileness 
can  teach,  Samuel's  service  was  confined  to  attendance  on  the  venerable  high  priest. 
The  position  for  which  he  was  finally  called  was  more  conspicuous,  of  wider  influence, 
and  involving  the  display  of  superior  qualities.  The  narrative  relating  the  call  to 
this  higher  service  is  a  record  in  spirit  oi  what  has  often,  transpired  in  the  course 
of  history,  and  is  hdng  realised  every  day.  Abraham,  Moses,  and  David  served 
God,  each  in  his  own  restricted  sphere,  when  they  obeyed  the  Divme  call.  As 
Christ  onoe  summoned  fishermen  to  leave  their  occupation  to  be  fishers  of  men,  so 
now  others  hear  his  voice  urging  them  to  leave  the  ship,  the  desk,  the  farm,  to  Ao  his 
will  in  preaching  the  gospel.     To  the  attentive  ear  of  the  devout  there  are  frequent 


72  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  m.  1—21. 

calls  to  rise  to  more  arduous  positions  in  the  Church,  or  to  enter  on  some  line  of 
private  Christian  endeavour  that  shall  more  truly  bless  mankind.  Let  devont  men 
not  forget  that  the  Divine  call  to  higher  work  is  not  confined  to  public  fanctionaries. 
All  kinds  of  workers  are  engaged  on  the  spiritual  temple. 

XL  There  is  A  special  fitne-ss  required  fob  highbb  sebtici.  Obviously,  only  a 
Samuel  trained  by  a  devout  mother,  accustomed  to  the  hallowed  associations  of  the 
sanctuary,  was  suited  for  the  work  that  had  henceforth  to  be  done.  The  chief 
elements  that  qualify  for  entrance  on  higher  service  are — 1.  Deep  piety  ;  iaz  as  piety 
is  a  requisite  to  all  useful  spiritual  work,  so  deep  piety  is  required  for  the  more  trying 
forms  of  usefulness.  2.  Fidelity  in  lower  forms.  He  that  is  faithful  in  that  which 
is  least  becomes  fitted  for  superior  responsibilities.  "  Come  up  higher  "  is  the  voice 
which  crowns  earthly  toil.  3.  Natv/ral  aptitude  for  new  emergencies.  God  never 
puts  a  man  in  a  position  for  which  natural  powers  when  sanctified  are  unsuited.  The 
wondrous  adaptations  in  the  material  world  find  their  analogies  in  the  spiritual. 
4.  Readiness  to  endure  what  is  unknown.  Ood's  servants  have  to  enter  an  untra- 
versed  ground,  and  their  qualification  for  a  call  to  this  must  embrace  a  spirit  that 
says,  "  Here  am  I."  "  Speak,  Lord."  "  What  wouldst  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  The 
representation  given  of  Samuel,  and  of  others  in  the  Bible,  shows  that  they  were 
endowed  with  these  qualifications.  This,  also,  may  be  a  test  by  which  good  men 
may  now  judge  of  themselves.  No  one  ought  to  think  of  departing  from  any  useful 
sphere  of  labour  without  severe  scrutiny  as  to  capabilities  for  heavier  duties. 

III.  The    FITNESS    FOB    HIGHER    SEBVICB    IS,   IN    SOME     INSTANCES,    UNCONSCIOUBLT 

ACQUIRED.  Growth  is  not  felt  while  in  process,  and  only  when  attention  is  called  to 
it  is  the  fact  recognised.  Samuel  became  month  by  month  more  pious  and  true ;  his 
aptitudes  enlarged,  and  his  courage  rose  with  every  discharge  of  inconvenient  duty. 
He  became  spiritually  wealthy  without  being  aware  of  it — sure  evidence  of  vital 
godliness.  The  disposition  sometimes  found  to  complain  of  one's  lot,  to  hanker  after 
some  more  showy  occupation  in  Ood's  service,  and  to  watch  and  plan  for  personal 
advancement,  is  not  a  good  sign.  The  humble  deeds  of  opening  the  door,  lighting 
the  lamps  of  the  house  of  God,  when  done  out  of  pure  love  for  the  Lord  of  the 
sanctuary,  are  means  of  raising  the  tone  of  the  entire  life.  To  do  the  smallest  deed 
f</r  Christ  is  blessed,  and  years  of  such  fond  service  is  an  education,  the  results  of 
which  are  only  brought  out  to  view  when  a  perhaps  sudden  demand  is  made  for  some 
difScult  duty.  By  his  bitter  repentance,  and  the  all-absorbing  love  for  Christ 
consequent  on  full  restoration,  Peter  little  knew  that  he  was  becoming  the  man  to 
lead  the  Church  on  to  great  triumphs. 

IV.  The  MEANS  OF  CALLING  TO  HIGHER  SERVICE  ABE  WONDEBFULLT  BDITBD  TO  THE 

CIRCUMSTANCE.  The  miraoulous  manifestation  of  the  Divine  Being  was  in  harmony 
with  the  method  by  which,  as  Samuel  knew  from  history  of  the  past,  God  conveyed 
his  will  to  men.  No  terror  would  arise  in  his  spirit,  for  he  was  accustomed  to 
reverence  the  house  of  God,  and  to  feel  that  God  was  nigh.  A  pure,  loving  heart  does 
not  dread  God.  The  more  childlike  the  piety,  the  more  welcome  the  thought  and 
presence  of  the  eternal  Friend.  If  Samuel  was  to  become  a  prophet,  and  the 
emergency  required  that  a  prophet  should  speak  at  that  juncture  ;  and  if,  for  authen- 
tication, £11  must  be  used,  it  is  difBcult  to  conceive  how  these  ends  could  be  more 
naturally  secured  than  by  the  manner  in  which  the  call  was  made.  The  objections 
men  raise  to  what  they  call  the  anthropomorphism,  of  such  a  portion  of  Scripture  as 
this  are  utterly  baseless.  Does  not  God  reveal  himself  in  the  material  world  by  the 
visible  things  which  are  the  outward  expressions  of  his  mind  ?  Does  it  make  any 
real  difference  to  him  whether  he  form  them  by  a  slow  or  by  a  more  swift  process  ? 
Was  the  first  expression,  in  an  act  of  creation,  slow  f  Who,  then,  shall  say  that  in 
expressing  his  moral  purposes  for  men  he  must  not  and  cannot  adopt  an  outward 
visible  form,  by  which  the  mind  to  be  taught  shall  be  surely  arrested?  Given  a 
revelation  to  be  made,  will  men  prescribe  d  priori  and  infallibly  how  God  is  to  act 
in  making  it  ?  If  so,  do  they  not  draw  on  their  human  views,  and  create  a  God  of 
their  own  ?  And  what  is  this  but  anthropomorphism  of  deepest  dye  ?  All  God's 
acts  are  perfect.  The  call  of  his  servants  is  by  means  suited  to  time,  purpose,  and 
condition.  Abraham  and  others  after  him  each  heard  the  Divine  voice  differently, 
b)rt  naturally,  so  far  as  special  conditions  determine  event*.   There  u*  "  £y«  nitiM  of 


OH.  UL 1—21.]  THE  PIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  73 

operations,"  but  "one  Spirit."  So  now  it  may  be  by  "still  small  voice,"  or  by 
Buggestion  of  the  wise,  or  by  pressure  of  circumstances,  that  his  servanta  receive  the 
assurance  that  God  would  have  them  enter  on  enlarged  responsibilities.. 

V.    It  is  POSSIBLE  THAT  A  CALL  HAT  NOT  BE  CLEARLT  DIBTINOniSHED  AT  FIBST.     It 

was  not  wonderful  that  Samuel  mistook  the  voice  of  God  for  the  voice  of  man.  It 
was  Divine  tenderness  gradually  to  prepare  his  mind,  through  the  suggestion  of  Eli, 
for  a  great  event.  God  accommodates  his  voice  of  majesty  to  mortal  ears.  A  spirit 
like  Samuel's,  satisfied  with  the  honour  of  doing  anything  in  the  house  of  God,  would 
scarcely  suppose  that  the  greatest  of  honours  was  at  hand.  We  are  not  sure  that 
calls  to  higher  service  are  in  any  case  immediately  clear.  Scripture  tells  of  the  fact 
in  many  instances  without  reference  to  the  mental  history  of  the  individuals. 
Abraham's  strong  faith  implies  special  difiSculties,  and  possibly  conflicts.  Isaiah 
could  scarcely  believe  that  God  would  use  him.  Though  the  disciples  knew  that 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  called  them  to  be  his  servants,  doubts  subsequently  came  over 
them,  for  they  "trusted  that  it  had  been  he  which  should  have  redeemed  Israel." 
Good  men  become  so  habituated  to  lines  of  action,  ruling  of  impulses,  and  guidance 
of  common  events,  that  at  first  they  cannot  recognise  a  superior  will  in  new  openings, 
new  gentle  longings,  and  pressure  from  without.  It  is  by  the  use  of  ordinary  facultiu 
and  means  that  the  call  to  duty  is  ascertained.  Samuel  inquired  of  Eli,  and  followed 
the  suggestions  of  the  experienced.  The  great  lines  of  duty  are  close  to  all  who 
will  take  the  trouble  to  know  them.  Wise  men,  passing  events,  openness  of  spirit, 
willingness  to  be  led,  these  are  the  means  by  which  every  perplexed  Samuel  will  be, 
sure  to  solve  his  doubts.  To  know  the  possibility  that  God  has  some  unknown  duty 
to  indicate,  to  be  saying  in  heart,  when  attention  is  aroused,  "  Speak,  Lord,  for  thy 
servant  heareth  " — this  is  often  the  first  step  to  a  new  career  of  usefulness. 

Vers.  11 — 14. — Privileges  and  cares.  The  one  great  fact  here  set  forth  is  that 
God  reveals  to  Samuel — 1.  The  judgment  impending  over  the  house  of  Eli,  and  ita 
reasons.  2.  That  Eli  had  been  already  informed  of  its  nature.  3.  That  the  judg- 
ment when  it  comes  will  cause  the  most  intense  consternation  in  Israel. 

I.  An  BNTHANCE  ON  SUPEBIOB  PRIVILEGES.  Hitherto  Samuel  had  waited  on  man. 
Now  he  is  honoured  to  hear  the  voice  of  God,  and  wait  directly  on  the  Divine  pre- 
sence. His  acquaintance  with  the  history  of  his  race — acquired  from  his  mother,  and 
the  conversation  of  Eli,  and  possibly  records  in  the  tabernacle — must  have  caused  him 
to  know  that,  in  being  thus  called  to  listen  to  the  voice  of  God,  he  was  about  to  take 
rank  among  the  distinguished  in  Israel.  The  honour  would  be  esteemed  in  pro- 
portion to  the  purity  of  his  nature  and  sense  of  unworthinessin  the  sight  of  God. 
The  question  as  to  why  God  should  raise  a  mere  child  to  a  position  of  such  import- 
ance may  admit  of  partial  answer  in  this  instance,  though  there  is  always  in  the 
Divine  choice  an  element  of  wisdom  which  we  cannot  unfold.  If  the  regular  ofiScials 
of  Israel  are  unfaithful,  God  may  teach  men  by  using  the  feeblest  of  instruments,  and 
out  of  the  ordinary  course.  And  it  might  be  important  for  the  new  prophet  to  be 
properly  installed  and  authenticated  before  the  aged  judge  passed  away,  and  the  ark 
of  God  fell  into  the  hand  of  the  foe.  It  is  always  a  season  of  solemn  importance 
when  a  servant  of  God  enters  on  higher  privileges,  and  becomes  a  special  medium  for 
reaching  the  world  with  Divine  truth.  It  may  be,  as  in  this  case,  in  quietude, 
without  the  knowledge  of  the  restless  world.  In  any  instance  is  it  a  marked  era  in 
a  personal  life. 

II.  An  UNWELCOME  DiscovEET.  Throughout  the  ten  or  twelve  years  of  Samuel's 
service  in  the  sanctuary  he  had  been  to  Eli  as  a  loving,  dutiful,  reverent  son.  To 
his  awakening  piety  and  simple  nature  the  aged  high  priest  would  be  the  most 
august  personage  in  the  world,  the  representative  of  the  Most  High.  The  quiet 
good-nature  of  Eli  in  relation  to  himself  would  impress  the  youthful  mind  very 
favourably.  There  would  be  in  Samuel's  deportment  a  tenderness  and  deference 
suited  to  age.  It  would  therefore  be  a  terrible  discovery  to  learn  from  the  mouth 
of  God  that  this  revered  man  leas  so  guilty  as  to  deserve  chastisement  most  severe. 
The  surface  of  life  was  removed,  and  the  object  of  love  and  reverence  stood  con- 
demned. The  shock  to  •  child's  sensibilities  could  not  but  be  great  at  first  When 
honoured  oharactar  is  found  to  be  blasted,  the  first  impulse  of  the  h«art  it  t« 


74  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  m.  1— SL 

give  up  faith  in  men  and  things.  But  well-balanced  holy  minds,  as  was  Samuel's,  soon 
recover  themselves.  He /rft  that  God  must  do  right.  His  horror  of  sin  was  in  pro- 
portion to  his  purity  of  life.  Therefore,  with  all  the  awe,  silent  and  loving,  of  a  true 
child  of  God,  he  would  grieve,  yet  feel  that  God  was  wise  and  good.  In  man 
ordinary  forms  the  same  discovery  is  sometimes  made.  Children  have  to  learn  now 
and  then  all  at  once  that  the  father  is  discovered  to  have  lived  a  life  of  secret  sin. 
The  Church  is  occasionally  astounded  by  discoveries  of  character  not  suspected. 
Even  the  disciples  were  unaware  of  the  presence  of  a  thief  and  traitor  as  their  friend 
and  companion.     How  many  characters  have  yet  to  be  unveiled  I 

III.  A  PREMONITION  OF  COMING  CARES.  If  we  search  further  for  reasons  why  so 
terrible  a  revelation  was  made  to  the  child-prophet,  one  might  be  found  in  the  pre- 
paration it  gave  him  for  future  anxieties.  It  is  well  for  youth  and  men  to  go  forth 
to  their  career  remembering  that  troubles  will  come.  Samuel's  knowledge  that 
disasters  of  most  painful  character  were  close  at  hand  would  be  morally  good  and 
useful.  For  when  cares  gather  around  the  soul  flees  more  earnestly  to  God.  The 
same  thing  occurred  in  the  instance  of  the  apostles.  Tfhe  honour  conferred  on  them 
in  receiving  the  truth  was  weighted  with  the  knowledge  that  "  in  the  world  "  they 
would  "have  tribulation."  Every  one  who  enters  on  a  new  course  of  service  must 
look  for  cares  as  part  of  the  lot  assigned  ;  and  the  prospect  will  not  daunt  the  true 
heart,  but  bring  it  more  into  contact  with  the  Source  of  strength. 

IV.  A  REVELATION  OP  DiviNE  PROCEDURE.  Samuel,  if  at  all  reflective,  most  have 
Jbeen  struck  with  the  exceeding  deliberateness  of  the  Divine  judgmemts.  Here  was  a 
case  of  vile  conduct  long  manifested,  and  wicked  irresolution  to  put  it  down  ;  yet, 
instead  of  sudden  and  swift  punishment  coming  on  father  and  sons,  there  is  first  a 
declaration  to  the  father  that  the  judgment  is  coming,  and  that  all  is  in  train  for  it ; 
then  a  lapse  of  some  little  time,  and  a  declaration  to  Samuel  that  the  judgment  is 
fixed  and  sure  ;  and  after  that  a  succession  of  events  that  must  have  occupied  a  consider- 
able time  before  the  execution  of  the  judgment  (ch.  iv.  1 — 11).  This  calm  deliber- 
ateness of  God  is  an  awful  thing  for  the  guilty,  and  may  inspire  the  patience  and  hope 
of  the  righteous.  It  is  to  be  seen  in  the  predictions  and  preparations  for  the  destruc- 
tion of  Jerusalem  ;  in  the  steady  wave  of  desolation  and  woe  he  in  due  time  causes 
to  sweep  over  apostate  nations ;  in  the  slow  and  sure  approach  of  disaster  on  all  who 
make  wealth  by  fraud,  or  barter  his  truth  for  gain ;  as,  also,  in  the  calm,  orderly 
arrangement  of  laws  by  which  all  who  have  despised  the  only  Saviour  reap  the  fruit 
of  their  ways. 

Vers.  15 — 21. — Biverse  experiences.  The  principal  facts  are — 1.  Samuel,  on  enter- 
ing upon  his  daily  duties,  fears  to  relate  to  Eli  what  had  been  told  him.  2.  Eli, 
under  the  action  of  conscience,  and  convinced  that  something  important  has  been 
communicated,  employs  strong  pressure  to  obtain  it  from  Samuel.  3.  Eli,  hearing  the 
account,  recognises  the  righteousness  of  the  judgment  4.  Samuel's  position  as  pro- 
phet is  established  through  the  land.  Samuel  rose  a  new  youth.  During  one  night 
events  had  transpired  which  gave  him  a  new  position,  wrought  a  change  in  his 
views  and  feelings,  and  tinged  his  life  with  a  great  sorrow.  Weary  with  nervous 
exhaustion,  and  haunted  by  the  thought  of  a  sad  discovery,  it  was  no  wonder  if  he 
moved  more  languidly  than  usual.  The  brief  narrative  sets  before  us  a  group  of  facts 
resulting  from  the  communications  made  to  him  during  the  night. 

I.  The  TRIUMPH  OP  DUTY  OVER  FEELING.  Siimuel  had  anoMrmis  duty  to  discharge. 
The  old  man,  weak  with  weight  of  years  and  sorrowful  in  heart,  has  to  be  informed  of 
the  seal  put  on  his  doom.  _  "No  prophecy  is  of  private  interpretation"  applies  here 
in  the  sense  that  Samuel's  increased  knowledge  was  not  intended  as  a  mere  secret  for 
himself.  Duties  are  real  though  not  imposed  in  form  of  words,  and  the  sensitive  spirit 
quickly  recognises  them.  The  eagerness  of  Eli  to  learn  all  that  had  been  communicated 
left  Samuel  no  option.  Thus  duties  spring  up  as  soon  as  increased  knowledge  is  a  fact ; 
and  when  God  puts  honour  on  us  we  must  be  prepared  to  face  fresh  obligations.  But 
duty  arising  naturally  out  of  new  relations  is  sometimes  counter  to  legitimate  feelings. 
"  Samuel  feared  to  show  Eli  the  vision."  His  quick  sense  saw,  as  soon  as  he  awok* 
that  day,  that  he  would  have  to  relate  a  painful  story.  The  natural  shrinking  of  a 
kindly  heart  from  the  infliction  of  a  wound  would  become  more  marked  aa  an  eagai 


OH.  III.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  75 

request  was  made  for  mformation.  He  knew  that  Eli  would  be  filled  with  anguish, 
both  because  of  the  coming  doom  and  the  present  virtual  substitution  of  another  in 
his  place  as  medium  of  Divine  communication.  It  is  human  to  dread  the  infliction 
of  humiliation  and  pain.  There  is  a  lawful  sympathy  with  sufEering  and  pity  f« 
disgrace.  The  judge  may  weep  in  passing  sentence  of  death,  and  yet  be  a  perfect 
judge.  A  parent's  heart  may  righteously  bleed  at  the  thought  of  administering 
severe  chastisement.  Duty  is  not  confronted  by  feeling  as  a  foe.  Even  Christ  shrank 
from  taking  the  cup  which  a  Father's  will  ordained.  But  disagreeable  duty  it  met 
fully  by  the  supremacy  of  sense  of  right.  Feeling  is  suppressed,  regard  for  truth  is 
strong,  and  immediate  and  future  consequences  are  left  to  God.  Samuel  kept  nothing 
back.  Herein  lies  the  triumph  of  duty.  The  moral  victories  of  life  may  be  won 
by  the  young  and  inexperienced ;  for  the  secret  lies  not  in  vast  knowledge  and 
critical  skill,  but  in  a  sound  heart,  swayed  by  supreme  regard  for  God. 

II.  The  BODiNGS  OF  A  RESTLESS  CONSCIENCE.  Itwasmore  than  curiosity  that  induced 
the  inquiry  of  Eli.  His  strong  language,  almost  amounting  to  a  threat,  revealed  an 
internal  conflict.  Conscience  is  qmck  in  arousing  suspicions.  Did  the  aged  man  half 
hope  that  some  relaxation  of  the  sentence  already  passed  would  come?  Did  the 
alternate  feeling  arise  that  the  specific  hour  of  punishment  had  beeii  announced?  The 
presence  of  an  unectsy  conscience  is  a  fearful  bane  in  life.  No  age,  no  past  reputation, 
no  external  honours,  no  ofBcial  dignity,  no  formal  employment  in  religious  duties,  can 
give  exemption  from  it  where  sin  has  been  deliberately  indulged.  It  is  as  an  enemy 
in  the  home,  a  spoiler  in  a  city,  a  ghost  along  one's  pathway.  What  a  power  for 
misery  lies  in  some  men  I  How  easily  it  is  aroused  by  passing  events  I  How  it  makes 
men  quiver  even  in  the  presence  of  children  1  How  possible  it  is  for  even  good  men  to 
embitter  old  age  by  pangs  which  God  will  not  assuage  on  this  side  the  grave  I  How 
unspeakably  blessed  they  who  keep  a  clean  conscience,  or  have  found  cleansing  and 
rest  in  Christ  I 

III.  Submission  to  the  inevitable.  If  Eli  had  now  and  then  cherished  a  faint 
hope  that  the  execution  of  the  sentence  against  him,  already  deferred,  would  be  either 
set  aside  or  modified,  all  hope  vanished  as  he  listened  to  the  simple  narrative  of  Samuel. 
The  terrible  tension  of  his  spirit  was  at  once  relaxed,  and  with  a  reverence  and  awe 
which  revealed  that  the  religious  life,  though  sadly  injured,  was  true,  he  could  only 
say,  "  It  is  the  Lord :  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him  good."  Poor  old  man  I  A  study 
for  others  in  responsible  positions  in  the  Church  of  God.  It  was  well  for  him  that  he 
30uld  thus  speak,  and  give  to  the  saints  of  all  time  a  form  of  words  exactly  suited 
to  them  when  adversity  falls  and  the  heart  sinks  within.  God  is  merciful  even  in  the 
chastisement  of  his  erring  people,  giving  them  grace  to  bow  submissively  to  his 
righteous  will.  Well  is  it  when  men  can  kiss  the  rod  that  smites  them  I  There  are, 
at  least,  four  cluiracteristics  in  a  true  submission  to  the  inevitable.  1.  A  distinet  re- 
cognition of  God's  acts.  "  It  is  the  Lord."  No  mere  blind  working  of  laws,  though 
forces  do  sweep  on  bringing  desolation  to  the  soul.  The  true  spirit  sees  God  in  all 
the  trouble.  2.  An  absence  of  all  complaint.  "  It  is  the  Lord."  That  is  enough. 
"  The  Lord  "  known  in  Israel,  who  made  all  things,  who  is  the  same  in  all  ages,  who 
visited  Lot  for  his  covetousness,  who  kept  Moses  out  of  the  promised  land  for  his 
rashness  ;  "  the  Lord  "  who  raises  to  honour  and  crowns  life  with  good,  and  has  only 
been  known  as  faithful,  holy,  just,  and  good.  Not  a  murmur,  not  a  bitter  word  or 
resentful  feeling,  finds  place  in  true  submission.  3.  Confoiinity  to  the  stroke.  "  Let 
him  do."  The  back  is  bared  to  the  rod.  It  is  duty  and  privilege  to  wish  none  other 
than  the  execution  of  his  purpose.  4.  £dief  that  all  is  for  good.  "  Let  him  do  what 
seemeth  him  good."  "  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I  trust  him."  Chastisement  of  the 
good,  and  also  direct  punishment  of  the  wicked,  are  in  the  judgment  of  God  good. 
True  submission  acquiesces  in  that  judgment.  Such  has  been  the  submission  of  the 
saints  in  ancient  and  modem  times ;  and  pre-eminently,  and  with  reference  to  special 
sorrows,  of  him  who,  when  bearing  a  burden  which  others  deserved,  said,  "  Father, 
not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done." 

IV.  A  GROWING  KEPUTATION.  SamuerH  fidelity  in  discharging  a  painful  duty  was 
a  good  beginning  of  an  ofiScial  life.  He  was  furnished  with  the  special  knowledge 
requisite  to  the  emergency  of  the  time.  The  repeated  secret  vision  in  Shiloh,  and  the 
votward  confirmation  of  his  words  before  the  people,  gave  him  courage,  and  secured 


76  THB  FIBST  BOOK  OF  BAMXTEL.  [oh.  m.  1— SI. 

hii  recognition  in  the  place  of  Eli.  TIiub  ^u  dements  enter  into  the  gradual 
aeguitUion  of  a  reputation.  1.  Fidelity  in  discharge  of  hiutvm  duty.  This  gives 
power  to  the  soul  for  any  further  duty,  however  unpleasant.  Temptations  overcome 
m  one  instance  lose  force  afterwards.  Sense  of  right  gains  energy  in  action  by  each 
exercise.  The  basis  of  substantial  character  is  laid  in  acts  of  righteonsness.  2. 
GinUinvmu  help  from  God.  We  cannot  go  on  to  new  conquests  by  the  mere  force 
of  what  we  have  become  by  previous  deeds.  As  Samuel  needed  and  enjoyed  aid 
from  God  for  his  position  in  life,  so  every  one  can  only  acquire  a  solid  reputation  by 
looking  for  and  using  such  aid  as  God  may  see  fit  to  bestow  day  by  day.  3.  Con- 
tinued verification  of  profesfion  by  deeds  corresponding  thereto.  A  character  attained 
to  by  faithful  deeds  in  the  past,  aided  by  Divine  grace,  becomes  practically  a  pro- 
fession. It  is  the  exponent  of  principles  supposed  to  be  dominant  in  the  life,  and 
men  give  a  certain  value  to  it.  But  if  reputation  is  to  grow  and  become  broader  in 
iia  base  and  wider  in  its  influence,  the  profession  of  principles  of  conduct  must  be 
verified  constantly  by  actions  appropriate  to  them. 

Practical  lessons  : — 1.  It  is  of  extreme  importance  for  young  and  old  to  cultivate  a 
rigid  regard  for  truth,  combined  with  a  tender  consideration  of  human  feeling.  2. 
The  discharge  of  disagreeable  duties  is  greatly  helped  by  the  remembrance  that  they 
arise  out  of  the  circumstances  in  which  God  himself  has  placed  us.  3.  We  should 
distinguish  between  wise  submission  to  what  God  lays  on  us  for  discipline,  and  indo- 
lent acquiescence  in  circumstances  self -created,  and  largely  removable  by  onr  efforts. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers.  1—18. — The  old  priest  and  the  child-prophet.  Every  imagination  must  be 
stmck  by  the  contrast  between  the  old  man  and  the  child.  The  more  so,  that  the 
natural  order  of  things  is  reversed.  Instead  of  admonition  to  the  child  coming 
through  the  lips  of  age,  admonition  to  the  aged  came  through  the  lips  of  childhood. 

1.  The  CHARACTER  OP  Eli  ILLUSTBATED.  1.  His  good  points.  The  Lord  had  ceased 
to  speak  to  or  by  Eli ;  but  when  the  old  priest  perceived  that  the  Lord  had  spoken  to 
the  child,  he  showed  no  personal  or  official  jealousy.  On  the  contrary,  he  kindly 
encouraged  Samuel,  and  directed  him  how  to  receive  the  heavenly  message.  He  did 
not  attempt  to  interpose  on  the  ground  that  he,  as  the  chief  priest,  was  the  official 
organ  of  Divine  communications,  but  bade  the  child  lie  still  and  hearken  to  the  voice. 
Nor  did  he  claim  any  preference  on  the  ground  of  his  venerable  age.  It  is  not  easy 
to  look  with  complacency  on  one  much  younger  than  ourselves  who  is  evidently  on 
the  way  to  excel  us  in  our  own  special  province.  But  Eli  did  so,  and  threw  no 
hindrance  whatever  in  the  way  of  the  young  child.  Let  God  use  as  his  seer  or 
prophet  whom  he  would.  Eli  was  anxious  to  know  the  truth,  and  the  whole  truth, 
from  the  mouth  of  the  child.  He  had  been  previously  warned  by  a  man  of  God  of  the 
disaster  which  his  own  weakness  and  his  sons'  wickedness  would  bring  on  the  priestly 
line  (ch.  ii.  27 — 36).  But  the  evil  of  the  time  was  too  strong  for  him  ;  and  having 
effected  no  reform  in  consequence  of  that  previous  warning,  the  old  man  must  have 
foreboded  some  message  of  reproof  and  judgment  when  the  voice  in  the  night  came 
not  to  himself,  but  to  the  child.  Yet  he  was  not  false  to  God,  and  would  not  shrink 
from  hearing  truth,  however  painful.  "  I  pray  thee  hide  it  not  from  me."  He  meekly 
acquiesced  in  the  condemnation  of  his  house.  Eli  had  no  sufficient  force  of  character 
or  vigour  of  purpose  to  put  away  the  evil  which  had  grown  to  such  enormity  under 
his  indulgent  rule,  but  he  was  ready  with  a  sort  of  plaintive  surrender  to  Divine 
justice.  It  was  not  a  high  style  of  character,  but  at  all  events  it  was  vastly  better 
than  a  self-justifying,  God-resisting  mood  of  mind.  2.  His  faults.  No  meek  lan- 
guage, no  pious  acquiescence  in  his  sentence,  can  extenuate  the  grievous  injury  which, 
through  indecision  and  infirmity,  Eli  had  brought  on  Israel  at  large,  and  on  the 
priestly  order  in  particular.  His  virtues  may  almost  be  said  to  have  sprung  out  of 
his  faults.  He  was  benevolent,  submissive,  and  free  from  jealousy  because  he  had 
no  force,  no  intensity.  He -could  lament  and  sufEer  well  because  he  had  no  energy. 
So  he  commanded  little  respect  because,  instead  of  checking  evil,  he  had  connived 
at  it  for  a  quiet  life.  "  There  are  persons  wno  go  tnrough  life  sinning  aiid  sorrowing, 
sorrowing  and  sinning.     No  experience  teaches  them.     Torrents  of  tears  flow  from 


oa.  m.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  71 

their  eyes.  They  are  full  of  eloquent  regrets.  But  all  In  vain.  When  they  hava 
done  wrong  once  they  do  -wrong  again.  What  are  such  persons  to  be  in  the  next 
life  ?     Where  will  the  Elis  of  this  world  be  ?    God  only  knows  "  (Robertson). 

II.  The  child  called  to  be  a  TEePHET.  We  may  discern  even  in  "  little  Samuel ' 
the  beginnings  of  a  great  character,  prognostics  of  an  illustrious  career.  The  child 
was  courageous,  not  afraid  to  sleep  in  one  of  the  priest's  chambers  alone,  no  father  or 
mother  near.  And  he  was  dutiful  to  the  aged  Eli,  hastening  to  him  when  he  thought 
that  he  had  called  in  the  night;  and  considerate  to  his  feelings,  reluctant  to  tell  him 
in  the  morning  the  heavy  judgments  of  which  God  had  spoken.  From  that  night  he 
began  to  be  a  prophet.  Very  soon  were  the  hopes  of  Hannah  for  her  son  fulfilled 
nay,  surpassed.  "  Samuel  grew,  and  the  Lord  was  with  him,  and  did  let  none  of  hit 
words  fall  to  the  ground."  The  nature  of  the  first  communication  made  through 
Samuel  gave  some  indication  of  the  future  strain  of  his  prophetic  life  and  testimony. 
He  was  not  to  be  one  of  those,  like  Isaiah,  Daniel,  and  Zeohariah,  whose  prophecies 
and  visions  reached  far  forward  into  future  times.  His  function  was  more,  like  that 
of  Moses,  Elijah,  or  Jeremiah,  as  a  teacher  of  private  and  public  righteousness.  He 
was  destined  to  maintain  the  law  and  authority  of  God,  to  rebuke  iniquity,  to  check 
and  even  sentence  transgressors  in  high  places,  to  withstand  the  current  of  national 
degeneracy,  and  insist  on  the  separation  of  Israel  from  the  heathen  nations  and  their 
customs.     The  pith  of  his  life-ministry  lay  in  his  urgency  for  moral  obedience. 

III.  Light  thrown  on  the  early  training  of  God's  public  servants.  It  is  ac- 
knowledged that  some  who  have  been  eminently  useful  in  Christian  times  have  been 
converted  in  manhood,  and  their  earlier  life  may  seem  to  have  been  lost.  Paul  was 
so  converted.  So  was  Augustine.  But  these  really  form  no  exception  to  the  rule 
that  God  directs  the  training  of  bis  servants  from  childhood.  Paul  had  a  good  Jewish 
Rabbinical  education,  and,  besides  this,  an  acquaintance  withGreek  literature  and  forms 
of  thought.  Having  been  brought  up  a  Pharisee,  he  was  the  more  fitted  after  his 
conversion  to  estimate  at  its  full  force  that  Jewish  resistance  to  Christianity  on  the 
ground  of  law-righteousness  which  he  above  all  men  combatted.  At  the  same  time, 
knowing  the  world,  and  being  from  his  youth  up  cultivated  and  intelligent  according 
to  the  Greek  standard,  he  was  prepared  to  be,  after  his  conversion,  a  most  suitable 
apostle  of  Christ  to  the  Gentiles.  A  similar  process  of  preparation  may  be  traced  in 
Augustine.  His  early  studies  in  logic  and  rhetoric  prepared  him,  though  he  knew  it 
not,  to  become  a  great  Christian  dialectician ;  and  even  the  years  in  which  he  served 
his  own  youthful  passions  were  not  without  yielding  some  profit,  inasmuch  as  they 
intensified  his  knowledge  of  the  po\yer  of  sin,  and  ultimately  of  the  sin-vanquishing 
power  of  grace.  ^  By  far  the  greater  number  of  those  who  have  served  the  Lord  as 
prophets,  preachers,  or  pastors  of  his  flock,  have  been  nourished  up  for  such  service 
from  early  years,  though  they  knew  it  not.  Some  of  them  went  first  to  other  callings. 
John  Cbrysostom  was  at  the  bar ;  Ambrose  in  the  civil  service,  rising  to  be  prefect 
of  Liguria ;  Cyprian  was  a  teacher  of  rhetoric ;  Melancthon,  a  professor  of  Greek. 
Moses  himself  grew  up  a  scholar  and  a  soldier,  and  no  one  who  saw  him  in  the  court 
of  Egypt  could  have  guessed  his  future  career.  But  in  such  cases  God  guided  his 
servants  in  youth  through  paths  of  knowledge  and  experience  which  were  of  utmost 
value  to  them  when  they  found  at  last  their  real  life-work  for  his  name.  There  is 
danger,  however,  in  sudden  transitions  from  one  walk  of  life  to  another,  and  from  one 
mould  of  character  to  another.  It  is  the  danger  of  extravagance.  There  is  a  proverb 
about  the  excessive  zeal  of  sudden  converts  ;  and  there  is  this  measure  of  truth  in  it, 
that  persons  who  rapidly  change  their  views  or  their  position  need  sbme  lapse  of  time, 
and  some  inward  discipline,  before  they  learn  calmness,  religious  self-possession, 
and  meekness^  of  wisdom.  It  is.therefore  worthy  of  our  notice  that  God  gave  Moses 
a  long  pause  in  the  land  of  Midian,  and  Paul  also  in  Arabia.  We  return  to  the  fact 
that  the  great  majority  of  God's  servants  in  the  gospel  have  grown  up  with  religious 
sentiments  and  desires  from  their  very  childhood.  So  it  was  with  John  the  Baptist, 
with  Timothy,_with  Basil,  with  Jerome,  with  Bernard  of  Clairvaux,  with  Columba, 
with  Usher,  with  Zinzendorf,  with  Bengel,  and  many  more.  So  it  was  with  Samuel. 
His  first  lessons  were  from  the  devout  and  gifted  Hannah  in  the  quiet  home  at  Bamah. 
From  his  earliest  consciousness  he  knew  that  he  was  to  be  the  Lord's,  and  a  specially 
consecrated  servant  or  Nazarite.     Then  he  was  taken  to  Shilob,  and  his  special  training 


78  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [cm.  m.  1— M 

for  a  grand  and  difSouIt  career  began.  Early  in  his  life  be  had  to  SM  evil  among 
those  who  ought  to  have  shown  the  best  example.  He  had  to  see  what  mischief  ia 
wrought  by  relaxation  of  morals  among  the  rulers  of  what  we  should  call  Church  and 
State,  so  that  an  abhorrence  of  such  misconduct  might  be  deeply  engraved  on  his 
untainted  soul.  But  at  the  same  time  Samuel  grew  up  in  daily  contact  with  holy 
things.  The  sacred  ritual,  which  was  no  more  than  a  form  to  the  wicked  priesta,  had 
an  elevating  and  purifying  influence  on  the  serious  spirit  of  this  child.  And  so  it 
was  that  Samuel,  conversant  day  by  day  with  holy  names  and  symbols,  took  a  mould 
of  character  in  harmony  with  these — took  it  gradually,  firmly,  unalterably.  Itgavt 
steadiness  to  his  future  ministry ;  for  he  was  to  retrieve  losses,  assuage  excitements, 
re-establish  justice,  reprove,  rebuke,  and  exhort  the  people  and  their  first  king.  Such 
a  ministry  needed  a  character  of  steady  growth,  and  the  personal  influence  which 
attends  a  consistent  life.  So  the  Lord  called  Samuel  when  a  child,  and  he  answered, 
"Speak;  for  thy  servant  heareth."  May  God  raise  np  young  children  among  us 
to  quit  themselves  hereafter  as  men—to  redress  wrongs,  establish  truth  and  right, 
heal  divisions,  reform  the  Church,  and  pave  the  way  for  the  coming  King  and  the 
kingdom  I — F. 

Vew.  1—18.  (SETLon.y—SamuePs  call  to  the propheHe  office.  "The  Lofd  odled 
Samuel"  (ver.  4). 

"  In  Israel's  fane,  by  silent  night, 
The  lamp  of  God  was  burning  bright ; 
And  there,  by  viewless  angels  kept, 
Samuel,  the  child,  securely  slept 

A  voice  unknown  the  stillness  broke, 
'  Samuel  1 '  it  called,  and  thrice  it  spoke. 
He  rose — he  asked  whence  came  the  word. 
From  Eli !    No  ;  it  was  the  Lord. 

Thus  early  called  to  serve  his  God, 

In  paths  of  righteousness  he  trod  ; 

Prophetic  visions  fired  his  breast, 

And  all  the  chosen  tribes  were  Messed  "  (Cawoed). 

Introductory.— 1.  This  call  to  the  prophetic  office  took  place  at  a  time  of  great 
moral  and  spiritual  darkness.  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  "  (the  revelation  of  his  mind 
and  will  to  men)  "  was  rare  in  those  days  ;  for  "  (therefore,  as  the  effect ;  or  because, 
as  the  evidence  of  the  absence  of  such  revelation)  "  there  was  no  vision"  (prophetic 
communication)  "  spread  abroad  "  among  the  people  (ver.  1 ;  2  Chron.  zxxi.  6). 
(1)  The  word  of  God  is  needed  by  man  because  of  his  ignorance  of  the  highest 
truths,  and  his  inability  to  attain  the  knowledge  of  them  by  his  own  efforts.  (2)  Its 
possession  is  hindered  by  prevailing  indifference  and  corruption.  (3)  Its  ahimce  is 
worse  than  a  famine  or  bread  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  9 ;  Amos  viii.  11),  and  most  destructive 
(Prov.  xxix.  18).  2.  It  was  the  commencement  of  a  fresh  series  of  Divine  com- 
munications, which  culminated  in  the  teaching  of  the  great  Prophet,  "  who  spake  as 
never  man  spake  "  (Acts  iii.  24 ;  Heb.  i.  1).  This  is  the  chief  general  significance 
of  the  event.  "The  call  of  Samuel  to  be  the  prophet  and  judge  of  Israel  formed  a 
turning-point  in  the  history  of  the  Old  Testament  kingdom  of  God."  3.  It  was  given 
to  one  who  was-  very  young  (twelve  years  old,  according  to  Josephus,  when  child- 
hood merges  into  youth ;  Luke  ii.  42),  and  who  held  the  lowest  place  in  the  taber- 
nacle, where  Eli  held  the  highest,  but  who  was  specially  prepared  for  the  work  to 
which  he  was  called.  "  Shadows  of  impenitent  guilt  were  the  dark  background  of 
the  picture  from  which  the  beams  of  Divine  love  which  guided  that  child  of  grace 
shone  forth  in  brighter  relief  "  (Anderson).  4.  It  came  in  a  manner  most  adapted 
to  convince  Eli  and  Samuel  that  it  was  indeed  from  tbe  Lord  (ver.  8),  and  to  answer 
its  immediate  purpose  in  regard  to  both.     Notice — 

I.  The  voice  of  the  Lord.  1.  It  was  heard  in  the  temple  (vers.  2,  8),  or  palace 
of  the  invisible  King  of  Isrnel,  proceeding  from  his  throne  in  the  innermost  sanc- 
tuary (Exod.  XXV.  22  ;  1  Sam.  iv.  4 ;  Heb.  ix.  5)  ;  not  now,  however,  addressing  the 


OH.  III.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  Tt 

high  priest,  but  a  child,  as  a  more  loyal  subject,  and  more  susceptible  to  IMvine 
teaching  (Matt.  xi.  25, 26).  2.  It  broke  suddenly  on  the  silence  and  slumbers  of  the 
night ;  "  ere  the  lamp  of  God  went  out,"  i.  e.  toward  the  morning — a  season  suitable 
todeep  and  solemn  impression.  "  Untroubled  night,  they  say,  gives  counsel  best." 
The  light  of  Israel  before  God,  represented  by  the  golden  candelabrum,  with  its 
"  seven  lamps  of  fire,"  was  burning  dimly,  and  the  dawn  of  a  new  day  was  at  hand. 
3.  It  called  Samuel  by  name,  not  merely  as  a  means  of  arousing  him,  but  as  indicat- 
ing the  Lord's  intimate  knowledge  of  his  history  and  character  (John  x.  3),  and  his 
claims  upon  his  special  service.  The  All-seeing  has  a  perfect  knowledge  of  each 
individual  soul,  and  deals  with  it  accordingly.  4.  It  was  often  repeated,  with  ever- 
increasing  impressiveness.  Natural  dulness  in  the  discernment  of  spiritual  things 
renders  necessary  the  repetition  of  God's  call  to  men,  and  his  patience  is  wonderfully 
shown  in  such  repetition.  5.  It  was  in  the  last  instance  accompanied  by  an  appear- 
ance. "  Jehovah  came,  and  stood,  and  called  "  (ver.  10).  Probably  in  glorious  human 
form,  as  in  former  days.  "  Allied  to  our  nature  by  engagement  and  anticipation,  the 
eternal  Word  occasionally  assumed  its  prophetic  semblance  before  he  dwelt  on  earth 
in  actual  incarnate  life."  There  could  now  be  no  doubt  whence  the  voice  proceeded; 
and  even  the  delay  which  had  occurred  must  have  served  to  waken  up  all  the 
faculties  of  the  child  into  greater  activity,  and  prepare  him  for  the  main  communi- 
cation he  was  about  to  receive. 

IL  The  response  of  Samuel.  1.  He  did  not  at  first  recognise  the  voice  as  God's, 
but  thought  it  was  Eli's  (vers.  4 — 6).  For  "  he  did  not  yet  knpw  the  Lord  "  by  direct 
and  conscious  revelation,  "  neither  was  the  Word  of  the  Lord  revealedto  him  "  (literally, 
made  bare,  disclosed ;  as  a  secret  told  in  the  ear,  which  has  been  uncovered  by  turning 
back  the  hair — Gen.  xxv.  7 ;  1  Sam.  ix.  15 ;  Job  xxxiii.  16)  as  it  was  afterwards 
(ver.  21).  "  We  must  not  think  that  Samuel  was  then  ignorant  of  the  true  God,  but 
that  he  knew  not  the  manner  of  that  voice  by  which  the  prophetical  spirit  was  wont 
to  awaken  the  attention  of  the  prophets  "  (John  Smith's  '  Sel.  Discourses,'  p.  208). 
"  God  speaketh  once,  yea  twice,  yet  man  perceiveth  it  not "  (Job  xxxiii.  14).  How 
often  is  his  voice  deemed  to  be  only  the  voice  of  man  I  2.  He  acted  up  to  the  light 
he  had  (vers.  7,  8).  Three  times  his  rest  was  broken  by  what  he  thought  was  the 
voice  of  Eli ;  three  times  he  ran  to  him  obediently,  uncomplainingly,  promptly ;  and 
three  times  he  "  went  and  lay  down  in  his  place  "  as  he  was  bidden.  The  spirit 
which  he  thus  displayed  prepared  him  for  higher  instruction.  3.  He  obeyed  the 
direction  given  him  by  the  high  priest  (ver.  9).  Although  Eli  could  not  himself 
hear  the  voice,  yet  he  perceived  that  it  was  heard  by  another,  showed  no  indignation 
or  envy  at  the  preference  shown  toward  him,  and  taught  him  to  listen  to  the  Lord 
for  himself,  and  what  he  should  say  in  response.  "He  showed  himself  a  better 
tutor  than  he  was  a  parent"  (Hall).  4.  He  responded  in  a  spirit  of  reverence, 
humility,  and  obedience  to  the  voice  that  now  uttered  his  name  twice  (ver.  10). 
"  Speak ;  for  thy  servant  heareth."  His  omission  of  the  name  "  Jehovah  "  was  per- 
haps due  to  his  overwhelming  astonishment  and  reverence  But  he  confessed  him- 
self to  be  his  servant,  virtually  ratifying  of  his  own  accord  his  dedication  to  his 
service,  and  testified  his  readiness  to  "hear  and  obey."  Oh,  what  an  hour  is  that  in 
which  the  presence  of  the  Lord  is  first  manifested  in  living  force  to  the  soul  1  and 
what  a  change  does  it  produce  in  all  the  prospects  and  purposes  of  life  I  (Gen. 
xxviii.  16,  17).  "  We  were  like  them  that  sleep,  them  that  dream,  before  we  entered 
into  communion  with  God." 

III.  The  communication  of  God  to  Samuel.  1.  It  differed  from  the  message  of  - 
the  "  mam  of  God,"  which  had  come  some  time  previously,  in  that  it  was  more  brief, 
simple,  and  severe ;  and  was  given  to  Samuel  alone,  without  any  express  direction  to 
make  it  known  to  Eli,  who  seems  to  have  paid  no  regard  to  the  warning  he  pre- 
viously received.  2.  It  was  an  announcement  oi  judgment  on  the  house  of  Eli  which 
would  be — (1)  Very  startling  and  horrifying  to  men  (ver.  11).  (2)  The  fulfilment  of 
the  word  which  had  been  already  spoken  (ver.  12).  (3)  Complete.  "  When  I  begin,  I 
will  also  make  an  end."  (4)  Righteously  deserved,  inasmuch  as  his  sons  had  grievously 
sinned,  and  he  knew  it  as  well  as  the  approncliing  judgment,  and  restrained  them  not 
(ver.  13 ;  James  iv.  17).  "  Sinners  make  themselves  vile  (literally,  curse  themselves), 
and  those  who  do  not  reprove  them  make  themselves  accessaries  "  (M.  Henry).  (6)  Per- 


80  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  m.  1—21. 

manent  and  irrevocable.    "Forever."  "IhaveBwoni,"&c.  (ver.  14).    S.  It  was  veiy 

painful  to  Samuel  because  it  was  directed  "against  Eli"  (ver.  12 — as  well  as  his  house), 
for  whom  he  entertained  a  deep  and  tender  affection.  The  "burden  of  the  Lord"waf 
heavy  for  a  child  to  bear.  It  was  his  first  experience  of  the  prophet's  cross,  but  it 
prepared  him  for  his  future  work.  "  Woe  to  the  man  who  receives  a  message  from 
the  gods."  4.  It  put  his  character  to  a  seoere  test,  by  leaving  to  his  discretion  the 
use  which  he  should  make  of  so  terrible  a  communication.  Wisdom  and  grace  are  as 
much  needed  in  using  God's  communications  as  in  receiving  and  responding  to  his 
voice. 

IV.  The  disclosube  by  Samuel  to  Eli.  1.  It  was  not  made  hastily  or  rashly 
(ver.  16).  "He  lay  down  till  the  morning,"  pondering  the  communication  ;  he  suf- 
fered it  not  to  interfere  with  the  duty  that  lay  immediately  before  him,  but  rose  and 
"  opened  the  doors  of  the  house  "  as  usual,  though  with  a  heavy  heart ;  and  exhibited 
great  calmness,  self-control,  discretion,  and  considerate  reserve.  He  "  feared  to 
show  Eli  the  vision  "  lest  he  should  be  grieved,  or  take  it  in  a  wrong  manner.  2.  It 
was  only  made  under  strong  pressure  (vers.  16,  17).  "  Samuel,  my  son  "  (B'ni),  said 
Eli ;  and  "  how  much  is  expressed  by  this  one  word  I  "  (Thenius).  He  asked,  he 
demanded,  he  adjured.  3.  It  was  made  truthfully,  faithfully,  and  without  any 
reserve  (ver.  18).  4.  It  was  followed  by  a  henejidal  effect.  Not,  indeed,  in  rousing 
the  high  priest  to  strenuous  efforts  for  the  reformation  of  his  house,  which  he  probably 
deemed  impossible,  but  in  leading  him  to  acknowledge  that  it  was  the  Lord  who  had 
spoken,  and  to  resign  himself  to  his  will.  No  such  effect  followed  the  warning  pre- 
viously addressed  to  him.  A  similar  spirit  was  shown  by  Aaron  (Levit.  x.  3),  by 
Job  (i.  21),  by  David  (2  Sam.  xviii.  14,  15,  32,  33),  by  Hezekiah  (2  Kings  xx.  19), 
and,  above  all,  by  the  great  High  Priest  himself  (Matt.  xxvi.  42).  No  other  Divine 
message  came  e^parently  to  Eli  or  his  house.  Henceforth  there  was  only  the  silence 
that  precedes  the  thunderstorm  and  the  earthquake. — D. 

Ver.  10. — The  faithful  servant.  "Speak;  for  thy  servant  heareth.''  The  well- 
known  picture  by  Sir  Joshua  Reynolds,  representing  the  child  Samuel  in  tlie  attitude 
of  prayer,  aptly  expresses  the  spirit  of  his  whole  life.  His  own  language  in  response 
to  the  call  of  God  does  this  still  more  perfectly,  and  "  contains  the  secret  of  his 
strength."  It  also  teaches  us  how  we  should  respond  to  the  Divine  call  which  is 
addressed  to  ns,  and  what  is  the  spirit  which  we  ought  ever  to  possess.  For  God 
speaks  to  us  as  truly  as  he  spoke  to  Samuel,  though  in  a  somewhat  different  manner. 
He  speaks  to  us  often,  and  caUs  each  of  us  to  special  service  for  him ;  and  there  can- 
not be  a  nobler  aim  than  that  of  possessing  the  mind,  disposition,  and  character  of  a 
"  faithful  servant "  (Matt.  xxv.  21)  here  portrayed.    This  implies — 

I.  Consciousness  of  the  Master's  peesence.  1.  Peculiar  ;  not  merely  a  general 
belief  in  his  omnipresence,  such  as  most  persons  have,  but  a  realisation  of  his  presence 
here;  not  as  in  a  dream,  but  in  full  waking  thought ;  not  as  if  he  were  at  a  distance 
from  us,  but  "face  to  face."  "Thou  God  seest  me."  2.  Intense;  filling  the  soul 
with  the  light  of  his  glory  and  with  profound  reverence  (Job  xlii.  6).  3.  HaUtual; 
abiding  with  us  at  all  times,  carried  with  us  into  every  place,  and  pervading  and 
influencing  all  our  thoughts,  words,  and  actions. 

II.  Acknowledgment  of  the  Master's  claims.  "  Thy  servant."  His  claims-  are 
—1.  Just;  because  of— (1)  What  he  has  done  for  us.  He  has  given  us  our  being, 
and  all  that  makes  it  a  blessing  (ch.  i.  11).  He  has  purchased  us  at  a  great  price  (1 
Pet.  i.  18).  "  Ye  are  not  your  own  "  (1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20).  (2)  Our  consecration  to  him 
(ch.  1.  28).  "  I  am  the  Lord's  "  (Isa.  xliv.  6).  (3)  Our  acceptance  by  him.  2. 
Supreme.  AH  other  claims  are  inferior  to  his,  and  must  be  regarded  as  subordinate 
to  them.    3.   Universal ;  extending  to  all  our  faculties,  possessions,  &c. 

"  My  gracious  Lord,  I  own  thy  right 
To  every  service  I  can  pay, 
And  call  it  my  supreme  delight 
To  hear  thy  dictates  and  obey. 

What  is  my  being  but  for  thee, 
Its  sure  support,  its  noblest  end  | 


OH.  in.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  81 

Thy  ever-smiling  face  to  see, 

And  serve  the  cause  of  such  a  Friend  I "  (Doddridga). 

in.  LiSTENiRO  TO  THE  Master's  dibkotions.  "Speak."  "  I  am  Waiting  to  heai 
thy  commands,  and  desire  to  know  thy  will."  "  What  saith  my  Lord  unto  his  servant  ?  " 
(Josh.  V.  14).  "  What  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?  "  (Acts  ix.  6).  His  directions  are 
given  by — 1.  His  teord,  in  the  law  and  the  gospel.  2.  Hiii  providence,  in  the  various 
events  of  life,  affording  fresh  opportunities,  bringing  new  responsibilities,  indicating 
special  methods  of  service.  "  New  occasions  teach  new  duties."  "  There  are  so 
many  kinds  of  voices  in  the  world,  and  none  of  them  is  without  signification  "  (1  Cor. 
xiv.  10).  S.  His  Spirit;  teaching  the  meaning  and  application  of  the  word,  sug- 
gesting thoughts  and  activities  in  accordance  with  his  revealed  will,  filling  the  heart 
with  holy  and  benevolent  impulses.  "  It  is  written  in  the  prophets,  And  they  shall 
be  all  taught  of  God  "  (John  vi.  45).  "  Behold,  as  the  eyes  of  servants  look  unto 
the  hand  of  their  masters  "  (watching  with  the  utmost  attention  for  every  indication 
of  their  will),  "  so  our  eyes  wait  upon  the  Lord  our  God  "  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  8 :  cxziii.  2  ; 
Hab.  ii.  1). 

IV.  Readiness  fob  the  Master's  work.  "  Thy  servant  heareth  ; "  stands  ready 
to  obey — 1.  WAa<««er  thou  mayest  direct.  2.  With  my  Mtoos<  strength,  fi.  Promptly; 
without  delay.  "  When  it  pleased  God  to  reveal  his  Son  in  me,  immediately  I  con- 
ferred not  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  went"  (Gal.  i.  16 — 17).  When  Ledyard  (whose 
life  was  the  first  of  many  sacrificed  to  African  discovery)  closed  with  the  proposal 
of  the  Association  for  Promoting  the  Discovery  of  the  Inland  Parts  of  Africa  to 
undertake  a  journey  in  that  region,  and  was  asked  how  soon  he  would  be  ready  to 
set  out,  he  replied, "  To-morrow  morning."  The  like  promptitude  should  be  exhibited 
by  every  "good  and  faithful  servant." — D. 

Ver.  13. — Parental  restraint.  "And  he  restrained  them  not."  The  parental  rela- 
tion was  universally  regarded  in  ancient  times  as  one  which  involved  a  closer  identity 
between  parents  and  children,  and  a  more  absolute  authority  on  the  part  of  the 
former  over  the  latter,  than  would  now  be  deemed  just.  This  fact  explains  many 
occurrences  in  the  sacred  history.  It  also  makes  more  apparent  the  inexcusable  con- 
duct of  Eli  in  omitting  to  restrain  his  sons  from  their  evil  way.  To  every  head  of  a 
family,  however,  belongs  a  certain  measure  of  authority,  and  he  is  responsible  for  its 
exercise  in  "  commanding  his  children  and  his  household  "  (Gen.  xviii.  19)  to  do 
what  is  right,  and  restraining  them  from  doing  what  is  wrong.  Concerning  parental 
RESTRAINT,  observe  that — 

I.  Its  need  is  urgent.  1.  Because  of  the  strong  tendency  to  evil  which 
exists  in  children.  However  it  may  be  accounted  for  or  explained,  there  can  be  no 
deubt  of  the  fact.  If  it^be  simply,  as  some  say,  a  desire  of  self -gratification,  and 
dislike  of  everything  that  hinders  it — self-will,  it  is  necessary  that  it  should  be 
checked ;  for  those  who  are  trained  to  deny  themselves  in  very  early  life,  and  submit 
to  the  will  of  their  parents,  are  far  more  likely  than  others  to  accept  and  submit  to 
the  will  of  God  when  they  beoome  conscious  of  it.  "  In  order  to  form  the  minds  of 
children,  the  first  thing  to  be  done  is  to  conquer  their  will  and  bring  them  to  an  obe- 
dient temper.  This  is  the  only  strong  and  rational  foundation  of  a  religious  educa- 
tion, without  which  both  precept  and  example  will  be  ineffectual.  As  self-will  is  the 
root  of  all  sin  and  misery,  so  whatever  cherishes  this  in  children  insures  their  after 
wretchedness  and  irrcligion  ;  whatever  checks  and  mortifies  it  promotes  their  future 
happiness  and  piety  "  (The  mother  of  the  Wesleys).  2.  Because  of  the  evil  examples 
by  which  they  are  surrounded,  and  which  act  so  powerfully  on  their  susceptibility  to 
impression  and  their  propensity  to  imitation.  3.  Because  of  the  manifold  temptations 
to  which  they  are  exposed.  However  guarded,  they  cannot  be  altogether  kept  from 
their  influence. 

II.  Its  obligation  is  imperative.  1.  It  is  obviously  a  part  of  parental  duty. 
2.  It  is  often  enjoined  in  the  word  of  God  (Deut.  xxi.  15 — 21 ;  Prov.  xix.  18  ;  xxiii 
13,  14 ;  xxix.  16, 17).  3.  It  is  clearly  adapted  to  accomplish  beneficial  results  (Prov. 
xxii.  6).  It  is  thus  a  duty  which  parents  owe  not  only  to  their  children,  but  also  to 
the  great  Parent  of  all,  who,  by  the  manner  in  which  he  deals  with  his  earthly  children, 
Iras  himself  set  them  an  example. 

1  BAM-  • 


82  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [cH.  in.  1—21, 

n.  Its  mbthod  is  impobtant.  It  should  be— 1.  Timdy  ;  commenced  at  an  early 
age  (Prov.  xiii.  24).  2.  Firm  and  just.  3.  With  consideration,  kindnest,  and 
patimee  (Eph.  vi.  4;  Col.  iii.  21). 

"  O'er  wayward  childhood  wonldst  thon  hold  firm  nil*, 

And  ran  thee  in  the  light  of  happy  faces, 

Love,  hope,  and  patience,  these  must  be  thy  gracei, 
And  in  thine  own  heart  let  them  first  keep  school ; 

For  as  old  Atlas  on  his  broad  neck  places 
Heaven's  starry  globe,  and  there  sustains  it ;  M 
Do  these  bear  up  the  little  world  below 

Of  education  —patience,  love,  and  hope  "  (Coleridge): 

IV.  Its  omission  is  kuinods.  1.  To  children  (oh.  iv.  11).  2.  To  pareiUt  (oh.  iv. 
18).  3.  To  the  wah'ore  (eh.  iv.  22).  "  Indulgent  parents  are  cruel  to  themselves  and 
their  posterity  "  (Hall).  How  numerous  are  the  facts  which  justify  these  statements  I 
"  As  in  individuals,  so  in  nations,  unbridled  indulgence  of  the  passions  must  produce, 
and  does  produce,  frivolity,  effeminacy,  slavery  to  the  appetite  of  the  moment ;  a 
brutalised  and  reckless  temper,  before  which  prudence,  energy, -national  feeling,  any 
and  every  feeling  which  is  not  centred  in  self,  perishes  utterly.  The  old  French 
noblesse  gave  a  proof  of  this  law  which  will  last  as  a  warning  beacon  to  the  end  of 
time.  The  Spanish  population  of  America,  I  am  told,  gives  now  a  fearful  proof  of 
this  same  terrible  penalty.  Has  not  Italy  proved  it  likewise  for  centuries  past?  It 
must  be  so.  For  national  life  is  grounded  on,  is  the  development  of,  the  life  of  the 
family.  And  where  the  root  is  corrupt  the  tree  must  be  corrupt  likewise  "  (Kingsley, 
'The  Roman  and  the  Teuton,' Lect.  ii.).  Therefore  (1)  let  parents  exercise  due 
restraint  over  their  children  ;  t(nd  (2)  let  children  submit  to  the  restraint  of  their, 
parents  (Exod.  xx.  12  ;  Levit.  xix.  3 ;  Prov.  xxx.  17 ;  Jer.  xzxv.  18,  19). — D. 

Ver.  18. — Resignation.  "  It  is  the  Lord :  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him  good.'" 
The  sentence  which  was  pronounced  on  Eli  and  his  house  was  almost  aa  severe  as 
can  be  conceived.  But  the  manner  in  which  it  was  received  by  him  shows  that, 
notwithstanding  the  defects  of  his  character,  he  possessed  the  "  spirit  of  faith,'' 
which  shone  like  a  spark  of  fire  amidst  the  ashes  and  gloom  of  his  closing  days.  He 
did  not  refuse  to  admit  its  Divine  Author,  did  not  question  its  justice,  did  not  rebel 
against  it  and  seek  to  reverse  it,  did  not  fret  and  murmur  and  give  himself  up  to 
despair.  His  language  expresses  a  spirit  the  exact  opposite  of  all  this.  "When 
Samuel  had  told  him  every  whit,  Eli  replied,  It  is  the  Lord.  The  highest  religion 
could  say  no  more.  What  more  can  there  be  than  surrender  to  the  will  of  God  ?  In 
that  one  brave  sentence  you  forget  all  Eli's  vacillation.  Free  from  envy,  free  from 
priestcraft,  earnest,  humbly  submissive  ;  that  is  the  bright  side  of  Eli's  character,, 
and  the  side  least  known  or  thought  of  "  (F.  W.  Robertson). 

I.  He  eecognises  the  appointwent  of  God.  "It  is  the  Lord,"  or  "ho  is  the 
Lord,"  who  has  spoken.  He  believed  that  the  voice  was  really  his,  notwithstanding 
(1)  it  came  to  him  iTidirectly — through  the  agency  of  another;  (2)  it  came  in  an 
unexpected  manner  ;  and  (3)  it  announced  what  he  naturally  disliked  to  hear,  and 
what  was  most  grievous.  These  things  sometimes  dispose  men  to  doubt  "  the  word  of 
the  Lord,"  and  are  made  excuses  for  rejecting  it.  It  is  not,  in  its  mode  of  com- 
munication or  in  its  contents,  "  according  to  their  mind."  But  the  spirit  of  faith 
ventures  not  to  dictate  to  God  how  or  what  he  shall  say,  and  it  perceives  the  Divine 
voice  when  those  who  are  destitute  of  it  perceive  only  what  is  purely  natural  and 
human. 

II.  He  justifies  teji  rectitudk  of  God.     Such  justification  (Ps.  IL  4) 1.  Is 

implied  in  the  acknowledgment  that  it  comes  from  Jehovah,  who  alone  is  holy 
(ch.  ii.  2).  "  Shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right?  "  (Gen.  xviii.  25).  2. 
Pr'Mxed*  from  the  conviction  that  it  is  deserved  on  account  of  the  iniquity  of  his 
sons,  and  his  own  sins  of  omission  (Lam.  iii.  39  ;  Micah  vii.  9).  They  who  have  a 
due  sense  of  the  evil  of  sin  are  not  disposed  to  complain  of  the  severity  of  the 
sentence  pronounced  against  it,  3.  Is  not  the  less  real  because  not  fully  expressed, 
for  silence  itseU  is  often  the  most  genuine  testimony  to  the  perfect  equity  of  the 
Pivine  procedure.     "  Aaron  held  Lis  peace  "  (Lev.  i.  3  j  Ps.  xxxix.  9,  11). 


OH,  III.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  83 

III.  He  submits  to  the  sovereignty  of  God.  "  Let  him  do  what  Beemeth  liiin 
good."  1.  Very  reverently  and  humbly  (1  Pet.  v.  6).  It  is  vain  to  contend  against 
him.  2.  freely  and  cheerfully ;  not  because  he  cannot  be  effectually  resisted,  but 
because  what  he  does  is  right  and  good  ;  the  spontaneous  surrender  and  lacriflce  of 
the  will.     3.  Entirely.     "The  will  of  the  Lord  be  done  "  (Acts  xxi.  14). 

IV.  He  confides  in  the  goodness  of  God.  ■'  Good."  "  Good  is  the  word  of  the 
Lord "  (2  Kings  xx.  19).  Eli  could  not  have  spoken  as  he  did  unless  he  believed 
that — (1)  God  is  merciful  and  gracious ;  (2)  in  wrath  remembers  mercy,  mitigating 
the  force  of  the  storm  to  all  who  seek  shelter  in  his  bosom  ;  and  (3)  "  out  of  evil 
still  educes  good  "  (Rom.  viii.  28).  Let  us  be  thankful  for  the  surpassing  motives 
and  influences  afforded  to  us  under  the  gospel  (2  Cor.  iv.  17  j  Heb.  iv.  15 ;  xiL  10, 
11 ;  Bev.  xxi.  4  ;  xxii.  3).— D. 

Ver.  19 — iv.  1.  (Shiloh.) — Samuel  the  prophet.  "A  prophet  of  the  Lord"(ver. 
20).  "  A  prophet  was  a  man  who  drew  aside  the  curtain  from  the  secret  counsels  of 
Heaven.  He  declared  or  made  public  the  previously  hidden  truths  of  God;  and, 
because  future  events  might  chance  to  involve  Divine  truth,  therefore  a  revealer  of 
future  events  might  happen  to  be  a  prophet.  Yet,  still,  small  was  the  part  of  a 
prophet's  functions  which  contained  the  foreshadowing  of  events,  and  not  necessarily 
any  part  of  it "  (De  Quincey,  '  Confessions,'  p.  27).  The  greatest  of  prophets,  and 
more  than  a  prophet,  was  Moses  (Num.  xii.  6 — 8  ;  Deut.  xviii.  15  ;  xxxiv.  9).  After 
him  a  prophet  arose  at  rare  intervals.  With  Samuel,  who  was  second  only  to  Moses, 
a  new  prophetic  era  began.  He  was  called  to  a  permanent  prophetic  work ;  a  type 
of  the  future  line  of  the  prophets  which  he  virtually  founded,  and  "  set  for  all  time 
the  great  example  of  the  office  of  a  prophet  of  the  Lord."  "  In  Samuel — Levite, 
Nazarite,  at  the  sanctuary  of  Shiloh,  prophet,  and  destined  founder  of  a  mightier  pro- 
phetic power — were  united  from  the  first  all  spiritual  giftsmbst  potent  for  the  welfare 
of  the  people,  and  under  his  powerful  control  stood  the  wheels  on  which  the  age 
revolved.  .  .  .  He  was  truly  the  father  of  all  the  great  prophets  who  worked  such 
wonders  in  the  ensuing  centuries  "  (Ewald.  See  '  Davison  on  Prophecy ; '  '  Fairbaim 
on  Prophecy ; '  '  Prophecy  a  Preparation  for  Christ,'  by  the  Dean  of  Canterbury). 
The  summary  of  his  prophetic  activity  here  ^ven  leads  us  to  consider — 

L  His  qualification.  "  And  Samuel  grew,  and  the  Lord  was  with  him  "  (ver.  19). 
"  And  the  Lord  appeared  again  in  Shiloh  (ver.  10) :  for  the  Lord  revealed  himself  to 
Samuel  in  Shiloh  by  the  word  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  21).  1.  The  possession  of  a  holy 
character,  which  was  the  general  condition  of  prophetic  endowment.  At  the  time  of 
his  call  Samuel  entered  into  a  higher  knowledge  of  God,  and  a  closer  fellowship  with 
him  than  he  had  before ;  he  gradually  advanced  therein,  and  his  character  became 
more  and  more  perfect.  "  Equable  progression  from  the  beginning  to  the  end  was 
the  special  characteristic  of  his  life."  "  The  qualifications  which  the  Jewish  doctors 
suppose  necessarily  antecedent  to  render  a.ny  one  hahilem  ad prophetandum  are  truly 
probity  ajxd piety;  and  this  was  the  constant  sense  and  opinion  of  them  all  universally, 
not  excluding  the  vulgar  themselves  "  (John  Smith,  '  Sel.  Disc'  p.  250).  2.  The 
revelation  to  him  of  the  Divine  word — by  voices,  visions,  insight,  intuition,  inspiration 
(ver.  7).  "  For  the  prophecy  came  not  in  old  time  by  the  will  of  man ;  but  holy 
men  of  God  spake  as  they  were  moved  (borne  along  as  a  ship  by  the  wind)  by  the 
Holy  Ghost "  (2  Pet.  i.  21).  The  communications  of  God  to  men  have  been  made 
in  many  ways  (by  dreams,  by  Urim,  by  prophecy),  and  one  communication  faithfully 
received  and  used  has  prepared  the  way  for  another.  How  long  after  the  Lord  first 
appeared  to  Samuel  he  "  appeared  again  "  to  him  is  not  stated.  3.  The  conviction  of 
its  Divine  origin,  amounting  to  absolute  certainty,  and  impelling  him  to  speak  and 
act  in  accordance  with  the  revelation  he  received. 

II.  His  VOOATION.  "  And  the  word  of  Samuel  came  to  all  Israel"  (ch.  iv.  1).  He 
had  not  only  to  receive  the  word  from  God,  but  also  to  utter  it  to  men.  He  was  a 
spokesman  for  God,  a  messenger  or  interpreter  of  the  Divine  will.  1.  The  nature 
and  purpose  othiBvocatioavoie — (1)  Tm  communication  of  doetrine:  the  teaching 
of  moral  and  spiritual  truth;  the  declaration  of  the  mind  and  will  of  the  invisible 
and  eternal  King,  with  special  reference  to  the  requirements  of  the  time  in  which  ha 
lived.     He  was  a  witness  of  the  presence  and  govemment  of  Jehovah,  his  nature  and 


84  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  in.  1— M. 

character,  his  hatred  of  sin  and  love  of  righteouBnesB,  his  dissatisfaction  with  merely 
fonnal  and  ceremonial  services,  his  opposition  to  idolatry,  his  gifts,  claims,^  and 
purposes  with  respect  to  his  people.  "  The  prophetic  order  in  its  highest  significa- 
tion was  nothing  else  than  a  living  witness  for  those  eternal  principles  of  righteous- 
ness which  previous  revelation  had  implanted  in  the  Hebrew  race,  and  through  them 
in  the  life  of  humanity"  (Tulloch).  (2)  The  enforcement  of  practice,  by  urgent 
appeals  to  the  conscience,  and  presenting  powerful  motives  of  gratitude  for  past 
benefits,  hope  of  future  good,  and  fear  of  future  evil.  "  The_  prophets,  beside  tiieii 
communication  of  doctrine,  had  another  and  a  direct  ofBce  to  discharge  as  pastors  and 
ministerial  monitors  of  the  people  of  God.  Their  work  was  to  admonish  and  reprove, 
to  arraign  for  every  ruling  sin,  to  blow  the  trumpet  of  repentance,  and  shake  the 
terrors  of  the  Divine  judgment  over  a  guilty  land.  Often  they  bore  the  message  of 
consolation  or  pardon  ;  rarely,  if  ever,  of  public  approbation  or  praise"  (Davison). 
(3)  The  prediction  of  things  to  come;  not  simply  general  results  of  good  or  evil  con- 
duct, but  specific  events  that  could  not  have  been  known  except  by  Divine  inspiration 
(ch/vii.  4  ;  x.  2;  xii.  17  ;  xiii.  14);  an  element  which  became  more  prominent  in 
subsequent  times — the  things  to  come  having  relation  to  the  setting  up  of  a  kingdom 
of  heaven  on  earth.  We  need  not  here  dwell  upon  other  matters  connected  with 
and  growing  out  of  the  prophetic  vocation  of  Samuel,  viz.,  (4)  his  offering  sacrifice ; 
(5)  his  civil  magistracy ;  (6)  his  presiding  over  the  "  school  of  the  prophets ;  "  (7) 
his  recording  the  events  of  his  time  (1  Chron.  xxix.  29).  2.  Thepersons  whom  htt 
vocation  immediately  concerned.  (1)  The  people  and  the  elders  of  Israel — directing 
them  what  to  do,  exhorting  them  to  forsake  their  sins,  sometimes  opposing  and  con- 
demning their  wishes.  "  His  business  was  to  keep  all  Israel  true  to  the  Divine 
purpose  for  which  they  had  been  made  a  nation  "  ('  Expositor,'  vol.  iii.  p.  344).  (2) 
The  priesthood,  as  in  the  case  of  Eli  and  his  sons.  (3)  The  king — teaching  him 
that  he  was  a  sei-vant  of  Jehovah,  appointed  by  him,  and  bound  to  obey  his  laws, 
and  when  he  departed  from  them  denouncing  his  disobedience.  "  Under  the  pro- 
tection generally,  though  not  always  effectual,  of  their  sacred  character  the  prophets 
were  a  power  in  the  nation  often  more  than  a  match  for  kings  and  priests,  and  kept 
up  in  that  little  corner  in  the  earth  the  antagonism  of  influences  which  is  the  only 
real  security  for  continued  progress  ....  The  remark  of  a  distinguished  Hebrew, 
that  the  prophets  were  in  Church  and  State  equivalent  to  the  modem  liberty  of  the 
press,  gives  a  just  but  not  an  inadequate  conception  of  the  part  fulfilled  in  national 
and  universal  history  by  this  great  element  of  Jewish  life  "  (J.  S.  Mill, '  Representative 
Government,'  p.  41 ).  3.  The  manner  in  which  it  woa  fulfilled :  dihgently  (Jer.  zxiii. 
28  ;  xlviii.  10  =  negligently),  faithfully  (not  according  to  his  own  natural  wishes,  but 
God's  will) ;  fearlessly ;  established=:found  trustworthy — Num.  xii.  7  ;  1  Sam.  ii, 
35),  fully  (not  shunning  to  declare  all  the  counsel  of  God — Deut.  iv.  2 ;  Acts  xx.  27). 

III.  His  confirmation.  "  The  Lord  was  with  him,  and  did  let  none  of  his  words 
fall  to  the  ground  "  (but  made  them  stand  firmly,  or  attain  their  aim  like  an  arrow 
which  hits  the  mark — ver.  19).  He  attested,  sealed  him  as  his  messenger — 1.  By 
bringing  to  pass  the  good  or  evil  foretold  by  him  (Num.  xxii.  6).  2.  By  providential 
and  even  miraculous  occurrences,  indicating  his  approval  (ch.  vii.  10 ;  xii.  18).  3. 
By  clothing  his  word  with  power,  so  that  it  was  felt  by  those  to  whom  it  was 
addressed  to  be  the  word  of  the  Lord ;  for  there  is  something  Divine  within  which 
responds  to  the  Divine  without,  and  every  one  who  is  truthful  perceives  and  obeys  the 
voice  of  eternal  truth  (John  xviii.  37). 

IV.  His  recognition.  "  And  all  Israel  from  Dan  even  to  Beer-sheba  knew  that 
Samuel  was  established  to  be  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  20).  The  Divine  word 
was  no  more  rare  (ch.  iii.  1).  1,  His  authority  was  universally  admitted.  It  was 
familiarly  known  throughout  the  land  that  he  had  been  appointed  as  a  regular 
medium  of  communication  between  Jehovah  and  his  people.  2.  His  lUterancea  were 
widely  disseminated,  and  regarded  with  reverence.  "  The  word  of  Samuel  came  to 
all  Israel."  3.  His  work  thereby  became  highly  effective.  Its  full  effect  appeared 
long  afterwards.  But  even  before  the  blow  of  judgment,  which  he  predicted,  fell 
(some  ten  years  after  his  call),  he  doubtless  laboured  not  in  vain ;  and  during  the 
succeeding  twenty  years  ^ch.  vii.  2)  he  "  spent  his  time  in  a  slow  but  resolute  work 
of  kindling  the  almost  extmguished  flame  of  a  higher  life  in  Israel." — ^D. 


OB.  IV.  1—22.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUKL. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IV. 


Ter.  1. — And  the  word  of  SamMl.  .  .  all 
Israel.  This  clause  is  rightly  connected  with 
the  foregoing  verse  of  the  previous  chapter 
•  in  the  Syriac  and  Vulgate.  Attached  to 
the  fourth  chapter,  it  gives  a  wrong  sense, 
namely,  that  Samuel  gave  the  command  for 
the  assembling  of  all  Israel  for  battle  jfith 
the  Philistines.  This  is  so  plainly  erroneous 
that  the  A.  V.  dissents  from  it  by  trans- 
lating the  and  in  the  next  clause  by  now. 
Joined  to  the  previous  chapter,  it  gives  the 
true  meaning.  Because  Samuel  spake  by  the 
word  of  Jehovah,  therefore  hit  word  came 
to  all  Israel,  that  is,  it  was  a  binding  and 
authoritative  command  throughout  the  whole 
land ;  or,  in  other  words,  when  Samuel  was 
acknowledged  to  be  Jehovah's  prophet  he  also 
became  the  virtual  judge  of  Israel,  though 
probably  he  did  not  act  with  full  authority 
until  after  Eli's  death. 

Defeat  of  Iskasl  akd  oapturb  o»  the 
AKK  (vers.  1 — 11).  Kow  Israel — rather.  And 
Israel — went  out  against  the  Fhilistiues. 
During  the  declining  years  of  Eli,  the  yoke 
of  the  Philistines,  which  apparently  had  been 
shaken  ofif  in  his  manhood,  began  once  again 
to  pi-ess  heavily  upon  the  neck  of  Israel. 
But  Israel  was  still  strong  enough  to  make 
valiant  resistance,  provoked  apparently  by 
the  Philistines  invading  the  land,  as  we 
find  that  they  had  pitched,  i.  e.  encamped, 
in  Aphek.  As  Aphek  means  a  fortress,  many 
places  bear  the  name ;  but  the  position  of  the 
Philistine  camp  is  &ced  by  its  being  near 
both  to  Eben-ezer  and  to  Mizpah,  and  pro- 
bably, therefore,  it  was  the  Aphek  in  1  udah 
(Josh.  xiL  18).  Eben-ezer,  the  stons  of  help, 
had  not  as  yet  received  this  name  (see  eh.  vii. 
12) ;  and  apparently  it  was  not  a  town,  but  a 
monument  set  up  in  an  open  plain  fit  for  the 
purposes  of  war,  and  which  up  to  this  time 
had  no  specific  appellation. 

Ver.  2. — In  the  field  means  "in  the  open 
country."  By  a  gradual  change  of  language 
it  now  signifies  cultivated  ground,  and  even 
an  enclosure,  whereas  in  the  A.  V.  it  retains 
its  old  meaning  of  unenclosed  and  uncul- 
tivated land  (see  2  Kings  iv.  39). 

Ver.  8. — When  the  people  were  come  into 
the  camp.  Before  the  battle  Israel  had  en- 
trenched itself,  so  that  upon  its  defeat  it 
had  a  place  capable  of  defence  into  which  to 
retire.  We  fiid  also  that  their  communica- 
tions were  open,  so  that  they  could  send  to 
ShUoh.  The  army  is  called  the  people  be- 
cause battles  were  not  fought  in  those  days 
by  men  specially  trained,  but  by  all  the 
inhabitants  of  the  country  of  the  proper  age. 
The    question.    Wherefore    hath    Jehovah 


■mittea  nsl  ezprames  surprise.  The  dders 
had  evidently  expected  victory,  and  there- 
fore the  domination  of  the  Philistines  could 
not  have  been  so  complete  as  it  certainly 
was  in  the  days  of  Samson.  There  mnst 
have  been  an  intermediate  period  of  success- 
ful warfare  during  which  Kli  had  been  their 
leader.  Let  na  fetch  the  ark  of  the  covenant 
of  Jehovah.  This,  the  remedy  suggested  by 
the  elders,  was  to  employ  their  God  as  a 
talisman  or  charm.  The  ark  was  the  symbol 
of  Jehovah's  presence  among  them,  and  of 
their  being  his  especial  people,  and  by  ex- 
posing it  to  danger  they  supposed  that  they 
would  compel  their  God  to  interfere  in  their 
behalf.  They  would  have  done  right  in  ap- 
pealing to  their  covenant  relation  to  Jehovah  ; 
and  had  they  repented  of  the  sins  which  had 
grown  up  among  them,  fostered  by  the  evil 
example  of  Eli's  sons,  he  would  have  shown 
them  mercy.  But  for  God  to  have  given 
Israel  the  victory  because  of  tlie  presence  of 
his  ark  in  their  camp  would  have  been  to 
overthrow  all  moral  government,  and  would 
have  insured  their  spiritual  ruin  as  inevitably 
as  would  the  granting  to  any  order  of  men 
now  the  power  of  working  miracles  or  of 
infallibly  declaring  the  truth. 

Ver.  4. — Which  dwelleth  between  the 
oherubims.  Literally,  "which  sitteth,  /.«.  is 
enthroned,  upon  the  cherubim."  The  idea  is 
not  that  of  Jehovah's  habitation,  but  of  his 
seat  in  state  as  Israel's  King,  In  bringing 
the  ark  they  brought  to  the  camp  the  throne 
of  Jehovah,  as  their  theocratic  Ruler ;  but 
the  two  sons  of  Eli,  Hophni  and  Phinahas, 
were  there  with  the  ark,  representing  the 
immorality  of  the  nation,  whose  very  priests 
were  abandoned  men.  We  are  not  to  suppose 
that  there  was  any  fault  in  the  mnnuer  of 
bringing,  because  it  is  said  that  the  people 
sent  that  they  might  bring  the  ark  from 
Sliiloh.  Levites  may  have  carried  it,  and 
priests  witli  the  Urim  and  Thuniniim  have 
had  the  charge  of  every  detail  Hut  there 
was  the  ill-omened  conjuncture  of  personal 
immorality  with  superstitious  reverence  for 
mere  material  symbols,  and  thereby  the  pre- 
sence of  the  ark  only  insured,  in  the  moral 
government  of  God,  Israel's  defeat. 

Ver.  6. — But  they,  sure  of  its  talismanic 
influence,  shout  for  joy  as  they  see  its  ap- 
proach, and  the  Pliilistines  ask  the  meaning 
of  the  great  shout  in  the  camp  of  the 
Hebrews.  This  name  is  constantly  given 
to  the  Israelites  by  thoso  not  belonging  to 
them,  and  probably  has  a  certain  amount  of 
animosity  in  it,  as  showing  that  they  were 
foreigners ;  literally,  passer^  over,  people 
who  lu  the  persoTi  of  Abraham  had  com* 
fi'om  the  otiiur  ^iile  of  the  J<.uphrates,  and 


86 


TUB  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[CH.  IV.  1—22. 


having  began  as  feeble  immigi-ants,  had 
ended  in  obtaining  possession  of  the  land, 
and  ousting  the  rightful  inhabitants. 

Ver.  8.— These  mighty  Gods.  In  Hebrew 
Elohim,  though  plural,  is  used  of  the  one  true 
God,  but  in  this  sense  has  always  the  verb  or 
adjective  belonging  to  it  in  the  singular.  In 
ver.  7  the  Philistines  conform  to  this  rule,  and 
say,  Elohim  is  come  ;  but  here  the  verb,  pro- 
noun, and  adjective  are  all  plural,  i.  e.  they 
speak  as  heathen,  to  whom  polytheism  was 
natural  (comp.  1  Kings  xii.  28).  With  all 
the  plagues.  Kather,  "  with  every  plague," 
■).  e.  with  every  kind  of  plague.  In  the 
wilderness.  God  did  not  really  smite  the 
Egyptians  in  the  wilderness.  The  plagues, 
including  the  destruction  of  Pharaoh  and 
his  host  in  the  Red  Sea,  had  all  happened 
before  the  Israelites  had  entered  it.  But 
probably  the  Philistines  confused  together 
the  plagues  of  Egypt  and  the  miracles  in  the 
wilderness,  and  even  the  conquest  of  Canaan, 
in  one  grand  but  vague  whole,  and  so  were 
ready  to  give  way  to  despair,  as  they  called  to 
mind  the  traditions  they  had  heard  of  these 
mighty  interpositions  of  God  for  his  people. 

Ver.  9. — Be  strong.  But,  as  is  often  the 
case,  despair  served  only  to  nerve  them  to 
bitter  determination.  The  greatness  of  the 
danger— for  as  heathen  the  Philistines  fully 
believed  that  the  ark  would  act  as  a  charm — 
and  the  fearful  alternative  of  being  servants, 
i.  e.  slaves  to  those  who  not  so  very  long  ago 
had  been  slaves  to  them,  made  them  resolve 
to  do  their  very  ntmost.  The  result  was  a 
complete  victory. 

Ver.  10.— Israel  fled  every  man  into — 
better  to — his  tent.  Their  camp  stood  them 
this  time  in  no  stead.  It  was  stormed  by 
the  Philistines,  and  the  whole  army  fled  in 
confusion.  In  those  days  the  Israelites  dwelt 
in  tents,  and  to  flee  "every  man  to  his  tent" 
means  that  they  fled  away  in  every  direction, 
each  to  his  own  home.  It  is  in  this  indis- 
criminate flight  that  an  army  suffers  most 
As  long  as  men  keep  together  the  loss  is 
comparatively  slight.  But  now,  thus  utterly 
broken,  there  fell  of  Israel  thirty  thousand 
footmen — a  terrible  slaughter.  They  are 
called  footmen  because  the  Israelites  had 
neither  cavalry  nor  chariots. 

Ver.  11. — Moreover,  the  ark  of  God  was 
taken,  and  the  two  sons  of  Eli,  Hophni  and 
Fhlnehas,  were  slain,  according  to  the  pre- 
diction of  the  man  of  God.  Probably  the  last 
resistance  was  made  round  the  ark,  and  the 
sons  of  Eli  at  least  died  "as  men"  (ch.  ii.  33). 

Thi  otkbthbow  of  Eli's  housb  (vers. 
12—22).  Ver.  12,— There  ran  a  man  of 
Benjamin.  The  whole  story  is  told  with  so 
much  vividness,  and  is  so  full  of  exact  par- 
ticnlan,  that  it  mnst  have  come  from  an 
m-witnesa,  raobably  from  Samuel  himself. 
Aeeordingto  Jewish  tradition,  this  Benjamite 


was  no  other  than  Saul,  but  the.  chronology 
is  at  variance  viith  this  supposition.  The 
importance  in  old  time,  when  even  roads  did 
not  exist,  of  men  capable  of  running  long 
distances  to  carry  news  in  war  is  evident, 
and  many  instances  are  recorded  showing 
the  high  appreciation  in  which  their  services 
were  held  Thus  the  running  of  the  Cnshite 
and  of  Ahimaaz  forms  an  interesting  episode 
in  the  pathetic  history  of  Absalom's  death 
(2  Sam.  xviii.  19 — 31).  So  Herodotus  men- 
tions that  Pheidippides,  when  sent  to  urge 
the  people  of  Sparta  to  come  to  the  help  of 
the  Athenians  against  the  Persians,  arrived 
there  on  the  second  day  after  his  departure 
from  Athens  (Herod.,  vi  105, 106).  Shiloh, 
apparently,  was  but  a  comparatively  short 
distance  from  Eben-ezer,  as  the  runner  arrived 
there  on  the  evening  of  the  very  day  on 
which  the  battle  was  fought.  The  rent 
clothes  and  the  earth  upon  the  head  were 
the  usual  signs  in  token  that  some  great 
calamity  had  taken  place  (2  Sam.  i.  2). 

Ver.  13. — ^Upon  a  seat  —  literally,  "the 
throne  " — by  the  wayside,  whither  his  official 
chair  had  been  removed  to  some  spot  near  the 
gate  of  the  city  (see  ver.  18),  and  probably 
commanding  a  view  of  the  pathway  by  which 
a  messenger  would  arrive.  There  probahly  for 
hours  he  had  sat,  anxiously  awaiting  tidings 
of  the  ark,  which,  we  may  feel  sure,  he  had 
very  unwillingly  allowed  to  be  carried  away 
into  the  camp.  When  the  man  came  into 
the  city.  Literally  the  words  are,  "  And  the 
man  came  to  tell  it  in  the  city,  and  all  the 
city  cried  out. "  We  are  not  to  suppose  with 
some  that  Eli,  being  old  and  now  blind,  let 
the  messenger  slip  by  unobserved.  A  man 
of  his  high  rank  would  not  be  alone,  and 
the  mention  of  his  throne  suggests  that  he 
was  seated  there  in  somewhat  of  official 
dignity.  And  so,  as  the  runner  drew  near, 
with  the  symbols  of  disaster  upon  his  person, 
the  priests  and  Levites  in  attendance  npon 
Eli  would  begin  the  cry  of  sorrow,  and  soon 
it  would  spread  throughout  all  Shiloh. 

Ver.  14. — And  when  Eli  heard  the  noiie 
of  the  crying,  he  asked  the  meaning  of  this 
tnmnlt.  The  word  signifies  any  confused  noise, 
as  the  splashing  of  rain  (1  Kings  xviii  41), 
but  especially  the  din  made  by  a  multitude  oi 

Eeople  (Job  xxxix.  7).  It  exactly  expresses 
ere  the  Babel  of  voices,  all  asking  news  at 
once,  which  at  the  coming  of  the  messenger 
surged  around  the  high  priest's  throne.  He 
demands  the  reason,  and  the  uproar  is  quelled, 
while  "the  man  hasted,  and  came  and  told 
Eli"  Kot  oame  in,  for  Eli  was  without  on 
the  wayside,  but  simply  came  to  Eli,  being 
summoned  thither  by  one  of  the  Levites  in 
attendance.  Eli,  as  the  chief  ruler,  was,  of 
course,  the  person  whom  he  sought,  and 
immediately  that  ha  knew  where  he  was,  h« 
hasted  to  him. 


IV.  1—22.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


61 


Ver.  16. — Ell  was  ninety  and  eight  years 
old.  Until  the  invention  by  the  Arabs  of 
the  present  system  of  numerals,  all  ancient 
nations  had  a  most  cumbrous  system  of  ex- 
pressing numbers.  The  Hebrew  method  was 
to  attach  a  value  to  each  of  the  letters  of  the 
alphabet,  and  then  add  them  together,  and 
thus  the  eighth  and  nineteenth  letters  would 
between  them  make  up  ninety-eight.  Such 
a  system  led  to  constant  mistakes  in  copy- 
ing, and  thus  the  numerals  in  the  earlier 
parts  of  the  Old  Testament  are  beset  with 
uncertainty.  Here  the  Septuagint  has  ninety, 
and  the  Syriac  seventy-eight.  But  as  Eli 
was  described  already  as  "very  old"  in  ch. 
ii.  22,  the  Hebrew  text  is  the  most  probable. 
Instead  of  dim  the  Hebrew  has  set,  L  e.  Eli 
was  now  absolutely  blind,  as  the  word  ex- 
presses the  motionless  state  of  the  eye  when 
obscured  by  cataract.  In  ch.  iiL  2  a  differ- 
ent word  IS  used,  rightly  there  translated 
"  dim,"  as  the  disease  is  one  which  comes  on 
gradually.  In  1  Kings  xir.  i  we  read  that 
Ahijah  was  blind  from  the  same  cause,  and 
the  word  is  there  correctly  rendered  "set." 

Vers.  16,  17. — What  is  there  done,  my 
■on  1  Literally,  What  is  the  thing  I  Or,  as 
the  phrase  is  translated  in  2  Sam.  i.  4,  "How 
went  the  matter ) "  Eli  must  have  gathered 
from  the  words  of  the  messenger  that  Israel 
had  been  defeated ;  for  he  expressly  says,  I 
fled,  and  his  haste,  as  testified  by  the  added 
words  to  day,  showed  that  the  defeat  was  a 
severe  one.  Eli,  therefore,  anxiously  asks 
what  has  happened,  and  the  answer  piles 
misery  upon  misery,  rapidly  heaping  together 
four  crushing  catastrophes.  For  Israel  had 
fled  before  the  Philistines ;  there .  had  been 
a  great  slaughter;  among  the  slain  were 
Eli  8  two  sons ;  and,  worst  of  all,  the  ark  of 
Ood  was  taken. 

Ver.  18. — At  this  last  sad  news  the  old 
man's  spirit  failed ;  and  though  it  was  his 
own  want  of  a  firm  sense  of  duty  that  had 
prepared  the  way  for  this  sad  ruin  of  his 
country,  yet  we  cannot  but  respect  his  deep 
attachment  and  reverent  love  for  the  symbd 
of  his  faith.  The  rest  he  could  have  borne ; 
but  that  the  ark  of  God,  especially  intrusted 
to  his  care,  was  now  captive  in  heathen 
hands  waa  ■  calamity  that  broke  his  heart 


He  had  judged  Israel  forty  years.  The 
Septuagint  reads  twenty,  but  these  differ- 
ences in  numbers  occur  constantly.  In  either 
case  he  would  have  been  well  adrauced  in 
years  before  he  reached  the  judgeship,  and 
probably  he  attained  to  it  slowly  ;  not  by  one 
great  act,  but  by  the  qualities  of  a  statesman, 
by  which  he  lightened  the  yoke  of  the  Philis- 
tines, and  rendered  the  people  for  a  long 
time  a  match  for  them  in-  war.  His  charac- 
ter is  not  that  of  a  hero,  but  of  a  wise,  patient, 
and  prudent  ruler,  but  one  whose  good  quali- 
ties  were  spoiled  at  last  by  his  weak  partiality 
for  his  unworthy  sons. 

Vers.  19— 21.— His  daughter-in-law.  The 
death  of  Eli's  daughter-in-law  is  equally 
tragic  with  his  own.  The  news  of  the  ter- 
rible calamity  that  had  befallen  the  ark  of 
God  brought  on  a  premature  delivery ;  but 
when  she  had  given  birth  to  a  son,  the 
attendant  women  naturally  hoped  that  the 

food  tidings  would  cheer  the  mother's  heart, 
hey  haste,  therefore,  to  tell  her;  but  she 
answered  not,  neither  did  she  regard  it.  This 
does  not  mean  that  she  was  already  dead;  if 
so,  the  women  would  not  have  told  her.     It 
means  that  no  private  joy  could  compensate 
her  for  the  loss  of  the  outward  sign  and  proof 
that  the  covenant  of  Jehovah  was  with  her 
and  her  people.     The  loss  of  the  ark  seemed 
to  her  to  signify  the  overthrow  of  her  national 
religion.      But  she  heard,  for  immediately 
she  named  the  child  I-chabod.     There  is 
some  doubt  as  to  the  exact  meaning  of  the 
word.     It  may  mean  Alas  I  the  glory  ;  but 
more  probably  it  signifies  l^o -glory  —  the 
glory  of  Israel  is  no  more.     In  the  reason 
given  by  the  narrator  for  her  sorrow,  as 
summed  up  in  the  name  given  to  her  child, 
the  deaths  of  Eli  and  of  Phinehas  are  included, 
but  her  own  words  refer  only  to  the  ark. 
Literally  they  are,  "  The  glory  is  gone  into 
captivity  from  IsraeL"    There  is  possibly  a 
reference  to  this  in  Ps.   IxxviiL  64,  where, 
speaking  of  the  fall  of  Shiloh,  the  Psalmist 
says,  "Their  priests  fell  by  the  sword,  and 
their  widows  made  no  lamentation."  Others, 
it  may  be,  like  the  wife  of  Phinehas,  felt 
that  there  was  no  room  for  private  grief 
at  a  time  of  so  great  national  distresa  and 
humiliation. 


HOMILBTICa 

Vers.  1  — 11.  —  Moral  causes  of  disaster.  Assuming  that  the  first  sentence 
properly  belongs  to  the  third  chapter,  and  refers  generally  to  the  acceptance  of 
Samuel  as  prophet  by  the  whole  nation,  the  section  (vers.  1 — 11)  sets  forth  the 
following  facts: — 1.  Israel,  suffering  from  subjection  to  the  Philistines,  enters  on 
war  for  the  recuvery  of  freedom  and  suffers  defeat.  2.  Ordinary  means  failing,  re- 
course is  had  to  the  urk  of  God  in  oraer  to  insure  success.  3.  The  visible  presence 
of  the  ark  at  once  raises  the  courage  and  hope  of  Israel  and  fills  the  Philistines 
with  fear.  4.  As  a  counter-stimulus  to  conflict,  the  Philistines  stir  up  their  own 
love  of  freedom.     6.  The  battle  issnea  in  th«  haavv  defeat  of  Israel,  the  death  of 


88  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  it.  1— Zi 

Ell's  sons,  and  the  capture  by  the  Philistines  of  the  ark  of  God.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  but  that  the  will  of  God  is  being  wrought  out  in  the  triumphs  and  disasters  of 
national  life  through  all  time.  The  laws  by  which  men  are  governed  are  uniform.- 
They  are  often  slow  and  subtle  in  operation,  and  it  requires  that  the  whole  life  of 
a  people  be  known  before  we  can  see  the  sure  working  out  of  the  laws  that  determine 
success  or  ruin.  It  is  an  advantage  to  the  world  that  in  sacred  history  we  have 
revealed  to  us,  in  concrete  form,  the  principles  on  which  God  rules  men.  The  disasters 
that  fell  upon  Israel  in  the  early  years  of  Samuel's  life  furnish  us  with  much  instruction. 
We  learn  that — 

I.  There  is  for  a  people  a  state  of  pkosperitt  foe  which  they  are  originally 

DESIGNED,  AND  AFTER  WHICH  IT  IS   NATURAL   FOR  THEM   TO  ASPIRE.      Israel,  aS  a  people, 

was  constitutionally  fitted  to  enjoy  a  high  degree  of  national  well-being.  There  are 
material  blessings  proper  to  all  nationalities,  and  especially  were  these  included  in  the 
lot  promised  to  Israel  through  Moses  (Deut.  xxviii.  1 — 13).  It  was  quite  nataral, 
therefore,  for  the  people  in  Samuel's  time  to  seek  freedom  from  a  foreign  yoke,  and 
to  strive  to  regain  political  influence  and  internal  prosperity.  There  stands,  more  or 
less  clear,  before  the  mind  of  nations  and  individuals,  an  ideal  of  what  they  ought 
to  attain  to.  The  vision  of  good,  though  remote,  is  a  powerful  influence  in  life. 
Before  every  State,  Church,  and  home  there  lies  a  condition  of  freedom,  peace,  and 
influence  for  which  it  is  designed  by  Providence,  and  which  should  ever  be  the  goal 
of  effort. 

II.  The  Divine  favour  is  requisite  fob  true  success  in  the  effort  to  attain 
to  the  goal.  Israel  could  not  obtain  the  national  blessings  so  eagerly  sought  unless 
the  favour  of  God  be  secured.  This  is  the  record  of  their  entire  history.  It  is  the 
"blessing  of  the  Lord  that  maketh  rich."  The  life  of  a  nation  extends  possibly  over 
centuries ;  and  as  during  the  few  years  of  a  man's  life  he  may  be  allowed  to  strive  on 
without  God  to  the  end  before  disaster  is  apparent,  so  the  course  of  centuries  alone 
may  reveal  whether  it  is  possible  for  true,  enduring  success  to  be  realised  apart  from 
the  favour  of  God.  The  favour  of  God  means  a  co-working  of  the  Divine  energy  with 
his  creatures,  eo  as  to  secure  a  convergence  of  all  physical,  mental,  and  social  forces 
towards  their  welfare.  That  he  should  do  this  without  dislocations  of  nature  is 
as  reasonable  as  that  our  spirit  should,  in  its  measure  and  mode,  strike  in  on  the 
external  forces  of  matter,  and,  without  violating  their  laws,  cause  them  to  subserve 
its  purposes. 

III.  The  REVEALED  CONDITION  OF  INSURING   God'S   FAVOUR    IS   CONFORMITY  TO    HIS 

WILL.  Israel  could  not  expect  that  God  would,  as  a  matter  of  course,  prosper  their 
endeavours  after  the  goal  of  life.  The  evils  from  which  the  nation  suffered  were  the 
result  of  Mow-conformity  to  the  will  of  God.  It  is  clear  that  God  discriminates 
between  men,  and  although  it  may  be  that  God's  energy  works  along  lines  fixed  and 
uniform,  yet,  inasmuch  as  all  the  lines  are  his  creation,  and  are  coincident  with  his 
great  law  of  blessing  the  good  and  chastising  the  bad,  it  turns  out,  in  every  ease,  that 
his  favour,  in  specilic  acts  and  issues,  goes  with  conformity  to  his  will.  Moreover,  is 
there  not  a  very  true  sense  in  which  it  may  be  said  that  the  whole  being  of  God  is  in 
immediate  and  constant  contact  with  every  subtle  element  in  existence  ?  They  are  all 
ministers  that  do  his  pleasure.  God  has  not  banished  himself  from  all  spheres  of 
action,  so  as  to  be  the  only  powerless  Power  in  the  universe. 

IV.  Conformity  to  the  will  of  God  lies  in  two  things: — 1.  Exertion.  2. 
Moral  character.  The  natural  craving  of  Israel  for  national  prosperity  could  only  be 
satisfied  by  making  strenuous  efforts  to  shake  off  the  Philistines  yoke  and  develop 
all  the  resources  of  the  land,  and,  further,  by  the  possession  of  a  moral  charact«r  such 
as  God  delights  in.  It  is  the  will  of  God  that  if  men  will  enjoy  whatever  enters  into 
the  conception  of  a  well-developed,  prosperous  life,  they  must  work  for  it.  But  that 
is  only  (me  side  of  duty.  We  are  not  only  bound  to  act,  to  vmrk,  but  are  bound  to 
BE ;  and  it  depends  on  the  kind  of  persons  we  are  as  to  the  direction  and  force  of  our 
acts.  Israel  in  Samuel's  time  had  a  moral  character,  but  not  according  to  the  will  of 
God.  Every  nation  and  every  individual  bears  a  moral  character  before  the  eye  of 
God.  It  is  only  when  our  moral  condition  is  a  reflex  of  the  righteousness  of  God 
that  we  can  be  said  to  have  the  conformity  to  his  will  which  is  essential  to  tlie  favour 
that  insures  real  Bnccess  to  life's  effort 


CH,  IV.  1—22.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  «9 


V.  Reliance  solely  on  physical  and  mental  exeetion  foe  the  attainment  o» 
A  DESIRED  GOOD  IS  SURE  TO  END  IN  FINAL  DISASTER.  Israel  put  forth  physical  and 
mental  effort  to  attain  to  freedom  and  former  prosperity.  In  this  respect  there  was 
conformity  to  the  will  of  God,  and  an  observance,  therefore,  of  the  laws  of  success. 
But  the  radical  defect  in  the  case  was  that  of  an  utter  carelessness  concerning  the 
possession  of  the  character  which  alone  can  be  acceptable  with  God.  The  people 
lacked  all  the  force  which  lies  in  being  right  with  God.  Those  who  strive  for  the 
masteries  must,  we  are  told  (2  Tim.  ii.  5), "  strive  lawfully  " — in  harmony  with  all  the 
moral  as  well  as  physical  laws  which  govern  the  enterprise,  whatever  it" be,  public  or 
private,  relating  to  commerce,  education ,  or  religion.  The  great  practical  truth  here 
exhibited  is  that  it  is  possible  for  a  people  to  set  heart  on  the  achievement  of  a  pur- 
pose ^ood  in  itself,  to  devise  means,  combine  forces,  and  arouse  enthusiasm  likely  to 
issue  in  the  desired  result ;  but  yet  there  may  be  in  the  dail^  life  some  irreligious, 
unholy  spirit,  which,  being  known  to  God,  has  the  effect  of  causing  the  hidden  wheels 
of  Providence  soto  move  as  to  render  tiseless  efforts  otherwise  sufficient.  RigMemis- 
nets  is  the  most  important  factor  in  life.  Unrighteousness  will  in  the  end  neutralise 
all  exertion.  The  seeming  prosperity  of  the  wicked  is  short,  and  "  shall  destroy 
them."  Sin  saps  the  foundations  of  public  and  private  good.  True  godliness  alone 
makes  the  most  of  men. 

VI.  Distinguished  goodness  of  individuals  and  regard  fob  religious  symbols 
ARE  NO  SUBSTITUTES  FOE  MGHTEOUSNESS  OF  LIFE.  Samuel  had  become  known  in  Israel. 
The  long  lost  "  open  vision  "  was  restored.  The  people  knew  that  he  was  a  prophet. 
There  wa8,_  therefore,  so  the  people  reasoned,  an  evident  sign  that  the  favour  of  God 
was  returning.  ^  Their  own  character  was  bad  enough ;  but  had  they  not  a  holy  man 
of  God,  a  superior  character,  in  the  sanctuary  at  Shiloh  ?  Encouraged  by  this  trust 
and  heedless  of  repentance  and  reformation,  they  sought  freedom  and  prosperity  by 
the  exertion  of  their  own  physical  powers.  The  moral  element  of  conformity  to 
the  will  of  God  was  despised.  Disaster  came.  In  like  manner  it  is  in  vain  for 
a  nation  to  leave  goodness  to  officials  in  the  Church,  and  for  men  of  business  to 
leave  goodness  to  their  wives  and  children.  God  will  take  no  substitute  for  per- 
sonal holiness.  Not  even  is  the  perfect  righteousness  of  the  Redeemer  of  any 
avail  to  the  man  who  will  live  in  unrighteousness.  He  is  "  our  righteousness  "  when 
our  faith  in  him  brings  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit.  But  the  ingenuity  of  the  heart 
in  evil  is  marvellous.  Israel,  finding  that  vicarious  goodness  is  of  no  avail,  has 
recourse  to  a  new  expedient — outward  regard  for  the  symbols  of  religion.  Men 
remember  historical  facts,  though  they  may  have  lost  a  perception  of  their  spiritual 
significance.  Had  not  the  waters  of  Jordan  and  the  walls  of  Jericho  recognised  the 
presence  of  the  "ark  of  God"?  Did  it  not  go  before  the  people  to  "search  out 
a  resting-place"  for  them?  If  the  presence  of  a  Samuel  m  the  land  was  not  a 
guarantee  of  victory,  surely  all  power  must  submit  to  this  ancient  and  renowned 
worker  of  wonders  ?  And  thus  the  unholy  heart  imagines  that  an  outward  exhibi- 
tion of  the  sacred  things  pertaining  to  Divine  worship  will  be  a  practical  substitute 
for  the  character  not  possessed.  "  History  repeats  itself."  Yes ;  men  still  trust  in 
the  symbols  of  the  Church — creeds  more  or  less  orthodox,  outward  forms  of  worship, 
and  much  else— in  vain  hope  that  these  will  prove  a  charm  by  which  the  crushing 
power  of  sin  will  be  avoided  and  life  end  prosperously.  The  most  sacred  of  forms 
and  symbols  are  a  poor  refuge  for  a  soul  that  loves  unrighteousness  (Ps.  xxiv.  3 — 6). 

Practical  lessons : — 1.  Study  well  ail  the  laws  of  permanent  success  in  secular 
government,  religious  organisations,  commercial  transactions,  domestic  life,  and 
spiritual  culture.  2.  Let  personal  conduct  be  influenced  by  the  fact  that  even  the 
salvation  of  the  soul  is  according  to  law  (cf.  Matt.  xi.  28,  29 ;  Acts  iv.  12  ;  x.  43 ; 
1  Cor.  ix.  25 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  5).  3.  The  comparative  failure  of  religious  efforts  outwardly 
■nitable  may  be  remedied  by  a  revival  of  the  spiritual  power.  4.  In  times  of 
depression  and  religious  weakness  in  the  Church,  look  not  so  much  to  the  adoption 
of  new  expedients  for  subduing  the  world  to  Christ,  as  to  the  spiritual  condition  of 
his  professed  servants. 

Unexpected  coincidences.  It  was  declared  to  Eli  that  a  sign  «f  coming  judgment 
an  him  and  his  house  should  be  found  in  the  death  of  his  two  sons  in  one  day  (ch. 


90  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  iv.  1-  22. 

ii.  34),  and  also  that  an  event  should  occur  at  which  "  both  the  ears  of  every  one 
ihat  heareth  it  shall  tingle"  (ch.  iii.  11).  The  fulfilment  of  this  prediction  was,  to 
the  mind  of  Eli,  certain,  but  the  means  and  occasion  were  uncertain.  It  was  diffi- 
cult for  the  old  man  to  conjecture  how  God  would  keep  his  word.  The  narrative 
reveals  the  unlooked-for  coincidences  which  established  the  veracity  of  God. 

I.  MkN  ABE    INDDCBD   TO  ADOPT   A  COUEBB  OF  CONDUCT  AT  VARIANCE  WITH   THEIB 

USUAL  PBACTICE.  The  recent  history  of  Israel  proved  them  to  be  utterly  indifEerent 
to  religion.  The  vile  conduct  of  the  priests  caused  them  to  abhor  the  sacrifices 
of  the  Lord.  In  their  conflicts  with  foes  they  had  gone  forth  at  first  without 
the  presence  of  symbols  of  religion;  but  now  these  same  people,  being  left  judi- 
cially  to  the  blind  guidance  of  their  corrupt  hearts,  lead  forth  to  war  the  "  ark 
of  God,"  and  the  priests  in  charge  of  it.  In  like  manner  the  ordinary  course  of  the 
Philistines  would  be  to  yield  to  the  force  of  their  knowledge  of  what  wonders  had 
been  achieved  by  the  "  ark  of  God  "  (vers.  6 — 8),  and  either  refrain  from  fighting 
or  flee  at  the  first  onset.  But  instead  of  that,  by,  doubtless,  the  subtle,  secret  action 
of  God  on  their  spirits,  the  ordinary  course  was  'deviated  from,  and  the  strongest 
sentiments  of  religious  superstition  were  overborne  by  an  urgent  appeal  to  weaker 
sentiments.  The  last  thing  men  do  is  to  go  in  face  of  religious  fears  and  historic 
facts.  History  furnishes  parallel  instances.  The  Jews,  in  their  desire  to  get  rid  of 
Christ,  although  disgusted  with  Roman  supremacy,  took  the  strange  course  of  plead- 
ing their  loyalty  as  against  his  treason.  In  ordinary  affairs,  also,  men  are  often 
found  acting  on  new  lines  which  perplex  their  opponents. 

II.  God  SOMETIMES  DOES  THINGS  THAT  ARE  NOT  ANTICIPATED.  The  Israelites  little 
thought  that  God,  whose  symbols  they  paraded,  would  so  act  on  the  spirits  of  their 
foes  as  to  counteract  the  natural  effect  of  their  own  expedient.  Man  is  a  very 
imperfect  judge  of  the  ways  of  God.  There  are  no  doubt  immutable  laws  of  right- 
eousness on  which  all  his  actions  are  based,  and  in  many  spheres  we  are  enabled  by 
a  careful  study  of  things  to  say  what  is  sure  to  happen.  But  we  see  only  "  parts  of 
his  ways."  His  "thoughts  are  not  as  our  thoughts."  He  sometimes  does  "a  new 
thing.'  Precedents  are  being  created.  An  ordinary  observer  would  not  have 
thought  that  the  eternal  God  would  suffer  his  covenant  people  to  endure  serfdom. 
It  was  foolishness  to  the  Greeks  that  a  crucified  One  should  be  the  Divinely-appointed 
Saviour  of  the  world. 

IIL   By  THE  COINCIDENCE  OF  UNEXPECTED  HUMAN  AND  DiVINE  ACTIONS  THE  PURPOSES 

OP  God  are  sometimes  accomplished.  Had  not  Israel  deviated  from  their  usual 
course  in  demanding  the  ark,  the  sons  of  Eli  would  tave  remained  in  Shiloh.  Had 
not  the  Philistines  striven  hard  to  overcome  religious  fears,  no  defeat  would  have 
fallen  on  Israel.  Had  God  exercised  his  power  as  in  former  times,  the  ark  would 
not  have  been  captured.  But  the  reverse  of  these  events  occurred,  and  therefore,  in 
accordance  with  prediction,  Eli's  sons  were  on  the  battle-field,  and  perished  in  one  day, 
and  "  both  the  ears  "  of  all  the  people  were  made  "  to  tingle  "  with  the  awful  tidings 
that  the  "  ark  of  God  "  was  taken.  So  is  it  true  in  other  instances  that,  by  the  con- 
currence of  events  not  anticipated,  and  by  the  secret  action  of  God  along  with  the 
human  events,  his  purposes  are  realised  in  judgment  or  in  mercy. 

Gtneral  leisoni : — 1.  God  holds  a  complete  mastery  over  the  spirits  of  men,  and 
can,  when  it  pleases  him,  so  act  on  them  as  to  secure  the  realisation  of  his  designs 
without  destroying  their  freedom.  2.  The  Church  may  look  on  with  confidence  to 
the  fulfilment  of  all  that  is  said  of  Christ's  kingdom,  since  God  can  bring  about  the 
desired  conjunction  of  events.  3.  Wicked  men,  emboldened  by  deferred  judgments, 
may  well  tremble  at  the  thought  that  the  "  day  of  the  Lord  "  may  come  as  a  "  thief 
in  die  night." 

Vew.  12 — 18. —  Victory  in  defeat.  The  facts  given  are — 1.  Eli,  aware  of  the 
absence  of  the  ark  on  the  battle-field,  awaits  with  anxiety  the  earliest  tidings  of  th« 
issue  of  the  conflict.  2.  A  fugitive  relates  to  him  and  to  the  people  of  Shiloh  the 
nature  of  the  disaster  that  had  befallen  Israel.  3.  The  effect  of  the  news  on  the 
city  is  a  wailing  cry  of  despair,  and  on  Eli  sudden  death.  By  record  and  tradition  the 
people  were  familiar  with  the  disasters  and  sufferings  occasionally  experienced  by 
ancestors.     Influenced  by  the  prediction  of  the  "  man  of  God  "  (ch.  ii.  'i^),  Eli,  while 


rn.  IV,  1—22.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  91 

sitting  by  the  wayside,  feared  the  worst.  But  even  he  was  not  prepared  for  such  a 
climax  of  calamity.  Defeat  would  bring  sorrow,  not  surprise  ;  for  were  not  the  people 
godleBB  ?  Slaughter  would  be  regarded  with  pain  as  retribution  for  national  sins. 
Was  it  not  his  own  fault  that  his  sons  had  not  suffered  capital  punishment  long  ago? 
All  that  was  most  sacred  and  revered  in  the  history  of  the  chosen  race,  the  very 
gloiy  of  God — ^this  to  be  wrested  from  the  hands  of  Israel  and  borne  off  in  triumph 
by  the  heathen,  who  can  hear  it  and  live  I    There  is  nothing  now  to  live  for. 

L  To  THE  ETB  OP  MAN  GoD  SUFFERS  DEFEAT.  The  men  of  Shiloh  may  be  taken  as 
a  type  of  the  worldly,  unspiritual  mind.  They  had  been  instructed  to  believe  that 
Jehovah  was  engaged  on  their  side  in  conflict  with  the  wicked  idolatrous  nations. 
The  ark  had  become  with  them  almost  synonymous  with  the  Almighty  himself. 
Hence  the  sudden  wail  of  the  city  when  they,  hearing  the  sad  tidings,  leapt  to  the 
sudden  conclusion  that  now  at  least  the  Vanquisher  was  vanquished.  The  disaster 
was  a  check  to  his  purposes  proceeding  from  his  declared  enemies.  There  are 
occasions  when  the  surface  of  events  suggests  such  a  thought.  The  introduction  of 
sin  into  the  world  by  an  evil  power  appeared  to  mar  the  work  of  God  and  defeat  his 
purpose  in  creating  a  pure  and  beautiful  world.  In  the  days  of  Noah  the  power  of 
evil  seemed  to  triumph,  inasmuch  as  the  earth  became  utterly  corrupt.  The  destruc- 
tion of  the  holy  hill  of  Zion,  and  desecration  of  the  courts  of  the  Lord  by  the 
declared  enemies  of  Israel's  God,  was  regarded  by  the  heathen  as  a  proof  of  his 
inability  to  guard  his  own.  To  the  terror-stricken  disciples  of  Christ  it  seemed  for  a 
while  that  the  "  gates  of  hell "  were  prevailing  against  hira,  and  that  the  kingdom  of 
which  prophets  wrote  and  poets  sang  was  prematurely  annihilated. 

II.  The    APPEARANCE  OF  DEFEAT  IS  OWING  TO  THE  CONDITIONS  UNDBB  WHICH  GOU 

IS  PLEASED  TO  CARRY  ODT  HIS  DESIGNS.  God  does  not  govern  in  the  moral  world  by 
hard  mechanical  laws,  but  realises  his  purposes  under  the  conditions  involved  in  the 
existence  of  creatures  endowed  with  freedom  and  accountability.  He  adapted  his 
exercise  of  power  to  the  spiritual  condition  of  Israel.  Hence,  what  is  defeat  to  the 
human  eye  may  really  be  fore-ordained  and  reasonable  restraint.  Symbol  and  chas- 
tisement were  suited  to  the  imperfect  state  of  the  religious  thought  and  feeling.  If 
the  surrender  of  the  symbol  shall  issue  in  better  results  than  its  retention,  then  what 
seems  defeat  arises  out  of  the  peculiar  conditions  under  which  God  works  his  will. 
The  principle  has  wide  application.  It  is  a  condition  of  the  possible  existence  of 
free  moral  creatures  that  their  life  may  or  may  not  be  marred  by  sin.  If,  then,  sin 
mars  the  world,  God's  purpose  is  not  really  defeated.  The  forces  of  evil  in  the  ante- 
diluvian age  might  have  been  crushed  out  by  the  Spirit  had  God  reversed  the  condi- 
tions nnder  which  he  governed  men,  and  forced  them  to  be  holy.  The  visible,  transitory 
life  of  Christ  and  his  liability  to  death  were,  from  "  the  foundation  of  the  world. 
Divinely-recognised  conditions  of  accomplishing  human  redemption.  The  occasional 
obliteration  of  religious  ordinances  and  of  personal  piety  often  results  from  the  fact 
that  the  Church  is  amenable  to  the  law,  "  From  hira  that  hath  not  shall  be  taken  away 
even  that  which  he  hath."  Finally,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  the  happiness  of  a  world  is 
reasonably  made  conditional  on  the  free,  responsible  action  of  the  world  as  an  inter- 
related community,  in  which  the  good  or  evil  of  one  is  wisely  made  to  affect  all  the 
rest. 

III.  What  SEEMS  DEFEAT  TURNS  OUT  TO  BE  A  STEP  TO  FINAL  VICTORY.  It  is  the  per- 
fection of  wisdom  to  snatch  victory  from  defeat.  This  is  seen  in  the  first  effect  of 
the  capture  of  the  ark.  The  dormant  conscience  of  the  people  was  aroused.  Right- 
eousness, not  charms  and  ceremonials,  must  be  the  antecedent  of  victory.  It  will  be 
found  that  all  other  apparent  defeats  of  God's  designs  prove  to  be  stages  toward  a 
higher  good.  The  curse  of  sin  was  the  occasion  of  the ''  seed  of  the  woman  "  being  pro- 
mised to  "bruise  the  serpent's  head."  The  men  of  Noah's  time  procured  a  sweeter  earth 
and  amost  weighty  warning  and  encouragement  for  the  use  of  all  future  generations. 
The  sighs  and  tears  of  desponding  disciples  yielded  to  the  exultant  joy  and  abounding 
hope  of  the  kingdom  won  with  his  blood  who  now  liveth  evermore.  And  however 
much  sin  may  now  mar  the  life  of  the  world,  there  is  reason  to  believe  that,  undei  the 
control  of  him  who  is  "  able  to  subdue  all  things  to  himself,"  the  issue  of  all  will  be 
the  vindication  of  right  and  the  more  glorious  assertion  of  God's  majesty. 

General  lessons: — 1.    It  is  proper  to   avoid  haste  in  expressing  unfavonnbls 


92  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  it.  1—22. 

judgment  on  events  that  ieem  adverse  to  the  final  success  of  Christianity.  2.  When 
great  calamities  come  on  the  Church,  the  first  effect  should  be  great  searching  of  heart. 
3.  There  is  every  encouragement,  from  the  history  of  the  past,  for  strongest  confid- 
ence in  the  final  triumph  of  Christ  over  every  foe.  Rejoice  not  against  me,  0  mine 
ereemy  (Micahvii.8).  Cast  down,hiUnot  destroyed  {2  Cor.  iv.  9).  Surely  the  wrath 
of  man  shall  praise  thee  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  10).  He  must  reign  till  he  hath  put  all  enemies 
under  his  feet  (1  Cor.  xv.  25). 

Neutralised  usefulness.  There  is  deep  pathos  and  much  instruction  in  the  words 
of  the  sacred  historian  as  he  closes  the  references  to  Eli:  "And  he  had  judged 
Israel  forty  years."  A  man  eligible  for  so  honourable  a  position,  having  rendered 
varied  service  to  his  people,  dies  in  a  state  of  blended  consternation,  grief,  shame, 
and  remorse.  Not  the  calm,  joyous  end  of  the  righteous ;  not  the  end  cheered 
by  views  from  Pisgah's  peak  of  a  glorious  inheritance  ;  but  an  end  amidst  a  horror 
of  great  darkness.  '^  And  he  had  judged  Israel  forty  years  I"  Oh,  the  exquisite 
pathos  of  the  Bible  I 

I.  The  POSITIVE  QOOD  OF  A  man's  life  mat  be  labgelt  nbutealised  bt  bis  weak- 
nesses. The  tenor  of  the  narrative  suggests  that  as  a  whole  Eli's  life  was  good. 
Forty  years'  discharge  of  important  fuiiciiuns  indicates  a  long  series  of  holy  desires 
and  beneficent  acts.  The  natural  effect  of  this  would  be  only  for  the  formation  of  a 
sound  national  character.  For  in  those  times,  as  seen  in  the  instance  of  Moses  and 
Joshua  and  others,  the  moral  and  material  welfare  of  a  people  was  more  entirely 
dependent  ou  force  of  individual  character  in  the  leader  and  ruler  than  on  the  mani- 
fold influences  which  prevail  in  modern  times.  But  negative  qualities  hindered  the 
effect  of  the  good.  Thus  it  is  not  enough  for  a  man — ruler,  pastor,  or  parent — to  he 
religious  at  heart,  attentive  to  routine  duties,  and  "  harmless  "  in  conduct.  These 
may  fail  in  their  desired  issue  unless  accompanied  with  the  energy  and  resoluteness 
of  a  will  that  rests  only  in  seeing  right  done,  God  feared,  and  life  made  holy.  The 
good  that  some  men  do  with  one  hand  they  undo  with  another.  A  little  sin  destroys 
much  good. 

II.  It  MAT  BE  A  LONG  TIME  BEFORE  THIS  NE0TEALISATION  OF  POSITIVE  GOOD  IS  FULLY 

DISCOVERED.  Eli  was  not  blind  to  the  fact  that  for  years  past  the  condition  of  the 
people  and  priests  had  degenerated ;  but  some  men  are  slow  in  detecting  their 
own  part  in  a  given  result.  As  he  gave  more  heed  to  causes  outside  his  own  conduct 
and  bearing,  so  do  men  still  overlook  their  own  contributions  of  a  negative  character 
to  the  formation  of  opinion  and  habit  in  their  too  exclusive  thought  of  what 
proceeds  from  others.  A  weak  ruler  wonders  how  it  is  the  people  are  dissatisfied, 
and  perhaps  rebellious.  A  weak  parent  deplores  that  his  words  and  deeds  are  so  httle 
heeded  at  home.  Each  of  these  is  conscious  of  sincere  motive,  upright  purpose, 
and  actual  toil ;  but  it  is  only  by  slow  degrees  that  he  comes  to  see  the  neutralising 
process. 

III.  The  ISSUE  THAT  REVEALS  THE  NEUTRALISATION  MAT  BE  OF  THE  NATURE  OF  A 

JUDGMENT.  In  Eli's  case  the  catastrophe  which  fell  upon  the  nation  and  hinaself  was 
the  means  of  revealing  to  him,  in  unmistakable  terms,  the  truth  that  the  element  of 
indecision  and  moral  cowardice  in  his  character  had  rendered  comparatively  useless 
Ids  "  forty  years "  of  office.  The  death  of  sons  and  desolation  of  the  Church  of 
God  tell  of  years  of  honourable  care  and  toil  spoiled  by  irresolution  to  visit  the 
guilty  with  punishment  and  purge  the  sanctuary  of  the  vile.  There  are  crises  in 
the  lives  of  communities  and  individuals.  The  effect  of  these  is  to  brirg  into  clearer 
light  the  causes  of  failure.  "  The  day  shall  declare  "  "  every  man's  work,"  "  because  it 
shall  be  revealed  by  fire."  The  ruin  which  comes  to  a  business,  a  Church  organisation, 
a  home,  or  a  reputation,  exposes  the  weak  parts  of  an  elaborate  superstructure. 
Although  the  catastrophe  may  come  about  in  a  natural  way,  it  nevertheless  is  under 
Divinely-ordained  law,  and  therefore  is  the  judgment  of  God. 

IV.  The   POSITIVE  GOOD   IN  PERSONAL  CHARACTER  MAY  SURVIVE  DISASTER  TO  LIFE'S 

WOBK.  The  last  act  of  Eli's  life  was  one  of  homage  to  religion.  The  better  side 
of  his  character  asserted  itself  in  his  dying  moments.  His  horror  and  shame  and 
grief  on  the  mention  of  the  capture  of  the  ark  of  God  revealed  his  loyalty  of  heart 
to  spiritual  religion.     The  poor  old  man  reaped  in  pain  and  death  the  reward  of  bis 


OH.  rr.  1—22.]  THE  FIRM  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  M 

sinful  weakness ;  but  while  gathering  the  bitter  fruit,  he  showed  his  profound  interest 
in  the  honour  and  glory  of  Jehovah  by  being  so  sensitive  to  the  reproach  brought  on 
the  sacred  name.  We  must  distinguish  between  the  rum  of  a  man's  work  and  the 
ruinqfhis^  goiil.  In  the  former  there  is  a  grievous  chastisement  for  carelessness  and 
avoidable  ignorance ;  in  the  latter  there  is  an  abandonment  to  the  essential  and  pre- 
ferred wickedness  of  the  heart.  Eli's  heart  was  riglit  with  God,  but  his  will  was 
weak  to  work  as  he  ought.  Those  who  by  faith  are  on  the  one  Foundation  are  safe. 
They  may  build  up  a  superstructure  in  personal  qualities  and  in  deeds  for  others, 
much  of  which  may  perish  in  the  fire  which  tries  every  man's  work,  while  they 
may  be  '_'  saved  yet  so  as  by  fire  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  11 — 15). 

Practical  lessons: — 1.  We  should  seek  self-knowledge  if  we  would  avoid  errors  in 
conduct  and  make  the  best  use  of  a  Christian  life.  2.  When  the  results  of  effort 
•re  not  satisfactory,  strict  attention  should  be  given  to  causes  within  self.  3.  When 
constitutional  or  acquired  weakness  is  discovered,  it  may  be  counteracted  by  a  care 
to  exercise  as  much  as  possible  the  opposite  positiv-e  virtue. 

Vers.  19 — 22. — Ichabod.  The  facts  given  are — 1.  The  wife  of  Phinehas,  hearing 
the  sad  tidings  of  Israel's  disaster  and  of  the  death  of  her  husband  and  of  Eli,  suffers 
premature  labour.  2.  The  loss  of  the  ark  of  God  contributes  more  to  her  anguish  of 
spirit  than  does  the  sudden  death  of  her  nearest  relatives.  3.  She  deliberately 
refuses  the  most  natural  of  all  consolations.  4.  When  dying  she  gives  a  name  to 
her  child  that  shall  express  her  sense  of  the  calamity  fallen  on  Israel.  The  record 
furnishes  us  with  three  typical  references  to  persons  greatly  afEected  by  the  tidings 
brought  from  the  field  of  battle.  1.  The  superstitious  populace  of  the  city,  who  utter 
a  cry  of  consternation  and  despair.  2.  The  public  functionary,  good  but  blame- 
worthy, who  sees  in  the  event  a  just  judgment,  and,  being  sensible  of  his  personal 
ofEence,  pays  dying  homage  to  the  sacred  cause  with  which  his  life  had  been  identi- 
fied. 3.  A  very  spiritually-minded  individual  in  private  life,  whose  dying  words 
manifest  her  extraordinary  piety.  In  the  brief  reference  to  the  wife  of  Phinehas  we 
see — 

I.  The  NATUEE  OF  SUPREME  CALAMITY.  Opinions  of  men  differ  with  respect  to 
what  it  is  that  constitutes  the  greatest  calamity  that  can  fall  to  the  lot  of  nations, 
Churches,  and  individuals.  The  dying  experience  of  the  pious  Hebrew  mother  throws 
useful  light  on  this  question.  The  ark  of  God  was  gone ;  and  also,  as  its  moral 
cause,  the  righteousness  of  the  people.  Hence,  as  a  people's  "  glory  "  lies  in  the 
enjoyment  of  the  highest  distinction  God  confers,  and  the  happiness  resulting  there- 
from, it  follows  that  the  greatest  calamity  falls  on  a  people  when  that  distinction 
and  consequent  happiness  are  taken  away.  The  nature  of  the  supreme  distinction 
enjoyed  depends  on  the  capacities  and  vocations  of  those  concerned.  1.  Israel. 
The  supreme  distinction  of  Israel  was  the  enjoyment  of  all  that  was  suggested  by 
the  presence  of  the  ark  of  God.  By  virtue  of  its  structure,  its  contents,  and  uses,  the 
ark  was  the  outward  sign  of  an  inestimable  good.  It  meant  that  Israel  was  chosen 
above  all  people  for  a  holy  and  far-reaching  purpose,  in  which  all  nations  should  be 
blessed,  and  that  great  covenanted  blessings  were  theirs.  To  them  the  ark  was 
favour,  noble  destiny,  protection  and  enrichment,  knowledge,  holy  influence,  fellow- 
ship with  the  Eternal.  And,  in  so  far  as  its  continued  presence  was  connected  with 
their  possession  of  a  character  conformable  in  some  degree  to  its  purpose  and  their 
own  destiny,  its  abode  among  them  would  suggest  that  they  had  not  become  utterly 
corrupt  and  unfit  for  the  end  for  which  they  were  chosen.  When,  then,  the  ark  of 
God  was  allowed  to  be  taken  away,  there  happened,  so  far  as  the  outward  sign  was 
still  a  correct  index  to  its  original  and  ordinary  intent,  the  direst  calamity  conceiv- 
able. The  evidence  of  being  the  people  of  Jehovah  was  gone  I  The  tables  of 
covenant  were  lost  1  The  mercy-seat  was  inaccessible  by  the  appointed  means  1 
And,  also,  the  righteousness  of  ifte  appropriate  to  the  continuance  of  such  blessings 
and  honours  was  lacking  I  Marvel  not  that  a  wail  of  woe  arose  from  at  least  one  true 
heart — "  Ichabod  I  "  Loss  of  men,  of  commerce,  of  political  influence,  of  home,  of 
health,  of  all,  was  not  to  be  compared  with  this.  For  what  is  Israel  worth,  what 
Israel's  function  in  the  world,  without  Divine  favour  and  blessing?  2.  NatiirM. 
Taking  nations  generally  in  their  relation  to  God  and  one  another,  theii  crowning 


94  ^  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL  [(S.  tr.  1— O. 

distinction  lies  in  righteousness  of  spirit  and  conduct.  Population,  trade,  armies,  fleeto, 
science,  art,  have  no  permanence,  no  real  value,  apart  from  a  healthy  national  con- 
science and  right  doing.  If  by  any  means  tMs  righteousness  disappears,  then  the 
greatest  calamity  has  come ;  and  it  is  only  a  question  of  time  with  respect  to  the 
passing  away  of  greatness.  God  never  allows  an  unrighteous  people  to  attain  to  the 
best  a  nation  is  capable  of.  3.  Churches.  The  Christian  Church  is  the  body  of 
Christ.  It  exists  as  a  body  to  exhibit  the  spirit  and  do  the  work  of  Christ,  the  Head. 
Its  highest  honour  is  in  doing  what  Christ  would  have  done  in  the  world.  But  if  a 
Church,  professing  to  be  part  of  the  One  Body,  so  far  loses  love  for  Christ  and  true 
holiness  of  life  as  to  fail  to  answer  the  practical  ends  for  which  it  exists,  then  it 
suffers  a  calamity  far  more  serious  than  depletion  of  numbers,  loss  of  social  status, 
the  pains  of  poverty,  and  the  fiercest  persecution.  "  Ichabod  "  was  once  appropriate 
to  Laodioea  (Rev.  iii.  16 — 18).  4.  Individuals.  The  highest  distinction  and  blisa 
of  a  human  being  is  to  be  conformed  in  nature  to  the  holy  nature  of  Christ.  This  if 
the  permanent  crown  of  life.  It  could  be  shown  that  a  soul  bo  blessed  will  find  the 
most  perfect  development.  This  is  that  for  which  Christ  came,  lived,  died,  and  rose 
again.  And  it  is  obvious  that  not  thus  to  be  saved  is  to  suffer  the  greatest  loss  ever 
possible  to  a  human  being.  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  he  gain  the  whole  world 
and  lose  his  own  soul  ?  "  Then,  indeed,  "  Ichabod  "  is  fearfully  true.  6.  The  minis- 
try of  the  gospel.  A  true  ministry  must  embrace  all  the  teacliing  requisite  for  the 
"  perfecting  of  the  saints."  A  full  and  perfect  gospel  means  all  that  Christ  and  his 
apostles  have  left  us.  An  examination  of  the  apostolic  ministry  will  show  that  the 
great  theme  on  which  the  inspired  preachers  chiefly  dwelt  was  the  cross  of  Christ. 
This  is  the  peculiar  distinction  of  the  New  Testament  teaching,  and  it  is  a  truth 
which  enters  directly  or  indirectly  into  everything  pertaining  to  Christian  life.  A 
ministry  is  good  in  proportion  as  it  gives  due  place  to  this  dominating  truth.  An 
aversion  to  the  cross  as  the  apostles  preached  it  is  an  unhappy  sign,  as,  also,  is  a 
mere  parade  of  the  term  or  the  symbol.  History  proves  that  a  Christless  ministry  is 
always  a  failure.  "  Ichabod  "  may  be  affirmed  of  it.  Generally,  then,  "  Ichabod  '' 
is  true  whenever  the  crowning  characteristic  has  departed ;  in  that  lies  a  supreme 
calamity. 

II.  How  A  JtJST  APPRECIATION  OF  A  BDFBEMB  OALAUITT  BEVEAL8  ITSELF.  The  wife 
of  Phinehas  was  a  study  to  her  attendants.  They,  in  common  with  the  mass  of  Israel, 
felt  that  a  sad  disaster  had  befallen  them,  but  her  extreme  anguish  and  singular  con- 
duct were  perplexing.  The  fact  was,  she  formed  a  just  appreciation  of  what  had 
occurred,  and  her  feelings,  words,  and  conduct  were  the  natural  expression  of  it.  The 
appreciation  appears  in — 1.  All-absorhing  concern.  A  more  striking  instance  of  this 
is  perhaps  not  to  be  found  in  the  entire  range  of  sacred  history.  This  unnamed 
person  was  passing  through  the  most  momentous  personal  crisis  possible  to  woman  ; 
the  anguish  of  nature  was  enough  to  absorb  every  thought  and  power.  Birth  of  a 
son  was  a  new  demand  on  attention  and  care,  and  the  death  of  a  husband  was,  at  such 
a  season,  a  special  occasion  of  sorrow.  Yet  all  these  most  important  and  pressing 
matters  were  entirely  lost  sight  of  in  her  soul's  utter  absorption  in  the  interests  of 
that  Divine  kingdom  which  lay  so  near  to  her  heart.  We  have  read  of  widows  dying 
under  the  shock  caused  by  a  husband's  death,  and  with  his  name  on  the  tongue  as  the 
last  sign  of  affection  and  interest ;  but  here  the  one  word  is  "  Ichabod-"  The  cause 
of  God  was  the  one  thought.  In  like  manner  will  a  just  appreciation  of  calamity 
show  itself  when  nations  have  lost  the  righteousness  which  exalts,  when  Churches  have 
failed  in  their  holy  design  and  have  become  a  reproach,  when  souls  cared  and  watched 
for  are  lost,  when  a  ministry  professedly  of  the  gospel  leaves  out  the  cross.  The  whole 
Bonl  will  be  filled  with  anguish  and  care.  2.  Refusal  to  accept  any  substitute.  The 
highest  and  most  welcome  comfort  nature  can  afford  to  a  sorrowing  widowed  mother 
is  to  give  her  a  son.  In  the  love  of  offspring  the  heart  finds  some  healing  and  solace. 
But,  marvel  of  devotion  to  the  Spiritual  and  Eternal,  this  mother  refuses  to  derive 
compensation  from  the  new-boni  child  1  "  She  answered  not,  neither  did  she  regard 
it."  The  mother's  conduct  was  right  and  natural ;  for  the  cause  of  God  is  first  and 
hig}>3st.  Nature  sanctified  will  not  accept  a  lower  transitory  good  in  the  place  of  the 
higher  eternal  good.  Jerusalem  is  to  be  preferred  above  our  "chief  joy."  Nowealth 
and  fame  will  comfort  the  statesman  who  mourns  the  departure  of  national  righteoui)- 


OH.  IV.  1—22.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  9fi 

Bess.  Eloquence,  logic,  and  elevation  of  taste  are  as  nothing  to  one  who  glories  in 
preaching  Christ  crucified,  if  Ae  be  not  preached.  3.  Tremendous  ^ort  to  awaken 
regard  for  the  spiritual.  The  dying  woman  made  a  great  effort  to  think  and  speak. 
Kie  loved  the  dear  child,  but  loved  the  holy  kingdom  more ;  and  therefore,  to  do  the 
utmost  in  her  power  to  arouse  regard  for  what  was  too  little  regarded,  she  even  im* 
posed  on  her  child  a  name  associated  with  sorrow,  shame,  and  trouble.  Thus  by  this 
dying  exertion  did  she  (1)  impress  her  attendants  with  her  sense  of  what  calamity  ip, 
and  what  should  be  sought  first  and  chief ;  (2)  direct  her  countrymen,  through  her 
son,  to  the  great  need  of  a  radical  reformation ;  and  (3)  leave  him  a  reminder  of  what 
was  dearest  to  his  mother's  heart.  Noble  woman  1  "  She  hath  done  what  she  could." 
Love  of  God  stronger  than  love  of  husband,  child,  national  fame,  and  even  of  personal 
comfort.  In  times  of  spiritual  calamity  the  faithful,  in  proportion  to  faithfulness, 
put  forth  extraordinary  efforts.  Moses  could  wish  himself  blotted  out  of  the  book  of 
God  (Exod.  xxxii.  32). 

Otneral  lessons: — 1.  In  darkest  times  God  has  in  reserve  a  "  holy  remnant"  (of.  1 
Kings  xix.  10,18;  John  x.  14).  2.  Thedeepestpiety  may  exist  where  least  expected. 
The  wife  of  the  vilest  of  men  (cf.  Matt.  viii.  10).  3.  Adverse  circumstances,  when 
met  with  a  determined  spirit,  may  even  conduce  to  exalted  piety.  The  vile  husband 
became  the  occasion  of  a  more  entire  and  constant  trust  in  God  (cf.  Ps.  ix.  9,  10  ; 
xxvii.  10).  4.  How  truly  the  requirements  of  Christ  to  love  him  and  his  cause  abov? 
all  finds  response  in  the  most  devoted  souls  (cf.  Matt.  x.  37  ;  Phil.  iii.  8).  6.  The 
piety  must  be  very  profound,  and  wide  in  its  spiritual  vision,  that  can  bring  all  the 
claims  of  nature  into  subordination  to  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  feel  assured  of  the 
essentially  rational  character  of  the  subordination.  6.  The  Saviour  is  a,  unique 
instance  of  absorption  in  the  spiritual,  and  exertion  to  realise  it ;  and  the  experience 
of  his  people  is  a  fellowship  with  his  BufBerina^s  (cf.  Matt.  iv.  9  ;  xvi.  21,  22 ;  xi. 
28  ;  xxiii.  37  ;  xxvi.  38,  39  ;  Lukt  xxiv.  21—26 ;  John  iv.  32 ;  vi.  15 ;  x.  11 ;  Phil. 
iii.  10).     "  The  zeal  of  thine  house  hath  eaten  me  up." 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers.  1 — 11.  (Eben-ezeb  and  Aphek.) — Judgment  inflicted  on  Israel.  "Israel  was 
smitten,  .  .  .  and  the  ark  of  God  was  taken ;  and  the  two  sons  of  Eli,  Hophni  and 
Phinehaa,  were  slain"  (vers.  10,  11).  The  law  of  retribution  which  prevails  in  the 
world  is,  more  especially  in  the  outward  life,  often  slow  in  its  operation,  inexplicable, 
and  sometimes  apparently  partial  and  imperfect.  But  in  many  instances  it  is  mani- 
fested in  a  sudden,  clear,  and  most  equitable  manner.  One  of  these  instances  is  here 
described.  Hophni  and  Phinehas  were  warned  in  vain,  and  pursued  their  evil  way. 
The  influence  which  they  exerted  on  others  was  pernicious,  and  their  sin  was  largely 
shared  in  by  the  people.  At  length  the  hour  of  judgment  struck.  "  Israel  went  out 
against  the  Philistines  to  battle  " — not,  probably,  according  to  the  counsel  of  Samuel, 
but  according  to  their  own  will,  and  to  repel  a  fresh  attack  of  their  most  powerful 
foes  and  oppressors  (ver.  9).  They  were  defeated  with  a  loss  of  about  4000  men ; 
but  instead  of  humbling  themselves  before  God,  the  elders  expressed  their  surprise 
and  disappointment  at  the  result.  They  were  blinded  by  sin,  and  assumed  (as  others 
have  often  done)  that  because  they  were  the  acknowledged  people  of  Jehovah  they 
would  necessarily  receive  his  help  according  to  his  covenant,  whether  they  fulfilled 
their  part  of  the  covenant  and  obeyed  his  commandments  or  not.  To  insure  his  help 
more  effectually,  they  sent  to  Shiloh  for  "  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  of 
hosts,  which  dwelleth  between  (is  enthroned  upon)  the  cherubim."  They  looked  for 
deliverance  from  the  ark  of  the  Lord  rather  than  from  the  Lord  of  the  ark.  Hophni 
and  Phinehas,  its  appointed  guardians,  readily  consented  to  go  with  it,  not  knowing 
that  they  were  going  to  their  doom ;  and  the  aged  high  priest  was  too  weak  to  oppose 
the  presumptuous  enterprise.  The  exultation  of  Israel  was  speedily  turned  into 
humiliation,  and  the  fear  of  their  enemies  into  triumph  ;  and  one  of  the  greatest 
calamities  Israel  ever  experienced  occurred.  These  events  suggest  the  following 
reflections : — 

I.    How  OFTEN  ABE  THE  UNGODLY  EMPLOYED  BY  GOD  FOK  THE   CaASTISEMENT  OP  HIS 

PEOPLE  (vers.  1,  2).     1.  When  those  who  have  been  chosen  to  be  separate  from  and 


96  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  iv.  1— M 

Buperior  to  the  ungodly  have  learnt  their  ways,  it  is  Jmt  and  appropriate  that  the^ 
should  be  given  up  to  chastisement  at  their  hands.  2.  The  cbaatisement  which  is 
ihus  inflicted  upon  them  is  the  most  teverethey  can  experience.  "  Let  us  not  fall  into 
*^he  hand  of  man  "  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  14).  "  The  tender  mercies  of  the  wicked  are  cruel " 
(Prov.  xii.  10).  3.  In  fulfilling  their  own  purposes  the  wicked  are  subject  to  the 
control  of  God  ;  they  can  go  no  further  than  he  pleases,  their  designs  are  overruled 
fqr  good,  and  when  they  have  done  their  work  they  are  broken  and  cast  aside  like 
useless  saws  and  axes  (Isa.  zxvii.  7,  6 ;  Acts  v.  28).  This  is  the  case  with  Satan 
himself.  "  Satan  is  a  very  important  element  in  the  Divine  economy.  God  needs 
him,  and  he  therefore  keeps  him  until  he  shall  have  no  more  use  for  him.  Then  will 
he  be  banished  to  his  own  place.  The  Scriptures  call  the  wicked  heathen  tyrant 
Nebuchadnezzar  a  servant  of  God.  They  might  give  Satan  the  same  name  "  (Heng- 
stenberg). 

II.  How  VAIN  IB  THE  POSSESSION  OP  THE  FORM  OP  RELIGION  WITHODT  ITS  BPIBIT  (vers. 

3,  4),  Israel  had  a  g^'eat  though  superstitious  reverence  for  the  ark,  and  expected 
that  it  would  "save  them  out  of  the  hand  of  their  enemies."  1,  Excessive  devotion 
to  the  outward  forms  and  ceremonies,  and  dependence  upon  them,  is  commonly  asso- 
ciated with  the  absence  of  spiritual  life  (Matt.  v.  20 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  6).  2.  Reliance 
upon  such  forms  arises  from  the  delusion  that  they  insure  the  presence  and  working 
of  God  apart  from  the  spirit  in  which  they  are  employed.  They  are,  however,  neither 
the  necessary  ncr  the  exclusive  channels  of  Divine  grace  (John  vi.  63),  and  no  benefit 
formerly  received  through  them  (Num.  x.  35)  is  to  be  expected,  unless  there  be  a 
right  relation  to  him  who  has  appointed  them.  3.  The  vanity  of  it  is  clearly  shown 
in  the  day  of  trial.  "  If  progress  to  perfection  is  placed  only  in  external  observances, 
our  religion,  having  no  Divine  life,  will  quickly  perish,  with  the  things  on  which  it 
subsists ;  but  the  axe  must  be  laid  at  the  root  of  the  tree,  that,  being  separated  and 
freed  from  the  restless  desires  of  nature  and  self,  we  may  possess  our  souls  in  the 
peace  of  God  "  (X  Eempis). 

III.  How  NEAR  ABE  THOSE  WHO  ARE  ELATED  IN  FALSE  CONFIDENCE  TO  THEIR  SIGNAL 

DOWNFALL  (ver.  6).  There  was  a  shout  in  the  camp  at  the  arrival  of  the  ark.  It 
struck  consternation  into  the  Philistines,  who  had  heard  of  the  wonders  wrought  by 
Jehovah  in  former  times  (ch.  vi.  6),  and  who,  like  Israel,  supposed  that  his  presence 
was  inseparably  connected  with  the  symbol  thereof  (vers.  6 — 8).  But  they  speedily 
regained  courage,  and  obtained  a  second  and  greater  victory  (ver.  9).  1.  False  con- 
fidence is  blind  to  its  own  weakness  and  danger.  2.  It  is  generally  associated  with 
neglect  of  the  proper  means  of  safety.  3.  Nothing  is  more  displeasing  to  God  than  pride 
and  presumption ;  nothing  more  frequently  condemned  or  more  severely  punished  (ch. 
ii.  3  ;  Prov.  xvi.  18  ;  Isa.  ii.  11).  "  By  that  sin  fell  the  angels."  "We  must  there- 
fore bear  this  in  mind  throughout  our  whole  life,  every  day,  every  hour,  and  every 
moment,  that  we  never  indulge  so  much  as  a  thought  of  confidence  in  self  "  (Soupoli). 

IV.  How    8ITBE    IS    THE    FULFILMENT    OP    THE    DiVINB    THREATENINGS   AGAINST    THE 

IMPENITENT  (vers.  10,  11 ;  ch.  ii.  30,  34).  In  mercy  it  may  be  long  delayed  ;  but 
mercy  has  its  limits,  and  judgment  comes  at  last  (Prov.  xxix.  1 ;  Rom.  ii.  5).  1. 
The  priests,  who  had  so  grossly  abused  their  power  in  many  ways,  and  now  exposed 
the  ark  of  the  Lord  in  battle,  were  struck  down  by  the  sword  of  his  enemies. 

"  Wisdom  supreme  !  how  wonderful  the  art 
Which  thou  dost  manifest  in  heaven,  in  earth, 
And  in  the  evil  world,  how  just  a  meed 
Allotting  by  thy  virtue  unto  all "  (Dante,  '  Inferno  Ti 

2.  The  elders  and  people,  who  "  asked  not  counsel  at  the  mouth  of  the  Lord,"  were 
abandoned  to  their  own  devices,  and  30,000  of  them  were  slain.  3.  The  whole  nation, 
which  had  forsaken  the  Lord,  was  deprived  of  the  sign  of  his  presence  (ver.  1] ) ;  the 
place  of  the  sanctuary,  which  had  been  defiled,  was  made  a  perpetual  desolation  (Ps. 
Ixxviii.  59 — 64 ;  Jer.  vii.  11, 12, 14 ;  xxvi.  6)  ;  and  they  who  would  not  serve  the' Lord 
with  gladness  were  compelled  to  wear  the  heavy  yoke  of  their  oppressors  (Deut 
xxviii.  47,  48  ;  1  Sam.  vii.  2,  14). 

"  The  mills  of  Cfod  grind  slowly,  but  they  grind  exceeding  small ; 
Though  he  stands  and  waits  with  patience,  with  exactness  grinds  he  ■IL" 


CH.  IV.  1.-22,]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  9T 


"God's  judgments- are  the  expressions  of  his  opinion  about  our  guilt.  .  .  .  But  there 
is  this  difference  between  man  and  God  in  this  matter: — A  human  judge  gives  his 
opinion  in  words ;  God  gives  his  in  events.  And  God  always  pays  sinners  back  in 
hind,  that  he  may  not  merely  punish  them,  but  correct  them  ;  so  that  by  the  kind  of 
their  punishment  they  may  know  the  kind  of  their  sin  "  (C.  Kingsley). — D. 

The  iruiuiry  of  the  afflicted.  "  Wherefore  hath  the  Lord  smitten  us  ?  "  (ver.  3). 
Men  are  accustomed  to  meet  affliction  in  various  ways.  1.  Some  meet  it  lightly,  and 
endeavour  to  laugh  at  it.  But  this  is  possible  only  when  it  is  not  very  severe.  2. 
Others  exaggerate  it,  lose  their  self-possession,  and  sink  under  it  into  despondency  and 
despair.  3.  Others  quarrel  with  it  as  with  an  enemy,  become  embittered  andojmical. 
4.  Others,  still,  endure  it  with  philosophical  (stoical)  fortitude,  accounting  it  not  an 
evil,  and  resolving  not  to  feel  it.  But  this  method  breaks  down  in  actual  experience, 
and  leaves  the  character  unimproved.  The  truly  wise,  whilst  fully  sensitive  to  its 
natural  influence,  and  confessing  it  to  be  an  evil,  seek  to  understand  its  meaning  and 
purpose,  and  act  in  accordance  therewith.  They  adopt  this  inquiry  of  the  elders  of 
Israel,  though  in  a  somewhat  different  spirit.     The  inquiry  pertains  to — 

I.  The  hand  from  which  it  comes.  "Wherefore  hath  the  Lord  smitten  us?" 
1.  His  dominion  is  tupreme  and  universal.  2.  His  operations  are  often  indirect,  and 
to  our  view  intricate  and  perplexing.  Adversity  is  not  the  less  under  his  direction 
and  control  because  it  comes  by  the  band  of  man.  3.  All  he  does  is  done  in  perfect 
wisdom,  justice,  and  benevolence.  It  must  be  so,  even  when  it  appears  otherwise 
(Ps.  Ixxvii.  19,  20).  The  mystery  which  beclouds  his  ways  is  itself  adapted  to  beget 
in  us  proper  feelings  toward  him.  The  first  necessity  in  affliction  is  to  settle  it  in 
our  hearts  that  "  it  is  the  Lord." 

II.  The  cause  to  which  it  is  due.  Whence  ?  Suffering  is  the  result  and 
penalty  of  violating  the  natural  or  moral  order  which  God  has  established  in  the 
world.  1.  It  may  be  often  traced  to  the  transgression  of  the  sufferer,  but  not  always. 
Those  who  are  greater  sufferers  than  others  are  not  necessarily  greater  sinners  (Luke 
xiii.  1 — 6).  2.  It  is  often  due  to  the  transgressions  of  others  with  whom  we  are 
intimately  associated,  and  in  the  effects  of  whose  conduct  we  necessarily  have  part. 
3.  It  is  connected  with  the  sinfulness  of  the  heart,  and  implies  participation  in  the 
fallen  and  corrupt  nature  of  humanity.  "  This  is  the  key  both  to  the  sufferings  of 
the  righteous  and  to  many  other  secrets."  Human  suffering  points,  as  with  the  finger 
of  God,  to  human  sin,  and  should  ever  lead  to  self-examination  and  profound 
humiliation. 

III.  The  purposes  for  which  it  is  sent.  Herein  the  fatherly  love  of  God  appears ; 
and  to  those  who  love  him  punishment  is  transformed  into  chastisement  and  a  means 
of  blessing  (Heb.  xii.  11).  It  is  designed — 1.  To  manifest  the  presence  and  evil  of 
sin,  which  would  not  be  otherwise  properly  felt  The  consequences  of  transgression 
often  quicken  the  conscience  to  its  "  exceeding  sinfulness,"  and  lead  to  godly  sorrow 
(Isa.  xxvii.  9).  2.  To  restrain,  and  prevent  future  disobedience  (Ps.cxix.  67).  3.  To 
edticate  and  improve  the  character — by  instructing  the  soul  in  spiritual  truth,  working 
in  it  submission  and  patience,  disposing  it  to  sympathy,  &c.  (Ps.  xciv.  12  ;  Rom.  v. 
3 ;  2  Cor.  i.  4).  "All  things  work  together  for  good,"  i.  e.  for  the  perfecting  of  the 
character  in  conformity  to  "  the  image  of  his  Son  "  (Rom.  viii.  29).  4.  To  prepare 
for  the  experience  of  higher  joy,  here  and  hereafter  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).  5.  To  promote 
the  holiness  and  happiness  of  others  in  many  ways.  _  6.  To  bring  glory  to  God  (John 
ix.  3  ;  xi.  4).  What  is  naturally  a  curse  has  thus  hidden  within  it  a  priceless  bless- 
ing ;  which,  however,  is  not  attained  without  human  co-operation  and  Divine  grace. 
Affliction  has  not  in  itself  the  power  to  purify,  strengthen,  and  save. 

IV.  The  means  by  which  these  purposes  are  accomplished.  1.  Humility  and 
penitence  (Job  xl.  4  ;  xlii.  6).  2.  Filial  trust;  entering  into  fellowship  with  Christ 
ui  his  sufferings,  and  receiving  his  Spirit  according  to  his  promise.  3.  The  hope  of 
heaven,  where  there  shall  be  "  no  more  pain  "  (Rom.  viii.  18). 

"  Whatever  thou  ttost  hate, 
Whatever  thou  wouldst  cast  away  and  scorn 
As  profitless — Affliction  never  lose ; 
Afflictioii  never  cease  to  venerate. 
I  BAH.  " 


m  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  iv.  1—22. 

For  eoiTow  sanctified  bears  fruit  to  God, 

Wbich,  in  his  heavenly  gamer  treasured  up, 

Shall  feed  his  own  to  ul  eternity."  D. 

Ver.  11. — Symbol  and  spiritual  trvth.  "And  the  ark  of  God  was  taken."  The 
ark  waB  a  Divinely-appointed  symbol  or  material  sign  of  spiritual  truth,  and  especially 
of  the  presence  and  majesty,  the  holiness,  mercy,  and  protection,  of  the  invisible  King 
of  Israel.  It  was  a  part  of  a  system  of  symbolical  worship  which  was  adapted  to  an 
early  stage  of  human  culture,  and  formed  an  important  element  in  a  dispensation 
introductory  and  preparatory  to  "the  ministration  of  the  Spirit"  (2  Cor.  iii.  8).  But 
even  under  the  new  dispensation  symbolism  is  not  absolutely  done  away,  for  Baptism 
and  the  Lord's  Supper  are  both  symbolic.  With  special,  though  not  exclusive,  refer- 
ence to  the  ancient  symbol,  notice  that — 

I.  The  symbol  serves  important  pdrposks  in  relation  to  the  tbdth  ob>spibitdal 
REALITY  WHICH  IT  REPRESENTS.  Its  need  arises  from  our  being  constituted  of  body 
and  soul,  the  dependence  of  thought  and  feeling  on  sensible  impressions,  and  the 
necessary  influence  of  imagination  in  religion  ;  and  it  serves — 1.  To  make  its  nature 
more  conceivable.  "  In  the  symbol  proper,  what  we  can  call  a  symbol,  there  is  ever, 
more  or  less  distinctly  and  directly,  some  embodiment  and  revelation  of  the  infinite  ; 
the  infinite  is  made  to  blend  itself  with  the  finite,  to  stand  visible  and,  as  it  were, 
attainable  there"  (Sartor  Resartus).  2.  To  make  its  presence  more  certain;  not, 
indeed,  in  itself,  but  in  the  convictions  of  the  soul.  3.  To  make  its  influence  more 
•powerful,  constant,  and  universal.  It  should,  however,  be  observed  that  only  the 
symbols  which  have  been  appointed  by  God  may  be  authoritatively  used  in  his 
worship  ;  that  these  should  be  regarded  with  due  reverence  ;  not  improperly  exalted, 
not  altered,  not  despised,  not  handled  by  unworthy  hands  ;  and  that  no  others  should 
be  introduced,  or  only  such  as  do  not  inculcate  error,  and  do  not  conduce  to  super- 
stition or  formalism. 

II.  The  symbol  may  be  possessed  whilst  the  truth  is  partially  oh  wholly  lost. 
This  comes  to  pass — 1.  When  the  symbol  receives  an  undue  share  of  atteniion  in 
comparison  with  the  truth,  which  is  distinct  from  it  and  incomparably  more  important ; 
when  it  centres  thought  upon  itself,  and  hinders  rather  than  helps  the  soul  in  its 
spiritual  aspirations.  2.  When  there  is  a  moral  indisposition  and  dislike,  on  the  part 
of  those  who  possess  the  symbol,  toward  the  truth.  3.  When,  in  consequence  of 
such  dislike,  and  the  lowering  of  the  idea  of  the  truth,  the  sign  is  confounded  with  the 
thing  signified,  identified  with  it,  and  substituted  for  it.  This  is  ever  the  chief  danger 
attending  the  use  of  symbols  in  Divine  worship. 

III.  The  retention  op  the  symbol  without  the  truth  is  worthless  and 
INJURIOUS.  1.  It  fails  of  its  purpose ;  is  a  means  of  grace  no  more ;  an  empty  cistern ; 
a  meaningless,  unreal,  and  hollow  form.  Nehushtan  (a  piece  of  brass^ — 2  Kings  xviii. 
4).  2.  It  fills  men  with  false  confidence,  and  increases  their  error,  formality,  and 
corruption.  3.  It  woefully  disappoints  tiie  trust  which  is  reposed  in  it,  and  often 
leaves  them  to  despair  (Gal.  v.  1,  2). 

IV.  The  removal  op  the  symbol  is  sometimes  necessary  to  the  recovery  of  the 
truth.  And  this  effect  is  accomplished  by — 1.  Its  correction  of  fatal  error.  In  the 
case  of  Israel,  teaching  that  the  ark  was  not  the  same  as  the  Divine  presence,  and  did 
not  necessarily  insure  it.  2.  Causing  deep  humiliation.  3.  Leading  to  earnest 
inquiry  and.  prayer.  "  They  lamented  after  the  Lord  "  (ch.  vii.  2),  not  after  the  ark, 
which  had  long  been  restored,  and  lay  in  a  private  dwelling  without  public  honour, 
and  appears  to  have  exerted  no  influence  whatever  in  the  revival  of  spiritual  truth 
and  life  that  followed. 

Conclusion : — 1.  Symbols  are  useful  when  rightly  used  and  held  in  Bubordination  to 
spiritual  truth.  2.  The  course  of  the  Divine  dealings  with  men  (like  that  of  men 
with  children)  is  less  and  less  symbolical,  more  and  more  spiritual.  "They  shall 
say  no  more.  The  ark  of  the  covenant,"  &c.  (Jer.  iii.  16  ;  Col.  ii.  17  ;  Heb.  ix.  23). 
3.  Symbols  will  completely  vanish  away  in  the  light  of  perfect  knowledge  (1  Cor. 
xiiL  10— 12).— D. 

Ver.  11. —  The  arh  misplaced  and  lost.  The  elders  of  Israel  were  chagrined  at  the 
defe«t  suffered  by  the  national  army  in  its  attempt  to  throw  off  the  yoke  of  the 


OH.  IV.  1—22.]  THE  riRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  99 


Philistines.  But,  instead  of  seeking  the  Lord  by  repentance,  they  fell  on  a  deyice 
to  compel  him,  as  they  supposed,  to  give  them  a  victory.  Had  not  the  ark  been 
carried  round  the  walls  of  Jericho,  when  Israel  had  no  engines  of  siege  to  bring 
against  a  fortified  city ;  and  had  not  the  walls  fallen  flat  to  the  ground  ?  Why  not 
try  its  power  again?  '■  Let  us  fetch  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  Jehovah  unto  ns, 
that,  when  it  cometh  among  us,  it  may  save  us  out  of  the  hand  of  our  enemies." 

I.  A  SACRKD  SYMBOL  MISUSED.  Forthwith  the  ark  was  brought  into  the  camp,  and 
the  people  in  their  foolish  confidence  shouted  till  the  earth  rang  again.  A  supersti- 
tious fear  ran  through  the  ranks  of  the  Philistines,  but  it  did  not  unnerve  them  for 
the  battle.  They  gained  a  signal  victory,  "and  the  ark  of  God  was  taken."  At 
such  a  cost  had  Israel  to  learn  that  the  ark  ought  not  to  he  used  as  a  charm  or  talis- 
man, and  that,  if  so  regarded  and  employed,  it  could  not  save  them,  could  not  save 
itself,  while  the  face  of  God  was  turned  away  from  the  wicked  priests  and  the  de- 
generate nation.  It  is  a  lesson  for  all  times.  Men  are  often  tempted  to  rely  on 
religious  symbols  and  appointments,  not  so  much  to  glorify  God  therewith  as  to 
protect  themselves.  It  is  much  easier  to  shout  over  these  than  to  break  ofE  sins  by 
righteousness.  So  the  cross  has  been  worn  in  many  an  evil  enterprise,  and  carried 
into  many  battles,  to  defend  cruel  and  rapacious  men.  So,  also,  men  shout  over 
their  Church,  their  English  Bible,  their  prayer-book,  or  their  sabbath,  in  a  vain  con- 
fidence that  their  relation  to  one  of  them,  or  to  all  of  them,  will  secure  the  Divine 
favour,  or,  at  all  events.  Divine  defence,  though  in  character  and  life  they  be  no 
better  than  others  who  boast  of  none  of  these  things.  But  it  is  all  delusion,  and  they 
who  go  into  some  hard  battle  of  life  with  no  better  security  are  destined  to  a  thorough 
defeat.  The  ark  of  God  itself  could  do  nothing  for  men  who  by  their  sins  had  driven 
away  the  God  of  the  ark.  What  a  selfish  man  wants  in  religion  is  to  have  God 
bound  to  take  his  part  and  fight  on  his  side,  instead  of  his  studying  to  be  on  God's 
side,  which  is  the  side  of  righteousness.  Such  was  the  thought  of  the  heathen 
nations  of  the  East.  Each  of  them  had  its  guardian  deity  or  deities,  who  were  wor- 
shipped and  propitiated  at  any  cost,  in  order  that  they  might  befriend  that  particular 
nation  or  tribe,  and  injure  its  enemies.  The  gods  were  expected  to  give  strength  and 
victory  to  their  own  people,  taking  their  part  whether  their  cause  were  just  or 
unjust.  The  Hebrews  sometimes  fell  into  the  same  way  of  thinking  of  Jehovah. 
He  was  their  national  God,  and  bound  as  such  to  fight  for  them.  He  was  to  be 
praised  if  they  succeeded,  to  be  reproached  if  they  failed  in  whatever  enterprise  they 
undertook.  Have  not  many  Christians  similar  thoughts  of  God?  Almost  every 
great  act  of  rapine  has  been  perpetrated,  and  every  war,  however  unjust,  has  been 
waged,  with  grave  appeal  to  heaven,  and  gross  usurpers  and  tyrants  have  had  "  Te 
Deum  "  sung  for  their  infamous  victories.  But  in  vain  do  unrighteous  men  claim 
religious  sanctions.  God  defends  the  right,  and  his  face  is  against  the  wrong-doer. 
The  ark  of  his  covenant,  brought  into  the  din  and  dust  of  battle  by  those  who  were 
full  of  sin  unrepented  of,  went  into  the  enemy's  hand,  and  the  priests  who  itood 
beside  it  were  slain. 

II.  FoBEBODiNa  or  eviIi.  The  aged  Eli  sat  in  his  chair  of  ofSoe  by  the  gate  of 
Shiloh,  watching  the  road,  eager  for  early  tidings  from  the  army,  his  heart  trembling 
for  the  ark  of  God.  The  natural  fearfulness  of  old  age  was  aggravated  in  this  case 
by  a  reproaching  conscience,  which  told  Eli  that  he  ought  not  to  have  permitted  the 
ark  to  be  taken  without  any  warrant  from  the  Lord  into  the  turmoil  of  battle.  So 
he  sat  foreboding  calamity ;  and  when  the  heavy  tidings  came  to  him  of  the  discom- 
fiture of  Israel,  the  death  of  his  sons,  and  the  capture  of  the  ark  by  the  Philistines, 
Eli  fell  to  the  earth  without  a  word,  and  died.  We  do  not  present  the  pathetir 
figure  of  the  old  priest  trembling  for  the  ark  as  a  model  for  servants  of  God.  The 
right  and  noble  thing  for  Eli  to  have  done  would  have  been  to  resist  the  desecration 
of  the  sacred  ark,  and  to  call  the  people  to  repentance,  that  so  they  might  be  strong 
in  God  before  they  encountered  the  Philistines.  But  he  had  governed  so  weakly 
that  be  had  no  moral  influence  or  authority ;  and  his  great  age,  which  ought  to  have 
brought  him  reverence,  only  brought  him  feebleness ;  so  Eli  could  but  tremble  and 
die.  We  have  seen  such  feeble  saints  in  our  own  time ;  they  are  always  foreboding 
evil ;  they  are  in  great  alarm  about  the  dangers  which  beset  Christian  truth ;  the^ 
■it  trembling  for  the  ark.     Popery  is  about  to  swallow  oa  up  I    Or,  Infidelity  u 

b2 


100  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  it.  1—22. 

carrying  all  before  it  t  Alas  for  the  ark  of  God  I  So  they  wail  and  lament,  and 
spread  misgivings  among  all  who  listen  to  them.  But  they  do  little  else ;  they  have 
no  vigour  in  counsel  or  action  to  prevent  or  to  remedy  spiritual  disaster.    It  is  a 

goor-spirited,  ineffective  style  of  Christian  character.  We  want  something  mnch 
rmer  and  bolder  for  the  defence  and  propagation  of  the  gospel.  We  want  repent- 
ance insisted  on,  righteousness  preached  and  practised,  wrongs  redressed,  abuses  cast 
out  of  the  Church,  and  then  we  need  not  fear  the  Philistines.  Granted  that  the  times 
are  perilous  ;  there  is  cause  of  anxiety,  and  there  is  need  of  prayer.  But  prayer  itself 
will  not  gain  any  victory  for  those  whose  hearts  and  lives  are  not  right  with  God. 
Hophni  and  Phinehas  went  to  the  battle-field  reeking  from  their  sins.  How  could 
God  fight  by  or  for  them  ?  And  the  people  of  Israel,  following  the  bad  example  in 
high  places,  were  quite  demoralised.  Why  should  they  have  a  victory  ?  Let 
repentence  begin  at  the  house  of  God.  Let  iniquity  be  abhorred  and  forsaken.  So 
God  will  be  with  us,  and  we  need  not  fear  the  foe.  We  shall  tremble  at  his  word, 
but  we  shall  not  tremble  because  of  the  Philbtines.  "  Though  an  host  should  encamp 
against  me,  my  heart  shall  not  fear." — F. 

Vers.  12 — 18.  (Shiloh.) — The  jiidgment  of  God  on  the  judge  of  Israel.  "And 
he  had  judged  Israel  forty  years"  (ver.  18).  The  life  of  Eli  was  lengthened  out  to 
ninety-eight  years,  during  the  last  forty  of  which  he  judged  Israel.  In  him  we  see 
that — 1.  The  highest  ofScial  position  may  be  held  by  one  who  is  destitute  of  the 
qualities  which  it  demands.  2.  Much  excellence  is  sometimes  associated  with  grave 
defects.  3.  Sins  of  omission  have  a  ruinous  effect  on  others — ^the  family,  the  Church, 
the  nation.  4.  A  good  man  is  not  spared  when  he  is  guilty  of  disobedience.  The 
judgment  of  Heaven  is  impartial.  The  last  hour  of  his  long  life  has  now  come,  and 
in  it  we  see  the  old  man — 

I.  Watching  with  anxiety  fob  the  ark  (ver.  13).  Why  does  his  heart  tremble  ? 
He  has  truly  an  affectionate  regard  for  it.  But — 1.  He  has  been  accessory  to  its 
exposure  in  the  battle-field.  2.  He  is  doubtful  about  its  safety.  3.  He  dreads  the 
consequences  of  its  loss.     Already  he  experiences  the  evil  effects  of  his  sin. 

II.  Receivinq  the  tidings  op  disaster  (vers.  12,  14 — 17).  "  Woe  upon  woe." 
1.  The  defeat  of  Israel  with  a  great  slaughter.  2.  The  death  of  his  two  sons.  S. 
The  capture  of  the  ark.  "  With  the  surrender  of  the  earthly  throne  of  his  glory  the 
Lord  appeared  to  have  abolished  his  covenant  of  grace  with  Israel ;  for  the  ark,  with 
the  tables  of  the  law  and  the  Capporeth,  was  the  visible  pledge  of  the  covenant  of 
grace  which  Jehovah  had  made  with  Israel "  (Keil). 

III.  Smitten  with  the  stroke  of  death  (ver.  18).  1.  After  long  and  merciful 
delay.  2.  Directly  connected  with  his  sin.  3.  "  Suddenly,  and  without  remedy." 
Nevertheless,  it  was  his  dismay  at  the  loss  of  the  ark  that  caused  his  trembling  heart 
to  cease  to  beat ;  and  his  love  for  the  sacred  symbol  lightens  up  the  gloom  of  bis 
melancholy  end. — D. 

Vers.  19— 22.  (Shiloh.)— /cAofiorf.  "The  glory  is  departed*  (ver.  22).  Ichabod 
=s  (1)  Where  is  thy  glory  ?  (It  is  departed) ;  (2)  The  Inglorious ;  or,  (3)  Alas  I 
the  glory.  The  last  words  of  the  wife  of  Phinehas.  Her  piety  was — 1.  Getmine. 
She  called  the  ark  "  the  glory ,"_ and,  doubtless,  had  regard  not  merely  to  the  symbol, 
but  also  and  chiefly  to  the  Divine  presence  which  it  represented.  2.  Peculiar. 
Living  in  corrupt  times,  the  wife  of  an  ungodly  man,  yet  truly  devout ;  a  pearl  among 
pebbles,  a  rose  among  thorns,  a  grain  of  wheat  in  a  heap  of  chaff.  S.  Emmeni. 
Her  grief  at  the  loss  of  the  ark  surpassed  her  sorrow  at  the  death  of  her  husband  and 
her  father-in-law,  and  swallowed  up  her  joy  at  the  birth  of  a  son.  4.  Early  per- 
fected by  death  amidst  the  righteous  judgments  of  Heaven.  From  her  dying  utter- 
ance learn  that — 

I.  The  pbesenok  of  Odd  is  the  tbde  olobt  of  a  feoplk.  It  is  the  source  of— 
1.  Their  real  dignity.  2.  Their  internal  prosperity.  3.  Their  external  influence.  In 
vain  do  we  look  elsewhere  for  these  things.  "Thy  God"  (shall  be)  "thy  glJWjr" 
(Isa.  Iz.  19 ;  Ixii.  2). 

II.  The  true  globt  of  a  peofli  mat  depart.  This  takes  place  when  the  pre- 
sence (».«.  the  favour  and  protection)  of  God  is  withdrawn.  1.  It  is  caused  hy 
jiwaan  na  of  Tariow  kinds.    He  is  not  desirous  of  leaving  men,  but  they  arf  wwill- 


CH.  V.  1—12.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL 


101 


ing  to  fulfil  the  conditions  according  to  which  alone  he  can  dwell  among  them.  2. 
It  is  often  held  out  as  a  viaming.  3.  It  has  actually  occurred  (Ezek.  x.  18). 
"  Moreover,  at  that  feast  which  we  call  Pentecost,  as  the  priests  were  going  by  night 
into  the  inner  temple,  as  their  custom  was,  to  perform  their  sacred  ministrations,  they 
said  that  in  the  first  place  they  felt  a  quaking  and  heard  a  great  noise,  and  after  thai 
they  heard  a  sound  as  of  a  great  multitude,  saying, '  Let  us  depart  hence.'  "  (Joseph., 
'  Wars,'  vi.  5,  3).  The  warnings  given  to  the  seven  Churches  of  Asia  (Rev.  ii.,  iii.) 
were  neglected,  and  the  evils  predicted  came  to  pass.  The  candlestick  was  removed 
out  of  its  place  (Rev.  ii.  5),  and  darkness  and  desolation  succeeded.  "  But  though 
particular  Churches  may  fall,  our  Lord's  promise  will  never  fail  the  Catholic  Chittch  : 
•  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world '  "  ('  Sp.  Com.'). 

Gondudon: — 1.  The  presence  of  God  should  be  accounted  by  us  the  greatest 
blessing,  and  his  departure  dreaded  as  the  greatest  calamity.  2.  Whatever  con- 
tributes to  his  departure  must  be  zealously  renounced  or  corrected  (Lam.  iii.  40). 
3.  No  condition  is  altogether  hopeless.  "  If  from  thence  thou  shalt  seek  the  Lord 
thy  God,  thou  shalt  find  him,"  &c.  (Deut.  iv.  29).  The  glory  of  Israel,  which,  it 
was  thought,  had  gone  for  ever,  was  restored ;  and  out  of  the  night  of  sorrow  a  new 
day  was  bom. — D. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  T. 


Thb  ark  of  God  in  Philistia  (vers. 
1—12).  Ver.  1. — The  Philistines  took  the 
ark  of  God.  The  silence  of  Scripture  is 
often  as  remarkable  as  what  it  tells  us. 
From  Ps.  Ixxviii.  60 — 64 ;  Jer.  vii.  12 ;  xxvi 
9,  we  gather  that  from  Aphek  the  Philistines 
marched  upon  Shiloh,  and  having  captured 
it,  put  all  whom  they  found  there  to  the 
sword,  and  levelled  the  buildings  to  the 
ground.  Especially  their  wrath  fell  upon 
the  priests,  in  revenge  for  the  bringing  of 
the  ark  to  the  camp,  by  which  the  war  was 
made  a  religious  one,  and  the  worst  feelings 
of  fanaticism  aroused.  Of  all  this  the  his- 
tory says  nothing,  nor  of  the  measures  taken 
by  Samuel  under  these  trying  circumstances. 
From  his  previous  eminence,  the  government 
would  naturally  devolve  upon  him,  especially 
as  Eli's  spns  were  both  slain ;  and  evidently 
he  must  have  managed  in  some  way  to  save 
the  sacred  vessels  of  the  sanctuary,  and  the 
numerous  records  of  the  past  history  of  the 
nation  laid  up  at  Shiloh.  Whatever  learn- 
ing there  was  in  Israel  had  its  seat  there ;  it 
was  probably  the  only  school  wherein  men 
were  initiated  in  the  kaowledge  brought  out 
of  Egypt ;  and  it  is  one  of  the  worst  and 
most  barbarous  results  of  war  that  it  destroys 
so  much  connected  with  human  progress  and 
civilisation,  overthrowing  mth  its  violent 
hand  as  well  the  means  of  a  nation's  culture 
as  the  results  thereof.  Samuel  evidently  did 
all  that  was  possible  to  counteract  these 
evils  ;  and  as  the  Philistine  army  withdrew 
into  its  own  country  immediately  after  the 
destruction  of  Shiloh,  probably  to  carry 
home  the  rich  spoils  obtained  there,  he  was 
apparently  able  to  ward  ofiF  the  worst  effects 
of  the  Philistine  invasion,  and  by  rapidly 
TCOipanising  the  government  to  gave   the 


people  from  utter  demoralisation.  But  upon 
all  this  Scripture  is  silent,  because  it  con- 
cerns the  history  of  Israel  on  its  temporal 
side,  and  not  as  it  exemplifies  God's  spirit- 
ual dealings  with  nations  and  men.  From 
£ben-ezer  (see  on  ch.  iv.  1)  nnto  Ashdod. 
This  town,  the  Azotus  of  Acts  viil  40,  was 
with  Ekron  and  other  Philistine  citie-s,  as- 
signed to  the  tribe  of  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  47), 
but  never  actually  conquered.  It  lay  near 
the  sea,  about  thirty-two  miles  north  of 
Gaza,  and  is  now  an  unimportant  vQlage, 
stUl  bearing  the  name  of  Esdud.  Of  the 
five  Philistine  capitals  Ashdod  and  Gaza 
were  of  the  most  importance,  as  being  the 
keys  of  Egypt,  and  the  former  was  also  en- 
riched by  the  sale  of  the  produce  of  Arabia, 
of  which  it  was  the  emporium. 

Ver.  2. — ^When  the  Philistines,  &o.  The 
words  are  exactly  the  same  as  those  in 
ver.  1,  viz.  "  And  the  Philistines  took  the 
ark  of  God,  and  brought  it,"  marking  the 
simplicity  of  ancient  narrative.  Sagon  is 
derived  by  PhUo  from  dagan,  "  com,"  and 
is  explained  by  him  as  an  emblem  of  the 
earth's  fertility ;  but  as  the  shape  of  this 
national  deity  of  the  PhOistines  was  cer- 
tainly that  of  a  man  to  the  waist,  ending  in 
the  body  and  tail  of  a  fish,  the  true  deriv- 
ation is  doubtless  that  from  dag,  "a  fish." 
It  represented,  however,  not  so  much  the 
sea,  on  which  the  Philistines  trafficked,  as 
the  fruitfulness  of  water,  which  in  the  East 
is  looked  upon  as  the  active  principle  of  life 
(comp.  Gen.  i.  20).  In  one  of  the  sculptures 
brought  from  Khorsabad  there  b  a  representa- 
tion of  a  battle  between  the  Assyrians  and  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Syrian  sea-coast,  and  in  it 
there  is  a  figure,  the  upper  part  of  which  is 
a  bearded  man  with  a  crown,  while  from  the 
waist  downwards  it  has  the  shape  of  a  fish 
(Layard's  '  Nineveh,'  ii  466).   Moreover,  itii 


102 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[OH.  V.  1—12 


swimming  in  the  sea,  and  is  surrounded  by  a 
multitude  of  marine  creatures.  Doubtless 
this  figure  represents  Dagon,  who,  neverthe- 
less, is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  sea-god,  like 
Neptune ;  but  as  the  fish  is  the  product  of 
water,  he  is  the  symbol  of  nature's  repro- 
ductive energy.  Together  with  Dagon  a 
female  deity  was  commonly  worshipped, 
called  Atergatis,  half  woman  and  half  fish, 
whose  temple  is  mentioned  in  2  Mace.  xiL 
26.  In  the  margin  there  she  is  explained  as 
being  Venus;  but  the  ideas  have  only  this  in 
common — that  Venus  also,  as  rising  out  of 
the  sea,  symbolises  life  as  springing  out  of 
water.  k&  Dagon  had  a  temple  also  at  Gaza 
(Judges  xvi  23),  and  at  the  other  cities  of 
Philistia  (Jerome  on  Isa.  xlvi.  1),  he  was 
evidently  the  chief  deity  of  the  nation,  and 
the  solemn  depositing  of  the  ark  in  his 
temple,  and  by  Dagon, — literally,  "at  his 
side," — was  intended  as  a  public  demonstra- 
tion that  the  God  of  the  Israelites  was 
inferior  to,  and  had  been  vanquished  by,  the 
national  deity  of  the  Philistines. 

Vers.  3,  4. — On  the  morrow,  behold,  Dagon 
was  fallen  upon  his  face  to  the  earth  before  the 
ark  of  Jehovah.  /.  e.  he  was  in  the  attitude 
of  adoration,  and  instead  of  triumphing  over 
Jehovah,  he  was  prostrate,  as  if  compelled 
to  worship.  But  his  priests  perhaj'..  lliought 
that  it  was  an  accident,  and  so  they  set  the 
image  in  its  place  again.  They  also,  we  may 
be  sure,  took  due  precaution  against  any  one 
entering  his  temple  by  stealth ;  but  when 
early  on  the  second  morning  they  came  with 
anxious  minds  to  see  whether  any  new  pro- 
digy had  happened,  they  found  their  god 
not  only  prostrate,  as  before,  but  mutilated, 
and  his  head  and  both  the  palms  of  his 
hands  were  out  off — not  broken  off  by  the 
fall  of  the  image  from  its  place,  but  severed 
with  deliberate  care,  and  placed  contemptu- 
ously npon  the  threshold,  i.  e.  upon  the 
door-sill,  the  place  where  all  must  tread. 
Only  Dagon  was  left  to  him.  "We  cannot  in 
English  render  the  full  contemptuousness  of 
this  phrase,  because  Dagon  is  to  us  a  mere 
proper  name,  with  no  significance.  In  the 
original  it  conveys  the  idea  that  the  head, 
the  emblem  of  reason,  and  the  human  hands, 
the  emblems  of  intellectual  activity,  were  no 
real  parts  of  Dagon,  but  falsely  assumed  by 
him  ;  and,  deprived  of  them,  he  lay  there  in 
his  true  ugliness,  a  mere  misshapen  fish ;  for 
darf,  as  we  have  seen,  means  a  fish,  and 
Dagon  is  here  a  diminutive  of  contempt.  In 
spite  of  his  discomfiture  the  Philistines  were 
true  to  their  allegiance  to  their  god,  because, 
believing  as  they  did  in  "gods  many,"  he 
was  still  their  own  national  deity,  even 
though  he  had  been  proved  inferior  to  the  God 
of  Israel,  and  would  probably  be  rendered 
more  particular  and  exacting  as  regards  the 
homage  due  to  him  from  his  own  subjects  by 


so  humiliating  a  defeat.  For  the  gods  ol 
the  heathen  were  jealous,  fickle,  and  very 
ill-tempered  if  any  slight  was  put  upon  them. 
After  all,  perhaps  they  thought,  he  had  done 
his  best,  and  though  worsted  in  the  personal 
conflict,  he  had  managed  so  cleverly  that 
they  had  gained  in  fair  fight  a  great  victory. 

Ver.  5.  —  Henceforward,  therefore,  his 
priests  and  other  worshippeTs  carefully  ab- 
stained from  treading  on  the  door-sill,  where 
his  nobler  members  had  lain,  unto  this  day. 
Apparently  the  Books  of  Samuel  were  vprit- 
ten  some  time  after  the  events  recorded  in 
them  took  place,  and  we  have  remarkable 
evidence  of  the  permanence  of  the  custom  in 
Zeph.  i.  9,  where  the  Philistines  are  described 
as  "those  that  leap  on,"  or  more  correctly 
over,  "the  threshold."  The  custom,  so  curi- 
ous in  itself  and  so  long  continued,  bears 
strong  testimony  to  the  nistorical  truth  of 
the  narrative. 

Ver.  6. — Eut  the  hand  of  Jehovah  was 
heavy  npon  them  of  Ashdod.  /.  ft  his 
power  and  might  were  exercised  in  smiting 
them  with  severe  plagues.  A  question  here 
arises  whether,  as  the  Septuagint  affirms, 
besides  the  scourge  of  emerods,  their  land 
was  desolated  by  swarms  of  field-mice.  It  is 
certain  that  they  sent  as  votive  ofierings 
golden  images  of  "the  mice  that  mar  the 
land  "  (ch.  vi  5) ;  but  the  translators  of  the 
Septuagint  too  often  attempt  to  make  all 
things  easy  by  unauthorised  additions,  sug- 
gested by  the  context ;  and  so  probably  here  it 
was  the  wish  to  explain  why  mice  were  sent 
which  made  them  add,  "  and  mice  were  pro- 
duced in  the  land."  Really  the  mouse  was 
a  symbol  of  pestilence  (Herod. ,  ii  141),  and 
appears  as  such  in  hieroglyphics ;  and  by 
sending  golden  mice  with  golden  emerods 
the  lords  of  the  Philistines  expressed  very 
clearly  that  the  emerods  had  been  epidemic. 
This  word,  more  correctly  spelt  hsemor- 
rhoids,  has  this  in  its  favour,  that  the  noun 
used  here,  ophMim,  is  never  read  in  the  syna- 
gogue. Wherever  the  word  occurs  the  reader 
was  instructed  to  say  tehorim,  the  vowels  of 
which  are  actually  attached  to  the  consonants 
of  ophalim  in  the  text  of  our  Hebrew  Bibles. 
In  Deut.  xxviii.  27  tehorim  is  mentioned  as 
one  of  the  loathsome  skin  diseases  of  Egypt, 
and  though  rendered  "emerods"  in  the 
A.  v.,  is  possibly,  as  translated  by  AquUa, 
"  an  eating  ulcer. "  Ophalim  need  only  mean 
tumours,  swellings,  its  original  signification 
being  "a  hill"  (2  Chron.  xxvii  3) ;  yet  as 
the  word  was  not  thought  fit  for  public 
reading  in  the  synagogue,  we  may  feel  sure 
that  it  means  some  such  tumours  as  the 
A.  V.  describes. 

Ver.  7. — His  hand  is  sore  npon  us.  The 
epidemic  was  evidently  very  painful,  and, 
as  appears  &om  ver.  11,  fatal  in  numerous 
instLiiices.     Connecting  this  outbreak  with 


OH.  T.  1—11] 


THE  F1B8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


103 


the  prostrate  condition  and  subsequent  muti- 
lation of  their  god,  the  people  of  Ashdod 
recognised  in  their  affliction  the  hand,  i.  e. 
the  power,  of  Jehovah,  and  determined  to 
send  away  the  ark,  the  symbol  of  his  ill- 
omened  presence  among  them. 

Ver.  8. — The  lords  of  the  Philistines. 
Philistia  was  governed  by  a  council  of  five 
princes,  but  whether  they  were  elective  or 
hereditary  in  the  several  towns  is  by  no 
means  clear.  They  are  called  "  seraniin," 
from  seren,  ."  a  hinge,"  just  as  the  cardinals 
of  the  Church  of  Rome  take  their  name  from 
the  Latin  word  cardo,  which  has  the  same 
meaning.  There  is  no  ground  for  connecting 
the  word  with  tar,  "a  prince."  When 
Ewald  did  so  he  probably  forgot  that  the  two 
words  begin  with  different  letters  —  seren 
with  samech,  and  sar  with  shin.  Seranim 
is  the  word  constantly  used  of  the  lords  of 
the  Philistines  (Josh,  xiii  3  ;  Judges  iii.  3  ; 
zvi.  5,  8,  &c. ;  1  Chron.  xiL  9),  though  after 
being  correctly  so  styled  in  1  Sam.  zzix.  2, 
they  are  popularly  called  in  vers.  3,  4,  9, 
sarim,  "  princes. "  Let  the  ark  of  the  God  of 
Israel  he  curried  abont  unto  Oath.  Unwill- 
ing to  part  with  so  signal  a  proof  of  their 
victory,  the  lords  of  the  Philistmes  determine 
to  remove  the  ark  to  another  locality,  but 
thereby  only  made  the  miraculous  nature  of 
what  was  taking  place  more  evident  to  alL 
Of  Gath  but  little  xs  known  ;  but  Jerome  de- 
scribes it  as  still  a  large  village  in  his  days, 
and  as  situated  near  the  border  of  Judsea,  on 
the  road  from  Eleutheropolis  to  Gaza. 

Yer.  9. — And  they  had  emerods  in  their 
secret  parts.  The  verb  used  here,  sathar,  is 
found  in  Hebrew  only  in  this  place,  but  is 
of  common  occurrence  in  Syriac  and  Arabic. 
Its  ordinary  meaning  in  both  these  languages 
is  to  "cover,"  "conceal,"  and  the  A.  v., 
taking  it  in  this  sense,  supposes  that  the  boils 
were  bidden,  and  translates  as  above.  But 
the  root  has  a  double  meaning,  and  signifies 
also  "to  destroy,"  though  in  this  sense  the 
Arabic  has  a  slight  difference  in  spelling, 
namely,  shatara  instead  of  aatara.  The  old 
versions  were  evidently  at  a  loss  in  under- 
standing the  meaning,  though  their  render- 
ings are  suggestive,  except  the  Syriac,  which 
translates  quite  literally,  but  leaves  thereby 
the  difficulty  untouched  of  the  twofold 
meaning  of  the  word,  and  the  Syio-Arabic 


lexicons  are  uncertain  which  to  choose. 
Some  give,  "and  the  emerods  hid  them- 
selves in  them,"  in  the  sense  of  gnawing 
and  burrowing  into  the  flesh,  i.  e.  they  be- 
came cancerous.  Others  take  the  alternative 
sense,  and  render,  "and  the  emerods  were 
burst  upon  them,"  i.  e.  became  fissured  and 
rent,  and  turned  into  open  sores.  Another 
translation  has  been  proposed,  namely,  "the 
tumours  or  emerods  brake  out  upon  them ; " 
but  as  the  verb,  both  in  the  Hebrew  and  the 
Syriac,  is  passive,  this  rendering  can  scarcely 
be  defended.  Upon  the  whole,  the  most 
probable  sense  is  that  the  tumours  buried 
themselves  deep  in  the  flesh,  and  becoming 
thus  incurable,  ended  in  causing  the  death 
of  the  sufferers. 

Vers.  10,  11. — The  Ekronitei  cried  out- 
Convinced  by  this  second  and  more  fatal 
plague  that  the  ark  was  the  cause  of  their 
punishment,  the  people  of  Ekron,  when  it  was 
passed  on  to  them  from  Gath,  protested  loudly 
against  its  presence.  Compelled  to  receive 
it  until  the  lords  of  the  Philistines  could  be 
convened  in  council  to  decide  upon  its  ulti- 
mate destination,  the  plague  broke  out  so 
heavily  among  them  that  they  were  in  utter 
dismay.  For  the  rendering  deadly  de- 
struction is  untenable.  Literally  the  words 
are,  "a  dismay  of  death  ;"  but  in  llebrew 
death  added  to  a  word  of  this  sort  simply 
means  "  very  great."  So  "  terrors  of  death  " 
in  Ps.  Iv.  4  are  very  great  terrors.  In  the 
next  verse  we  learn  that  many  did  die,  but 
the  words  used  here  describe  the  mental 
agony  and  despair  of  the  people  as  they  saw 
the  ark,  which  had  wrought  elsewhere  so 
great  misery,  brought  unto  them. 

Ver.  12. — The  cry  of  the  city  went  np  to 
heaven.  Not  the  word  used  in  ver.  10, 
where  it  is  an  outcry  of  indignatiMi,  but  a 
cry  for  help,  a  cry  of  sorrow  and  distress. 
Though  in  ver.  10  Ekronites  is  in  the  plural, 
yet  in  all  that  follows  the  singular  is  used. 
"  They  have  brought  about  the  ark  to  me,  to 
slay  me  and  my  people.  .  .  .  That  it  slay 
me  not  and  my  people,"  It  is  the  prince  of 
Ekron  who,  as  the  representative  of  the 
people,  expostulates  with  his  fellow-rulers 
for  the  wrong  they  are  doing  him.  But 
finally  all  join  in  his  lamentation,  and  the 
whole  city,  smitten  by  God's  hand  sends  up 
its  prayer  to  heaven  for  mercy. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — 6, — Foreshadovnngs.  The  facts  given  are— 1.  The  Philistines,  acting 
on  polytheistic  principles,  place  the  ark  in  their  heathen  temple,  thus  ascribing  to  it 
Divine  honourj  and  yet  indicating  its  inferiority  to  Dagon.  2.  During  the  night 
their  god  Dagon  falls  to  the  ground.  3.  Supposing  the  fall  to  be  the  result  of  some 
unaccountable  accident,  they  replace  their  god,  and  on  the  next  day  find  him  even 
broken  to  pieces.  4.  The  event  is  memorialised  by  the  establishment  of  a  super- 
gtitioua  ciutom.    The  supernatural   and   ordinary  events  connected  with  Israel's 


104  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [cb.  v.  1—12. 

history  have  a  prophetic  significance  for  future  ages.  The  record  is  "for  oui 
admonition,  on  whom  the  ends  of  the  world  have  come."  There  is  another  bondage 
than  that  of  Egypt,  another  conflict  than  that  of  Dagon  and  the  ark.  Here  are  two 
powers  in  collision,  and  we  have  given  us — 

I.  A  roEESHADOWiNG  OF  THE  FALL  OF  HEATHENISM.  1.  Thefoct  is  established  that 
heathenism  is  doomed  to  perish.  The  occurrence  in  the  house  of  Dagon  is  a  single 
instance,  in  palpable  form,  of  what  has  taken  place  in  many  lands,  and  will  recur  till 
every  idol  is  abolished.  No  prediction  in  Scripture  is  more  clear  than  that  the  day 
will  come  when  paganism  will  cease  to  exist  (Ps.  ii.  8  ;  Isa.  ii.  18 ;  xi.  9).  Events 
daily  point  on  to  it.  Dagons  fall  in  many  lands.  History  is  really  but  the  com- 
pletion of  processes  set  in  operation  by  God  in  ages  past.  Destruction  is  inherent 
in  the  essential  falsehood  of  heathenism.  The  truth  of  God  cannot  be  converted 
into  a  permanent  lie  (Rom.  i.  25).  It  is  a  mercy  that  God  has  so  ordained  things 
that  only  true  worship  can  endure.  2.  Heathenism  is  doomed  to  periih  hy  contact  with 
God's  truth.  Dagon  might  stand  erect  and  receive  the  homage  of  men  when  he  and 
they  are  left  to  themselves  ;  but  in  presence  of  the  ark,  the  visible  manifestation  of 
God's  will  to  the  world,  he  must  fall  on  his  face  to  the  earth.  Doubtless  corruption  in 
men,  if  left  long  enough  on  earth,  would  cause  them  to  become  extinct,  because  in 
the  nature  of  things  it  tends  to  utter  ruin  of  morals,  society,  health,  and  life.  It  is, 
however,  the  purpose  of  God  to  extinguish  it  without  extinguishing  the  race  of  men, 
and  that  too  by  his  revealed  truth.  Events  prove  that  this  has  been  the  process. 
Britain  ceased  to  be  idolatrous  when  the  light  of  life  came  to  her  shores.  Hence  the 
missionary  enterprise  ;  hence  the  need  of  "  holding  forth  the  word  of  life."  3.  The 
downfall  of  heathenism  is  brought  about  by  the  secret,  silent  power  of  God  exercised 
through  his  truth.  There  is  suggestiveness  in  the  hint  that  the  fall  of  Dagon 
occurred  during  tlie  silence  of  night.  The  fall  was  through  the  unseen  power  of 
God,  operating  by  ways  men  could  not  trace,  and  that  revealed  its  existence  in  its 
effects.  The  conquests  of  the  gospel  are  instrumental.  It  is  not  history,  though 
pure  and  impressive ;  nor  precept  clear  and  useful ;  nor  sublime  thought  for  the 
intellect ;  nor  mere  iniluence  of  character,  though  holy  and  elevating  ;  but  the  quick- 
ening Spirit,  who,  in  the  depths  of  human  nature  working  by  means  of  the  instrument, 
turns  men  to  God.  There  is  a  profound  secrecy  and  mystery  in  every  soul's  regenera- 
tion. 4.  The  fnal  downfall  of  heathenism  by  means  of  the  truth  is  brought  about 
after  repeated  efforts  to  revive  it.  They  placed  Dagon  on  his  seat  again,  and  rejoiced 
once  more  in  his  sufficiency ;  but  the  Unseen  Power  wrought  on  with  greater  energy, 
till  the  head  and  hands,  the  seat  and  instruments  ofpower,  were  cut  off.  Beautifully 
does  Scripture  thus  indicate  the  ebbs  and  flows  of  the  stream  of  truth  in  process  of 
subjugating  every  principality  and  power  to  Christ.  A  thousand  years  with  God 
are  as  one  day.  He  gives  free  scope  to  men  and  principles.  Yet  the  truth  will 
prevail  until  the  earth  is  "filled  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  as  the  waters 
cover  the  deep.'' 

II.  The  FRUSTRATION  OF  ALL  EFF0BT8  TO  DISHONOUR  GOD's  REVELATION  OF  HIMBELF. 

The  placing  of  the  ark  in  the  presence  of  Dagon  was  intended  to  indicate  a  belief  in 
it  as  a  power  among  men,  but  as  a  fowei  iriferior  to  that  exercised  by  the  Philistines' 
god.  Jehovah  was  a  deity,  but  yet  a  conquered  deity.  Hence  the  glory  due  to 
Dagon.  Now  the  ark  represented  at  that  time  the  specific  revelation  which  God 
had  given  for  bringing  to  pass  his  purpose  in  the  deliverance  of  the  world  from  the 
curse  of  sin.  The  practical  effect,  therefore,  of  the  Philistines'  conduct  was  to  rob 
revelation  of  its  supremacy.  The  tendencies  of  human  nature  are  constant ;  and 
now  that  the  full  revelation  has  been  given  in  Christianity,  there  is  the  same  effort 
to  dishonour  and  discredit  it  before  men  by  placing  it  in  unwarrantable  positions. 
1.  The  insult  offered  to  Christianity.  There  are  two  forms  of  insult.  (1)  That 
offered  by  persons  who  simply  recognise  Christianity  as  one  among  the  many  and 
equally  authorised  powers  for  promoting  the  good  of  mankind.  Human  society  is 
regarded  as  a  whole,  needing,  for  its  intellectual,  moral,  and  material  development, 
a  wise  use  of  various  educational  appliances  which  God  has  provided.  Religions, 
philosophies,  statecraft,  productions  of  men  of  genius,  are  all  of  Ood,  and  equally 
demand  the  respect  and  deference  of  men.  An  inspiration  from  the  Almighty  runs 
through  them  all,  since  they  ai%  his  agents.     Hence  Christianity  is  just  on*  of  the 


OH.  T.  1—12.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  101 

religions  of  the  world,  doing  its  part  in  common  with  them.  As  a  philosophy  it  may 
have  a  place  among  other  systems.  As  useful  in  the  management  of  peoples,  states- 
men may  lay  hold  of  it  in  support  of  other  agencies.  Christ  may  adorn  the  Pantheon 
in  company  with  other  neroes  in  thought  and  action.  (2)  That  offered  by  persons 
■who  regard  Christianity  a»  a  power  inferior  to  other  agerudes  for  irifluencing  human 
destiny.  There  are  few  who  would  esteem  it  inferior  as  a  religion^  when  compared 
with  prevailing  forms  in  now-Christian  lands ;  but  by  some  it  is  held  to  be  inferior  as 
compared  with  a  pure  theism  and  the  higher  philosophies.  Its  supematuralism  is 
branded  as  the  crude  product  of  unphilosophical  minds.  Its  cardinal  doctrine  of 
atonement  is  declared  to  be  at  variance  with  first  principles  in  morality.  Unless 
divested  of  its  outward  garb,  it  is  supposed  to  be  unsuited  to  the  higher  order  of 
intellect.  Its  power  as  a  supreme  authority  is  said  to  be  on  the  wane,  and  pride  is 
felt  in  placing  its  pretensions  side  by  side  with  those  of  the  modem  Dagon.  2. 
The  rebuke  of  those  who  offer  the  tnsttlt.  Without  dwelling  on  the  sure  disappoint- 
ment and  sorrow  which  come  on  those  who  dishonour  Christianity  by  regarding  it 
as  merely  one  of  the  various  powers  equally  deserving  of  respect,  it  may  sufSce  to 
point  out  how — (1)  Facts  show  that  all  systems  in  rivalry  with  Christianity  lose 
their  vaunted  pre-eminence  ;  and  this  too,  on  the  one  hand,  by  the  loss  of  their 
influence,  and  on  the  other  by  the  permanent  and  growing  power  of  Christianity. 
The  wisdom  of  the  Greek  ceased  to  be  a  ruling  force,  while  the  truth  of  Christ  won 
for  him  the  Roman  empire.  The  cold  theism  of  the  eighteenth  century  sank  into 
obscurity  as  the  great  evangelical  impulse  of  the  Church  of  God  developed  its  force. 
The  men  who  pride  themselves  in  antagonism  to  Christ  have  never  done  anything 
to  regenerate  the  savage,  to  make  the  dying-bed  peaceful.  (2)  It  is  in  the  nature 
of  the  case  that  such  a  result  should  always  ensue.  No  other  religion  is  so  fully 
attested  as  Divine.  Every  other  system  partakes  of  the  imperfection  of  its  authors  ; 
fails  in  motive  power ;  is  more  of  a  criticism  on  man  and  his  position  in  the  world 
than  a  solvent  of  the  deep  spiritual  cravings  of  the  soul ;  and  is  liable  to  pass  out 
of  influence  under  the  analysis  of  succeeding  minds.  The  policy  that  would  suggest 
to  a  statesman  the  use  of  Christianity  as  a  tool  for  government  thereby  proves  its 
moral  instability.  The  unseen  power  of  the  "  jealous  God  "  will  work  in  silence, 
and  cause  the  "  Name  that  is  above  every  name  "  to  have  "  in  all  things  the  pre- 
eminence."   A  refuge  of  lies  means  trouble  and  anguish. 

General  lessons : — 1.  History  confirms  faith  in  the  suflSciency  of  the  gospel  for 
the  conquest  of  heathenism.  2.  In  all  use  of  means  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
should  be  recognised.  3.  We  must  seek  proof  of  the  pre-eminence  of  Christianity 
in  deeds  such  as  no  rivals  can  produce.  4.  We  may  yet  expect  many  boastful  claims 
from  human  systems  before  men  learn  fully  the  lessons  of  history. 

Vers.  6 — 12. — Coercive  providences.  The  facts  given  are — 1.  God  visits  the  men  of 
Ashdod  with  severe  afiliction.  2.  In  their  perplexity  they  remove  the  ark  to  another 
locality.  3.  The  device  proving  a  failure,  and  the  men  of  Ekron  refusing  to  receive 
the  unwelcome  symbol,  a  council  of  authorities  decides  to  return  it  to  Israel.  Provi- 
dence had  so  ordered  events  for  high  moral  ends  as  to  bring  the  ark  into  captivity. 
The  influences  were  at  work  in  Israel  to  issue  in  the  result  desired.  Hence  there 
arose  a  need  for  a  turn  in  the  course  of  Providence. 

I.   The  NEED   FOB    COERCIVE    PROVIDENCES   ABISES   CHIEFLY   FROM    TWO    CAUSES.       1. 

Imperfect  acquaintance  with  the  Divine  will.  These  men  had  some  knowledge  of 
the  Divine  power  in  the  ark,  but  could  not  learn  the  precise  will  of  the  strange  god. 
One  of  the  first  things,  therefore,  is  to  prompt  to  an  inquiry  as  to  what  is  desired. 
But  man,  especially  when  grossly  ignorant,  is  indisposed  to  search  for  light,  and 
cannot  bear  very  clear  light.  If  men  will  not  act  because  they  do  not  know,  they 
must  be  aroused  to  learn,  or  to  do  without  knowing ;  for  God's  great  ways  must 
not  be  barred  and  blocked  by  man.  2.  Ununllingness  to  he  convinced  of  the  Divine 
will.  The  fall  of  Dagon  on  the  first  night  aroused  the  thought  of  a  superior  power, 
and  the  danger  of  keeping  it  from  its  natural  place.  This  first  gleam  of  light  was 
extinguished  by  a  new  trial  of  Dagon's  power  to  stand.  A  second  failure  brought 
more  light,  but  the  expedient  of  change  of  abode  was  adopted  to  evade  the  new  and 
clearer  suggestion.    Men  often  do  not  like  to  know  the  patii.of  duty.    There  is  mucb 


10«  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [cH.  v.  1—12. 

ingenuity  spent  in  evading  the  force  of  Divine  teaching.  If  they  will  not  follow 
increasing  light  when  their  doing  so  is  necessary  to  the  realisation  of  a  Divine 
purpose,  pressure  must  he  brought  to  bear.  Pharaoh,  Balaam,  and  Jonah  are  instances 
of  this. 

II.  The  KIND  OP  COERCION  BMPLOTBD  WILL  DEPEND  ON  THE  MENTAL  AND  SOCIAL  CON- 
DITION OF  THE  PEOPLE.  Men  are  influenced  strongly  by  events  which  touch  their 
interests,  and  which  come  in  such  shape  as  to  be  adapted  to  their  ordinary  modes  of 
thought  and  views  of  things.  The  people  of  Ashdod  were  highly  susceptible  to 
religious  impressions,  and  their  religious  associations  were  entirely  with  the  honour 
of  their  god.  Philosophical  arguments  and  high-toned  reasons  suited  to  pure 
Hebraism  or  Christianity  would  not  have  touched  them.  Moreover,  by  education 
and  inheritance  they  were  governed  by  the  habit  of  associating  bodily  sufferings, 
when  great,  with  a  positive  Divine  purpose.  Now,  God  governs  men  according  to 
their  capabilities,  and  reveals  his  will  in  ways  conformable  to  their  ruling  ideas. 
Whether  by  miracle  or  natural  coincidences,  there  is  always  adaptation  to  the  minds 
to  be  influenced.  This  principle  solves  many  events  in  Old  Testament  history,  and 
shows  the  perfect  reasonableness  and  even  propriety  of  the  pressure  brought  to  bear 
on  the  benighted  Philistines.  God  fits  every  rod  to  the  back  of  the  fools  he  smites, 
•nd  speaks  to  every  ear  in  accents  suited  to  its  delicacy  or  obtuseness. 

III.  The  COERCION  IS  PEOGRESBIVB  IN  INTENSITY.  The  Select  body  of  priests  of 
Dagon  first  feel  the  hand  of  God,  then  the  people  as  individuals,  and  then  the  entire 
community  as  such.  Also,  there  was  first  a  rude  blow  to  the  religious  prejudices  of 
the  priestly  body,  and  through  them  of  the  people ;  then  an  assault  on  the  physical 
condition  of  multitudes ;  and  finally  a  disastrous  blow  on  the  prosperity  of  the  state. 
Men  will  answer  religious  arguments  by  religious  arguments,  and  evade  truth  if 
possible ;  but  touch  their  bodies  and  their  fields,  and  some  earnest  inquiry  as  to  the 
cause  and  intent  will  be  evoked.  Especially  does  material  disaster  induce  effort  to 
learn  the  truth  when  authorities  are  compelled  to  deliberate  on  possible  remedies. 
In  national  providences  the  pressure  at  last  reaches  the  rulers. 

General  lessons : — 1.  God  uses  pressure  on  each  of  us  when  our  inclination  runs 
against  our  true  interest  and  his  glory.  Lot  was  led  urgently  out  of  Sodom.  2.  The 
pressure  used  never  crushes  the  will,  but  develops  thought,  and  opens  out  lines  of 
conduct  for  adoption.  3.  It  is  important  to  study  the  meaning  of  events  in  our  lives 
which  are  inevitable  and  disagreeable.  4.  The  coercive  action  of  Providence  will 
become  less  or  more  according  as  we  turn  from  sin  or  harden  our  hearts.  "  The  w«y 
of  transgressors  is  hard." 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Ch.  v.,  vi.  1—9.  (AsHDOD,  Gath,  Ekkon.)—  The  ark  among  the  heathen.  "  And  the 
ark  of  the  Lord  was  in  the  country  of  the  Philistines  seven  months  "  (ch.  vi.  1).  The 
scene  is  now  changed.  Whilst  there  arises  in  every  household  in  Israel  a  cry  of 
mourning  for  the  dead,  Shiloh  is  ravaged  and  burnt  with  fire,  and  the  yoke  of  oppres- 
sion made  heavier  than  before,  the  hosts  of  the  Philistines  return  to  their  own  country 
elated  with  victory.  They  carry  with  them  the  ark  of  the  Lord,  which  had  never  before 
been  touched  by  unconsecrated  hands,  or  for  ages  exposed  to  the  gaze  of  any  but  the 
priests ;  and  the  interest  centres  on  the  sacred  symbol  amidst  its  new  and  strange  sur- 
roundings. It  is  first  of  all  taken  to  Ashdod,  three  miles  from  the  sea-coast,  the  chief 
seat  of  the  worship  of  Dagon,  the  national  god  of  the  Philistines  (1  Chron.  x.  10)  ; 
afterwards  to  Gath,  ten  miles  distant  (the  native  place  of  Goliath,  and  twice  the  tem- 
porary residence  of  David) ;  and  then  to  Ekron  (ch.  vii.  U),  the  most  northerly  of 
their  cities.  Although  the  other  two  cities  of  the  Philistine  Pentapolis,  Gaza,  the  scene 
of  Samson's  death  (Judges  xvi.  21—30),  and  Askelon  (ch.  xxxi.  10 ;  2  Sam.  i.  20),  were 
deeply  concerned  in  the  events  which  attended  its  presence  (ch.  v.  8 ;  vi.  17),  it  does 
not  appear  to  have  visited  them.  1.  The  time  of  its  abode  among  the  Philistines  was 
for  them  a  time  of  judgment.  Although  the  ark  when  among  the  people  of  Israel 
seemed  to  be  abandoned  by  God  and  destitute  of  power,  it  was  now  defended  by  him 
and  clothed  with  might.  The  difference  arose  from  the  different  ciicuinstances  in 
vhicfa  it  was  placed ;  and  in  both  cases  it  was  shown  that  the  paweHUon  of  iutitationi 


CH.  V.  1—12.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  1(W 

appointed  by  God  does  not  profit  those  who  refuse  to  stand  in  a  right  relation  to  God 
himself,  but  rather  serves  to  increase  their  condemnation.  Judgment  also  is  executed 
in  many  ways.  2.  Judgment  was  mingled  with  mercy.  The  afBictions  which  they 
endured  were  "  less  than  their  iniquity  deserved  "  (Job  xi.  6),  and  were  "  established 
for  the  correction  "  (Hab.  i.  12)  of  their  sins  and  the  prevention  of  their  ruin  (Ezek. 
xviii.  30).  The  God  of  Israel  has  supreme  dominion  over  the  heathen,  "  chastises  " 
them  (Ps.  xciv.  10)  for  their  good,  and  never  leaves  himself  "  without  witness  "  (Acts 
xiv.  17).  3.  The  design  of  the  whole  was  the  furtherance  of  the  purpose  for  which 
Israel  was  called,  viz.  to  bear  witness  to  the  living  and  true  God,  and  to  preserve  his 
religion  separate  and  distinct  from  the  idolatry  and  superstition  of  the  heathen.  4. 
The  efect  of  the  display  of  his  power  in  connection  with  the  presence  of  the  ark 
among  them  appears  here  and  in  their  subsequent  history.  Consider  these  Philistines 
as — 

I.  Triumphing  in  the  captube  of  the  abk  (vers.  1,  2).  "They  brought  it 
into  the  house  (or  temple)  of  Dagon,  and  set  it  by  Dagon,"  as  a  trophy  or  a  votive 
ofEering,  ascribing  their  victory  to  him,  and  magnifying  him  as  superior  to  Jehovah. 
The  process  described  by  the  Apostle  Paul  (Eom.  i.  18 — 23)  had  taken  place  in  them. 
Their  worship  was  a  nature- worship,  joined  with  the  embodiment  of  their  "  foolish  " 
imaginations  in  an  image  with  which  their  god  was  identified.  Dagon  was  "the  god 
of  natural  power — of  all  the  life-giving  forces  of  which  water  is  the  instrument ; 
and  his  fish-like  body,  with  head  and  arms  of  man,  would  appear  a  striking  embodi- 
ment of  his  rule  to  those  who  dwelt  near  the  sea."  When  men  have  fallen  away 
from  the  knowledge  of  the  true  God  they — 1.  Do  honour  to  a  false  god;  impelled 
by  the  religiousness  of  their  nature,  which  will  not  let  them  rest  without  an  object  of 
worship.  2.  Dishonour  the  true  God,  by  declaring  him  inferior  and  subject  to  the 
false,  and  by  "  despising  his  holy  things."  The  Philistines  did  not  deny  the  existence 
of  Jehovah ;  they  were  willing  to  account  him  one  among  "  lords  many  and  gods 
many,"  and  regarded  him  as  having  a  local  and  limited  dominion.  But  the  funda- 
mental idea  of  the  religion  of  Israel  was  that  Jehovah  is  God  alone,  and  demands 
the  supreme  and  entire  affection  of  man  (Isa.  xlii.  8).  "  Thou  shalt  have  no  other 
gods  before  me,"  t.  e.  in  my  presence.  3.  Give  glory  to  themselves  ;  are  proud  and 
boastful  of  their  wisdom,  power,  and  success.  Self  is  really  the  idol  of  all  who 
forsake  the  Lord.     But  the  triumph  of  the  ungodly  is  short. 

II.  Smitten  before  the  presence  of  the  ark  (vers.  2 — 4).  Almost  as  soon  as 
they  obtained  possession  of  it,  the  victory  which  they  thought  they  had  obtained  over 
him  whose  presence  it  represented  was  turned  into  disastrous  defeat.  1.  Their  god 
was  cast  down  and  broken  in  pieces.  (1)  Mysteriously.  In  the  night.  (2)  Signi^- 
cantly.  "  Fallen  upon  his  face  to  the  ground  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord, '  as  if  in 
subjection,  or  rendering  worship  to  the  Lord  of  all.  (3J  Irresistibly.  Unwilling  to 
lay  the  lesson  to  heart,  they  "  set  him  in  his  place  again,'  but  only  to  prove  that  their 
efforts  on  his  behalf  were  abortive  (Isa.  xlv.  9).  (4)  More  and  more  signally.  Their 
very  efforts  affording  occasion  for  a  greater  manifestation  of  Divine  power,  and 
one  which  could  not  be,  as  the  first  may  possibly  have  been,  attributed  to  accident. 
"  The  face,  as  a  sig^  of  its  worthless  glory  and  vain  beauty,  struck  down  to  the 
earth ;  the  head  also,  as  the  seat  of  the  wisdom  which  is  alienated  from  God  and 
apposed  to  God;  the  hands,  as  a  symbol  of  the  powers  of  darkness  which  work 
therein,  cut  off"  (Lange).  (5)  Contemptuously.  "  Upon  the  threshhold,"  as  if  fit 
only  to  be  trodden  under-foot.  Such,  however,  was  the  blindness  of  his  votaries, 
that  they  henceforth  accounted  the  spot  as  peculiarly  sacred  (ver.  3).  (6)  Completely. 
"  Only  the  fish-stump  was  left."  "Thus  the  kingdom  of  Satan  will  certainly  fall 
before  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  error  before  truth,  profaneness  before  godliness, 
corruption  before  grace  in  the  hearts  of  the  faithful."  2.  Their  sustenance  was 
wasted  and  destroyed  (ver.  6 ;  vi.  4,  6).  "  Mice  were  produced  in.  the  land,  and 
there  arose  a  great  and  deadly  confusion  in  the  city  "  (Septuagint).  The  corn-fields, 
the  chief  means  of  their  subsistence  and  the  source  of  their  prosperity,  rendered 
fertile,  as  they  deemed,  by  the  power  and  favour  of.  Dagon,  were  wasted  by  a  plague 
of  field-mice  (not  unknown  in  the  history  of  other  lands)  under  the  special  arrange- 
ment of  Divine  providence,  that  they  might  learn  the  vanity  of  their  idol  and  the 
eupremaisy  of  Jehovah.    3.  Their  person*  were  afSicted  with  disease.    "  The  hand  ot 


108  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  v.  1— U. 

the  Lord  was  heavy  upon  them  of  Ashdod  "  and  "  the  coasts  (territory)  thereof,"  and 
"  smote  them  with  emerods  "  (vers.  9,  12 ;  either  hoils  or  hemorrhoids,  bleeding  piles 
— Ps.  Izxviii.  66).  (1)  Painful.  (2)  Eeproachf ul,  because  of  the  moral  corruption 
sanctioned  in  connection  with  idolatrous  worship  (Rom.  i.  24 — 32).  (3)  Instructive — 
concerning  the  self-control  and  moral  purity  which  the  true  God  requires  in  men. 
These  things  were  adapted  to  show  the  folly  of  idolatry,  the  majesty  of  God,  and  the 
necessity  of  humiliation  before  him.     Nor  were  they  wholly  without  efEect. 

III.  Inspired  with  deead  of  the  abk  (ver.  7),  for  such  was  evidently  the  pre- 
vailing feeling  of  the  men  of  Ashdod,  and  of  others  subsequently,  as  more  fully 
expressed  in  vers.  11,  12.  They  attributed  their  afSictions  to  its  presence — "  His 
hand  is  sore  upon  us,  and  upon  Dagon  our  god ; "  and  feared  a  continuance  of  them. 
Hence  they  wished  to  get  rid  of  it,  as  the  Gergesenes  desired  Jesus  to  "  depart  out 
of  their  coasts"  (Matt.  viii.  34).  1.  The  religion  of  the  heathen  is  a  religion  of 
fear.  2.  The  fear  of  man  in  the  presence  of  the  supernatural  bears  witness  to  the 
sinfulness  of  his  nature,  or  of  his  disturbed  relations  with  the  Divine.  3.  It  springs 
from  a  conviction  or  instinct  of  retribution,  which,  however,  is  often  mistaken  in  its 
applications.  4.  A  servile,  selfish  fear  drives  away  the  soul  from  God  instead  of 
drawing  it  near  to  him,  and  is  contrary  to  the  reverential,  filial  fear  in  which  true 
religion  has  its  root  (2  Tim.  L  7). 

IV.  Striving  fob  the  betention  of  the  ark  (vers.  8 — 12).  The  effect  of  their 
sufferings  on  the  people  of  Ashdod  was  to  lead  them  to  resolve, "  The  ark  of  the  God 
of  Israel  shall  not  abide  with  us ; "  but  its  removal  was  deemed  a  matter  of  such 
importance  that  they  called  a  council  of  the  lords  (or  princes)  of  the  confederacy  ta 
determine  what  should  be  done  with  it.  Whilst  they  may  have  felt  toward  Jehovah 
a  like  fear  to  that  with  which  they  regarded  Dagon,  they  were  unwilling  to  render 
honourto  him  by  "  letting  it  go  again  to  its  own  place  "  (ver.  11),  still  less  to  renounce 
their  idolatry.  They  wished  to  retain  the  ark  for  their  own  honour  and  glory ;  and 
so  indisposed  were  they  to  desist  from  their  attempt,  and  acknowledge  their  fault, 
that  even  their  own  priests  found  it  necessary  to  admonish  them  against  "  hardening 
their  hearts  as  the  Egyptians  and  Pharaoh "  (ver.  6 ;  ch.  iv.  8).  They  sought  to 
efEect  their  purpose  by  sending  it  to  Gath ;  and  it  was  only  when  both  Gath  and  Ekron 
were  still  more  severely  afflicted  than  Ashdod,  many  died,  and  the  cry  of  distress 
"went  up  to  heaven"  (ver.  12),  that  in  a  second  council  they  consented  to  let  it  go. 
1.  The  devices  of  men  against  the  Lord  are  foolish  and  vain  (Prov.  xxi.  30).  2. 
Their  continued  resistance  to  his  will  causes  increased  misery  to  themselves  and 
others.  3.  Their  efforts  against  him  afford  opportunities  for  a  wider  and  more  signal 
display  of  his  power.  4.  What  they  are  unwilling  to  do  in  the  beginning  they  are, 
after  much  suffering,  constrained  to  do  in  the  end. 

V.  Inquiring  about  the  return  of  the  ark  (ch.  vi.  2 — ^9).  The  Philistine 
princes,  having  resolved  to  send  it  back,  called  "  the  priests  and  soothsayers  "  to- 
gether, to  show  them  in  what  manner  it  should  be  done;  and  the  answer  they 
received,  though  not  unmingled  with  the  caution  generally  exhibited  by  heathen 
priests,  was  wise  and  good.  1.  Men  in  'all  ages  have  had  need  of  special  guidance 
in  Divine  things.  The  very  existence  of  a  priesthood  is  a  confession  of  such  need.  2. 
Conviction  often  forces  itself  upon  the  most  reluctant.  3.  There  is  in  men  generally 
a  deep  feeling  of  the  necessity  of  a  propitiatory  offering  in  order  to  avert  Divine 
wrath — "  trespass  offering "  (ver.  3).  4.  Even  the  light  which  shines  upon  the 
heathen  indicates  the  need  of  the  higher  light  of  revelation.  Their  wisest  advisers 
exhibit  uncertainty  and  doubt  (vers.  6,  9). 

VL  Rendering  homage  to  the  God  of  the  ark.  1.  By  sending  it  back  to  its 
own  place.  2.  By  the  open  acknowledgment  of  their  transgression  in  the  trespass 
offerings  they  present  on  behalf  of  the  whole  nation.  "  Give  glory  unto  the  God  of 
Israel  (ver.  6).  3.  By  providing  the  most  appropriate  and  worthy  means  of  making 
their  offerings.  "  A  new  cart "  (2  Sam.  vi.  3).  "  Two  milch  kine  on  which  there  hath 
come  no  yoke "  (Num.  xix.  2).  4.  By  the  humble  attendance  of  their  chief  men 
(vers.  12,  16).  6.  By  confessing  the  incompatibility  of  the  worship  of  Jehovah  with 
the  worship  of  Dagon.  "  And  from  this  time  we  hear  no  more  of  the  attempts  of  the 
Gentile  nations  to  join  any  part  of  the  Jewish  worship  with  their  own  "  (Warburton), 
Imperfect  as  their  homage  was,  it  was  not  unacceptable  to  him  "  who  is  a  gracious 


-OH.  T.  1— 12.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  lOS 

God  and  merciful,  slow  to  an^er,  and  of  great  kindness,  and  repents  him  of  the  evil " 
(Jonah  iv.  2 ;  Acts  xvii.  27,  30). 

VII.  Persisting  in  their  attachment  to  idols.  We  know  not  all  the  beneficial 
effect  of  the  presence  of  the  ark  among  them,  in  restraining  them  from  evil  and 
inciting  them  to  good  ;  but  we  know  that — 1.  They  did  not  renounce  their  idolatry. 
2.  They  did  not  cease  from  their  oppression  of  Israel.  And,  3.  Were  not  permanently 
deterred  from  making  fresh  attacks  upon  them  (ch.  vii.  7),  and  by  their  opposition 
to  the  God  of  Israel  "  bringing  upon  themselves  swift  destruction." — D, 

Ver.  3.  (AsHDOD.) — The  overthrow  of  idolatry.  "  Behold,  Dagon  was  fallen  upon 
his  face  to  the  earth  before  the  ark  of  the  Lord."  Idolatry  still  prevails  over  by  far 
the  larger  portion  of  the  earth.  It  is  an  ancient,  persistent,  and  enormous  evil.  And 
we,  like  Israel  of  old,  are  called  to  be  witnesses  to  the  heathen  of  the  living  and  true 
God ;  not,  indeed,  by  keeping  outwardly  separate  from  them,  nor  for  that  purpose, 
and  the  preservation  of  the  truth  intrusted  to  us,  by  contending  against  the;n  with  the 
sword ;  but  by  going  into  all  the  world,  and  preaching  the  gospel  to  every  creature. 
Our  only  weapons  are  those  of  truth,  righteousness,  and  love. 

"  Nor  do  we  need 
Beside  the  gospel  other  sword  or  shield 
To  aid  ua  in  the  warfare  for  the  faith." — (Dante.) 

When  the  sik  wm  defended  with  carnal  weapons,  it  was  carried  away  by  the 
heathen,  and  placed  in  the  temple  of  Dagon ;  but  he  whom  the  sacred  symbol  repre- 
sented smote  the  idol  to  the  ground  (vers.  1 — 5).  "  Wherever  he  comes  with  the 
ark  and  the  testimony,  there  he  smites  the  idols  to  the  ground.  Idolatry  must  full 
where  the  gospel  finds  a  place."     Concerning  idolatry,  notice — 

I.  The  nature  op  the  evil.  1.  False  and  unworthy  conceptions  of  God.  Tli? 
instinct  of  worship  was  possessed  by  the  Philistines ;  but  their  worship  was  renders  I 
to  a  monstrous  image,  which  was  wholly  destitute  of,  and  opposed  to,  the  perfections 
of  the  true  God.  It  is  the  same  with  other  idolatrous  nations.  Of  the  innumerable 
gods  of  India  it  has  been  said,  "  What  a  lie  against  his  supreme  majesty  I  Their 
number  is  a  lie  against  his  unity ;  their  corporeal  nature  is  a  lie  against  his  pure, 
invisible  spirituality ;  their  confined  and  local  residence  a  lie  against  his  omnipresence 
and  immensity ;  their  limited  and  subdivided  departments  of  operation  a  lie  against 
his  universal  proprietorship  and  dominion ;  their  follies  and  weaknesses  a  lie  against 
his  infinite  wisdom ;  tneir  defects,  vices,  and  crimes  a  lie  against  his  unsullied  purity 
and  perfection."  "  Having  no  hope,  and  without  God  in  the  world  "  (Ephes.  ii.  12). 
2.  Great  eorruptitm  of  life  and  manners ;  gross  sensuality,  incessant  strife,  oppres- 
sion, cruelty,  &c.  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  20).  "The  land  is  defiled,  and  vomiteth  out  her 
inhabitants "  (Levit.  xviii.  26).  3.  A  dovnvward  tendency  towards  still  greater 
darkness,  corruption,  and  misery.  "  The  true  evil  of  idolatry  is  this.  There  is  one 
sole  idea  of  God  which  corresponds  adequately  to  his  whole  nature.  Of  this  idea 
two  things  may  be  afiBrmed,  the  first  being  that  it  is  the  root  of  all  absolute  grandeur, 
of  all  truth,  and  all  moral  perfections ;  the  second,  that,  natural  and  easy  as  it  seems 
when  once  unfolded,  it  could  only  have  been  unfolded  by  revelation;  and  to  all 
eternity  he  that  started  with  a  false  conception  of  God  Oould  not  through  any  effort 
of  his  own  have  exchanged  it  for  the  true  one.  All  idolatries  alike,  though  not  all 
in  equal  degrees,  by  intercepting  the  idea  of  God  through  the  prism  of  some  repre- 
sentative creature  that  partiaUy  resembles  God,  refract,  and  splinter,  and  distort 
that  idea.  And  all  experience  shows  that  the  tendency  of  man,  left  to  his  own 
imaginations,  is  downwwrds.  Many  things  check  and  disturb  this  tendency  for  a 
time ;  but  finally,  and  under  that  intense  civilisation  to  which  man  intellectually  is 
always  hurrying,  under  the  eternal  evolution  of  physical  knowledge,  such  a  degrada- 
tion of  God's  idea,  ruinous  to  the  moral  capacities  of  man,  would  undoubtedly  perfect 
itself,  were  it  not  for  the  kindling  of  a  purer  standard  by  revelation.  Idolatry, 
therefore,  is  not  an  evil,  and  one  utterly  beyond  the  power  of  social  institutions  to 
xediesB ;  but,  in  fact,  it  is  the  fountain  of  all  other  evil  that  seriously  menaces  the 
destiny  of  the  human  race  "  (De  Quincey,  '  Leaders  in  Lit.,'  p.  308). 

XL  TBI  measi  or  its  ovebthbow.     1.  The  proclamation  of  Divine  tmtk,  ot 


no  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  v.  1—12." 

fflrhich  the  ark  may  be  accounted  a  symbol ;  the  revelation  of  the  righteous  and  mer- 
ciful purposes  of  God  toward  men  in  his  Son  Jesus  Christ.  2.  The  operations  of 
Divine  providence,  by  which  heathen  lands  are  rendered  accessible,  and  their  inhabit- 
ants disposed  to  pay  attention  to  the  truth ;  not  only  those  which  are  afflictive,  but 
also  those  which  are  benign  (ver.  6).  3.  The  influences  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  by 
which  false  systems  are  shaken  as  by  a  "  mighty  rushing  wind,"  and  consumed  as 
with  fire,  and  lost  souls  are  enlightened,  purified,  and  saved.  "  By  my  Spirit,  saith 
the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (Zech.  iv.  6).  He  works  in  silence  and  secrecy ;  but  the  efEects 
of  his  working  become  manifest  to  all.     The  light  of  the  morning  reveals  them. 

III.  The  certainty  of  its  doom  ;  from— 1.  The  adaptation  of  the  means.  2. 
The  work  which  has  been  already  accomplished,  and  which  is  an  earnest  of  and 
preparation  for  "  greater  things  than  these.  3.  The  predictions  of  the  word  (Num. 
xiv.  21 ;  Isa.  ii.  18;  Jer.  x.  11 ;  Mai.  ii.  11). 

Conclusion: — 1.  Pity  the  heathen  "in  the  compassion  of  Jesus  Christ.''  i2.  "Go 
ye."     "  Give  ye."     "  Pray  ye."    3.  Do  all  in  faith  and  hope.— D. 

Ver.  8. — Infatuation.  I.  Op  the  heathen.  Samson,  calling  on  the  name  of  Jeho- 
vah God,  pulled  down  the  temple  of  Dagon  at  Gaza,  and  showed  the  weakness  of  the 
idol.  When  the  Philistines  got  possession  of  the  ark  of  Jehovah,  they  placed  it  in 
another  temple  of  Dagon  at  Ashdod,  in  order  to  re-establish  the  credit  of  their  god. 
Great  must  have  been  their  chagrin  when  they  found  the  god  of  the  victors  prostrate 
before  a  sacred  symbol  connected  with  the  God  of  the  vanquished.  But  it  was  no 
easy  thing  to  break  their  confidence  in  their  own  god.  They  set  the  idol  up  again, 
trying  to  persuade  themselves,  perhaps,  that  the  fall  had  been  accidental.  The  re- 
storation of  Dagon,  however,  only  prepared  for  him  and  his  worshippers  a  greater 
discomfiture.  As  the  Philistines  would  learn  nothing  from  the  humiliation  of  their 
god,  they  had  to  behold  with  horror  his  mutilation  and  destruction.  A  plague  fell  at 
the  same  time  on  the  people  of  Ashdod,  like  the  plague  of  boils  that  smote  the 
Egyptians  in  the  days  of  Moses.  They  were  filled  with  dismay,  yet  they  would  not 
restore  to  its  place  in  Shiloh  that  ark  which,  as  they  owned,  had  brought  such  diatress 
upon  them  (ver.  7).  They  carried  it  from  city  to  city,  though  in  each  place  the  Lord 
punished  them.  For  some  months  they  continued  in  this  infatuated  course.  The 
lesson  of  the  weakness  of  their  own  gods  they  learned  very  slowly,  very  reluctantly ; 
indeed,  they  never  turned  from  their  idols.  Dreading  the  judgments  of  Jehovah,  they 
at  last  sent  back  the  ark  to  the  land  of  Israel ;  but  their  minds  and  hearts  were  not 
changed.  All  that  they  cared  for  was  to  be  fi-ee  of  this  terrible  ark,  that  they  might 
cleave  undisturbed  to  their  own  gods  and  their  own  heathen  usages. 

II.  Op  ungodly  men  in  all  nations.  An  evil  habit  is  reproved,  an  error  refuted, 
or  a  vain  hope  in  religion  exposed ;  yet  men  will  not  abandon  it.  They  have  some 
excuse  for  it,  and  after  it  has  been  thrQwn  down  they  "  set  it  up  again  in  its  place." 
The  lesson  is  repeated  with  emphasis  more  than  once,  and  yet  it  is  not  learned. 
Ungodly  and  self-willed  men  fall  on  one  excuse  after  another,  rather  than  give  up 
errors  which  suit  their  minds  and  evils  to  which  they  are  addicted.  They  have  no 
objection  to  keep  religion  as  a  talisman ;  but  rather  than  be  called  to  account  concern- 
ing it,  or  compelled  to  choose  between  it  and  their  own  devices,  they  will  send  it 
away.  They  prefer  even  a  weak  Dagon,  who  lets  them  sin,  to  the  holy  God,  who 
requires  his  people  to  be  holy  too.  The  Philistines  continued  to  be  heathens,  not- 
withstanding the  reproof  and  humiliation  inflicted  upon  them,  just  as  the  Egyptians 
remained  in  heathen  blindness  after  all  the  proofs  given  to  them  of  the  power  of 
Jehovah  over  their  gods  and  their  Pharaoh,  Alas  !  many  persons  in  Christendom 
have  solemn  reproofs  from  God  and  exposures  of  their  helplessness  when  he  rises  np 
to  judgment,  yet  never  turn  to  him.  In  their  infatuation  they  first  treat  the  ark  with 
disrespect,  then  send  it  away.  They  dismiss  God  from  their  thoughts,  and  are  as  mad 
as  ever  on  their  idols. 

["  This  chapter,  with  the  following,  strikingly  illustrates  the  non-missionaiy  cha- 
racter of  the  Old  Dispensation.  For  centuries  «ie  Israelites  were  near  neighbours  of 
the  Philistines,  and  yet  the  Philistines  had  no  particular  knowledge  of  the  religion  of 
the  Israelites,  and  only  a  garbled  and  distorted  account  of  their  history.  This  reli- 
gious isolation  was,  no  doubt,  ■  part  of  the  Divine  plan  for  the  development  of  the 


OH.  VI.  1—21.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


Ill 


theocratic  kingdom ;  but  if  we  look  for  the  natural  causes,  we  shall  find  one  in  fhe 
narrowness  of  ancient  civilisation,  when  the  ahsence  of  means  of  social  and  litoraij 
communication  fostered  mutual  ignorance,  and  made  sympathy  almost  impossible;  and 
another  in  the  national  local  nature  of  the  religion  of  Israel,  with  its  central  aanctaary, 
and  its  whole  system  grounded  in  the  past  history  of  the  nation,  thus  presenting 
great  obstacles  to  a  foreigner  who  wished  to  become  •  worshipper  of  Jehovah."— 
Dr.  BroaduB].— F. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VI. 


Rbstoration  of  the  ark  to  the  Is- 
raelites (vers.  1 — 12).  Vers.  1,  2.— The  ark 
of  Jehovah  was  in  the  country — literally, 
the  field,  i.  «.  the  territory — of  the  Philis- 
tines seven  months,  daring  which  long  time 
the  people  wherever  the  ark  was  deposited 
were  amieted  in  their  persons  with  a  most 
painful  malady.  The  princes  determined, 
tnerefore,  to  restore  it  to  Israel,  and  convened 
the  priests  and  the  diviners,  that  they 
might  advise  them  as  to  the  manner  in 
which  this  purpose  should  be  best  carried 
out,  lest  some  error  or  want  of  due  rever- 
ence might  only  serve  to  increase  their 
sufferings.  It  would  be  the  duty  of  the 
priests  to  see  that  the  proper  ceremonial  was 
observed  in  moving  the  ark,  while  the 
diviners  would  decide  what  day  and  hour 
and  special  method  would  be  lucky.  The 
importance  of  the  diviner,  gosem,  is  shown 
by  his  being  mentioned  in  Isa.  iii.  2  in  an 
enumeration  of  the  leading  orders  in  the 
state.  He  is  placed  there  between  the  pro- 
phet and  the  elder  or  senator ;  but  the  A.  V. , 
displeased  perhaps  at  finding  one  who  prac- 
tised a  forbidden  art  nevertheless  described 
as  practically  so  valued,  translates  the  word 
prudent.  Literally  it  means  a  divider  or 
partitioner,  because  it  was  his  office  to 
separate  things  into  the  two  classes  of  lucky 
and  unlucky.  Tell  us  wherewith,  &c. 
Though  this  translation  is  tenable,  the  right 
rendering  is  probably  how.  The  princes  did 
not  assume  that  gifts  must  accompany  the 
ark,  but  inquired  generally  as  to  the  best 
method  of  restoring  it.  So  the  answer  of 
the  priests  and  diviners  is  not  merely  that 
expiatory  offerings  are  to  be  made,  but  that 
the  ark  is  to  be  sent  back  in  such  a  way  as 
to  give  proof  that  Jehovah  had  intervened, 
or  the  contrary  (vers.  7,  8,  9). 

Vers.  3,  i. — A  trespass  offering.  The  offer- 
mg  that  was  to  be  made  when  the  offence  had 
been  unintentional  (Levit.  v.  15).  Why  his 
hand  is  not  removed  from  you  A  euphemism 
for  "why  your  punishment  continues  to  be 
so  severe,  without  sign  of  abatement."  If 
healing  follows  the  gift,  you  will  know  that 
the  malady  was  Jehovah's  doing.  The  tres- 
pass offering  was  to  consist  of  Ave  golden 
omerods,  and  five  golden  mlM,  it  being  an 


old  heathen  custom,  still  constantly  practised 

abroad,  of  presenting  to  the  deity  tokens 
representing  the  deliverance  wrought  for 
such  as  had  implored  his  aid.  Thns  Horace 
('  Carm.,'  i.  5)  speaks  of  the  custom  of  hang- 
ing up  in  the  temple  of  Neptune  the  clothes 
in  which  a  man  had  escaped  from  shipwreck. 
Slaves  when  manumitted  offered  their  chains 
to  the  Lares ;  and  the  idea  is  so  natural  that 
we  cannot  wonder  at  its  prevalence.  One 
plague  was  on  yon  all.  Rather,  "  is  on  von 
all.  It  did  not  cease  until  the  ark  nad 
been  restored.  The  Hebrew  has  on  them 
all;  but  as  all  the  versions  and  several  MSS. 
read  you  all,  the  substitution  of  them  is 
probably  the  mistake  of  some  transcriber. 

Yer.  5. — Kice  that  mar  the  land.  The 
idea  of  a  plague  of  field-mice  is,  as  we  have 
seen,  due  to  one  of  those  many  nnauthorised 
insertions  of  the  Septuagint  by  which  they 
supposed  that  they  removed  difficulties  from 
the  way  of  their  readers.  As  the  ancients 
use  the  names  of  animals  in  a  very  generic 
way,  any  rodent  may  be  meant  from  the 
jerboa  do  wnwards  ;  but  probably  it  was  the 
common  field-mouse,  arvicola  arvensis,  still 
common  in  Syria,  which  multiplies  with 
great  rapidity,  and  is  very  destructive  to  the 
crops,  and  so  became  the  symbol  of  devasta- 
tion and  pestilence  (see  on  ch.  v.  6).  When, 
as  Herodotus  relates  (Book  ii  141),  the  As- 
syrian army  of  Sennacherib  had  been  defeated, 
because  a  vast  multitude  of  field-mice  had 
overrun  his  camp  and  gnawed  asunder  the 
bow-strings  of  his  troops,  the  Egyptians 
raised  a  statue  to  Hephsestus,  holding  in  his 
hand  a  mouse.  But  very  probably  this  is 
but  the  literal  explanation  by  Herodotus  of 
what  he  saw,  while  to  a  well-instructed 
Egyptian  it  represented  their  god  of  heal- 
ing, holding  in  his  hand  the  mouse,  as  the 
symbol  either  of  the  devastation  whicli  he 
had  averted,  or  of  the  pestilence  with  which 
he  had  smitten  the  Assyrian  aimy  (see  on 
ch.  V.  6). 

Ver.  6. — Wherefore  do  yon  harden  your 
hearts,  as  the  Egyptians  and  Fharaohl  On 
this  reference  to  Egypt  see  on  ch.  iv.  8.  It 
is  remarkable  that  they  so  correctly  point 
out  that  it  was  the  obduracy  of  the  Egyptians 
which  made  their  punishment  so  severe. 
Yet  finally  even  they,  in  spite  of  their  de- 
termmed  opposition    were  compelled  to  let 


112 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[OB.  VI.  1—21 


Itsnel  go.  So  now  tbe  qneitioii  ii  whether 
the  Philistines  will  restore  the  ark  on  the 
warning  of  one  plague,  or  whether  they  will 
hold  out  till  they  hare  been  smitten  with  ten. 

Ter.  7. — Uake  a  new  cart,  and  take,  && 
The  Hebrew  is,  "  Kow  take  and  make  yon  ■ 
new  cart,  and  two  milch  kine."  The  trans- 
position of  the  A.  y.  throws  undue  stress 
upon  the  verb  make,  whereas  the  Hebrew 
smiply  means  that  both  the  cart  was  to  be 
new,  and  the  heifers  untrained  and  unbroken 
to  the  yoke.  Both  these  were  marks  of 
reverence.  Kothing  was  to  be  employed  in 
God's  service  which  had  been  previously  used 
for  baser  purposes  (comp.  Mark  xL  2).  No 
animal  was  deemed  fit  for  sacrifice  which  had 
laboured  in  the  field.  The  separation  of  the 
kine  from  their  calves  was  for  the  purpose  of 
demonstrating  whether  the  plague  after  all 
was  supernatural,  and  it  is  remarkable  what 
great  care  the  Philistine  priests  take  against 
confounding  the  extraordinary  with  the  Di- 
vine. If,  however,  the  kine  act  in  a  manner 
contrary  to  nature,  their  last  doubt  will  be 
removed. 

Ver.  8. — Pnt  the  jewels  of  gold  ...  in 
a  eoffer.  Instead  of  jewels  the  Hebrew 
word  signifies  any  article  of  workmanship, 
and  so  figures,  images  wrought  in  gold.  They 
were  to  be  placed  reverentially  at  the  side  of 
the  ark,  for  it  had  wrought  them  so  great 
evil  that  they  had  learned  to  look  upon  it 
with  awe. 

Ver.  9. — Eii  own  coast,  or  "border."  The 
ark  throughout  this  verse  is  spoken  of  as  if 
it  were  itself  a  deity.  Beth-shemesh  —  i.e. 
"the  house  of  the  sun,"  also  called  Ir- 
shemesh,  "city  of  the  sun"  (Josh.  xix.  41) 
— had  evidently  been  in  the  time  of  the 
Canaanites  the  seat  of  this  popular  idolatry. 
It  was  now  a  city  of  the  pnests,  situated  in 
the  tribe  of  Judah,  on  its  north-eastern 
border,  next  the  tribe  of  Dan,  and  was  the 
nearest  Israelite  town  to  Ekron.  If,  then, 
the  kine,  albeit  unused  to  the  yoke,  left 
their  calves  behind,  and  drew  the  cart  by 
the  most  direct  route  unto  the  land  of  Judah, 
they  would  give  the  required  proof  that  the 
Philistines  were  smitten  by  the  hand  of 
Tehovah,  and  that  it  was  no  chance  that  had 
happened  unto  them. 

Ver.  12. — The  kin*  took  the  straight  way. 
The  Hebrew  brings  out  the  directness  with 
which  the  heifers  took  the  route  to  Beth- 
shemesh  very  forcibly.  It  says,  "  And  the 
kine  went  straight  in  the  way  upon  the  way 
to  Beth-shemesh  ;  they  went  along  one  high- 
way, lowing  as  they  went,"  i,  e.  they  went 
in  one  direct  course,  without  deviating  from 
it.  Nevertheless,  their  continual  lowing 
showed  the  great  stress  that  was  laid  upon 
their  nature  in  being  thus  compelled  to 
separate  themselves  from  their  calves.  And 
the  tor^  of  the  Philistines  went  after  them. 


/.  e.  behind  them,  leaving  the  Une  free  to 
go  where  they  chose.  The  usual  m>sition  of 
the  driver  of  an  ox-cart  in  the  East  is  in 
front.  Conder  ('Tent  Work,'  L  274)  de- 
scribes the  view  up  the  great  com  valley  ol 
Sorek  to  the  high  and  ragged  lulls  above  as 
extremely  picturesque,  and  this  it  is,  he 
adds,  which  was  spread  before  the  eyes  of  the 
five  lords  of  the  Philistines  as  they  followed 
the  lowing  oxen  which  bore  the  ark  on 
the  "strai^t  way"  from  Ekron  to  Beth- 
shemesh.  The  ruins  of  the  latter  place,  he 
says,  lie  on  a  knoll  surrounded  by  olive  trees, 
near  the  junction  of  the  valley  of  Sorek  with 
the  great  gorge  which  bounded  Judah  on  the 
north. 

The  abk  at  Beth-shemesh  (vers.  18 — 
20).  Yer.  13.  And  they  of  Beth-shemesh. 
More  exactly,  "  And  Beth-shemesh  was  reap- 
ing its  wheat-harvest,"  the  whole  population 
being  in  the  fields.  Though  a  pnestly  city, 
we  find  in  ver.  16  the  Levitea  distinguished 
from  the  ordinary  inhabitants,  as  though 
they  and  the  priests  formed  only  the  ruling 
dass.  In  the  valley.  Now  called  the  Wady 
Snrar,  branching  off  into  another  valley  on 
the  south.  Robinson  (' Later  BibL  Bes.,'  153) 
speaks  of  the  site  of  Beth-shemesh  as  a  very 
noble  one,  being  "  a  low  plateau  at  the  junc- 
tion of  two  fine  plains."  The  wheat-harvest 
takes  place  in  Palestine  in  Hay,  and  conse- 
quently the  disastrous  battle  of  Eben-ezer 
must  have  been  fought  in  the  previous 
October. 

Ver.  14. — Stood  there,  where  there  was  a 
great  stone.  Probably  a  mass  of  natural 
rock  rising  through  the  soil  This  they 
used  as  an  altar,  breaking  up  the  cart  for 
wood,  and  sacrificing  the  kine.  In  this 
joyful  work  aU  the  people  seem  to  have 
joined,  though  the  sacrifice  would  be  offered 
on^  by  the  priests. 

Ver.  15. — The  Levites  took  down  the  ark. 
Naturally,  in  a  city  of  which  priests  formed  the 
ruling  caste,  the  people  would  be  acquainted 
with  the  general  nature  of  the  regulations  of 
the  law.  Apparently  it  was  only  after  the 
sacrificial  feast  that  they  forgot  the  reverence 
due  to  the  symbol  of  Jehovah's  presence 
among  them. 

Ver.  16.— They  returned  to  Ekron  the 
same  day.  The  lords  of  the  Philistines 
would  of  course  take  no  part  in  this  re- 
joicing, but,  having  seen  the  ark  restored, 
and  the  people  busied  in  making  prepar- 
ations for  the  sacrifice,  returned  immediately 
home. 

Vera.  17,  18. — The  golden  emerods.  We 
have  here  and  in  ver.  18  an  enumeration  of 
the  gifts  differing  from,  without  being  at  vari- 
ance with,  that  in  ver.  4.  They  are  stUl  five 
g^id^Q  emerods,  for  which  the  name  here  is 
not  ophaCim,  but  tehorim,  the  word  always 
read  in  the  synagogue  (see  ch.  v.  6).     Fron: 


CH.  VI.  1—21.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


113 


its  nse  in  the  cognate  langaages  it  is  pretty 
certain  that  it  is  rightly  translated  in  our 
version.  But  besides  these  there  were 
golden  mice,  according  to  the  number  of  all 
the  cities,  &e.  The  priests  had  named  only 
five  mice,  one  for  each  of  the  lords  of  the 
Philistines  ;  but  the  eagerness  of  the  people 
outran  their  suggestion,  and  not  only  the 
fenced  towns,  but  even  the  unwalled  villages 
sent  their  offering,  lest  they  should  still 
be  chastised.  Country  villages.  Literally, 
"the  village"  or  "hamlet  of  the  PerazL' 
The  Septuagint,  a  trustworthy  authority  in 
such  matters,  makes  the  Perazi  the  same  as 
the  Perizzite.  Both  words  really  signify 
"the  inhabitant  of  the  lowland,  i.  e.  ot 
the  plain  country  of  Phoenicia;  but  from 
Zech.  iL  4,  where  Perazoth  is  translated 
■*  towns  without  walls,"  and  from  Ezek. 
xxxviii.  11,  where  it  is  rendered  "unwalled 
nllages,"  we  may  conclude  that  it  had  come 
popularly  to  mean  an  open  village,  though 
literally,  in  both  these  places,  it  means  "  the 
hamlets  of  the  lowland."  Even  unto  the 
great  stone  of  Abel,  &c.  All  this  part  of 
the  verse  is  exceedingly  corrupt,  and  requires 
large  interpolations  to  obtain  from  it  any 
meaning.  Both  the  Vulgate  and  the  Syriac 
retain  the  unmeaning  word  Abel ;  but  the 
Septuagint  gives  us  what  is  probably  the 
true  reading :  "  and  the  great  stone  whereon 
they  set  the  ark  of  Jehovah,  which  is  in  the 
field  of  Joshua  the  Beth-shemeshite,  is  a 
witness  unto  this  day"  (comp.  Gen.  xxxi 
52  ;  Isa.  xxz.  8). 

Yer.  19.  —  He  smote  the  men  of  Beth- 
shemesh,  &c.  In  this  verse  also  the  text 
is  undoubtedly  corrupt.  The  Septuagint 
ascribes  the  sin  not  to  all  the  people,  but  to 
"the  sons  of  Jecouiah,  who  were  not  glad 
when  they  saw  the  ark,  and  he  smote  them. " 
But  as  this  reading  is  not  supported  by  the 
other  versions  we  may  pass  it  by.  The 
numbers,  however,  are  evidently  wrong. 
Fifty  thousand  men  would  imply  a  popu- 
lation of  250,000  people,  whereas  Jerusalem 
itself  in  its  palmiest  days  never  had  a  popula- 
tion of  even  70,000.  There  were  no  large  cities 
among  the  Israelites,  butasoattered population 
living  upon  their  fields,  and  with  a  few  small 
walled  towns  here  and  there  to  protect  them 
and  their  cattle  in  any  sudden  emergency. 
Eennicott,  however,  has  satisfactorily  ex- 
plained the  mistake.  In  the  old  way  of 
denoting  numbers  by  the  letters  of  the 
alphabet  an  'ain  ^  70  had  been  mistaken 
for  a  mm  with  two  dots  =  50,000.  The 
Syriac  has  5000,  that  is,  a  nun  with  one  dot. 
We  most  add  that  the  Hebrew  ia  not  fifty 


thousand  and  threesoor*  and  ten  men,  hot 
"  seventy  men,  fifty  thousand  men,"  without 
any  article  between,  and  with  the  smaller 
number  first,  contrary  to  Hebrew  rule.  The 
occasion  of  the  calamity  was  probably  as 
follows : — As  the  news  of  the  return  of  the 
ark  spread  from  mouth  to  mouth,  the  people 
flocked  together  to  take  part  in  the  sacrifice, 
which  would  of  course  be  followed  by  a  feast. 
Heated  thereat  by  wine,  perhaps,  and  merri- 
ment, they  lost  all  sense  of  reverence,  and 
encouraged  one  another  to  look  into  the  ark 
and  examine  its  contents,  though  the  words 
need  not  absolutely  mean  more  than  that 
"  they  looked  at  the  ark. "  Even  so  the  men  of 
Beth-shemesh,  as  a  city  of  priests,  must  have 
known  that  death  was  the  penalty  of  unhal- 
lowed gazing  at  holy  things  (Num.  iv.  20), 
and  it  is  more  than  probable  that  those  who 
were  smitten  were  priests,  because  in  them  it 
would  he  a  heinous  sin  ;  for  it  was  a  repe- 
tition of  that  contempt  for  religion  and  its 
symbols  which  had  been  condemned  so 
sternly  in  Eli's  sons.  The  mere  seeing  of 
the  ark  was  no  sin,  and  had  given  the  people 
only  joy  (ver.  13),  but  as  soon  as  they  had 
received  it  the  priests  ought  to  have  covered 
it  with  a  vail  (Num.  iv.  5).  To  leave  it 
without  a,  vail  was  neglectful,  to  pry  into 
it  was  sacrilege.  Because  Jehovah  had 
smitten  many  of  the  people,  &c.  This  clause 
should  be  translated,  "  because  Jehovah  had 
smitten  the  people  with  a  great  smiting." 
The  sudden  death  even  of  seventy  men  in  an 
agricultural  district,  especially  if  they  were 
the  heads  of  the  priestly  families  there, 
would  be  a  great  and  terrible  calamity, 
enough  to  fill  the  whole  place  with  griefc 

Vers.  20,  21. — Who  is  able,  &c.  Literally, 
"  Who  is  able  to  stand  before  Jehovah,  this 
holy  God  ? "  A  punishment  so  severe  follow- 
ing upon  their  unliallowed  temerity  made 
the  inhabitants  of  this  city  of  priests  eager 
to  pass  the  ark  on  to  others.  They  therefore 
sent  messengers  to  the  inhabitants  of  Kir- 
jath-jearim  to  request  them  to  fetch  it  away, 
fcryath-yarim — for  so  it  ought  to  be  pro 
nounced — ^means  the  city  of  forests — Wood 
town,  softened  among  us  into  Wooton.  It 
was  chosen  apparently  simply  because  it  was 
the  nearest  town  of  any  importance,  and  was 
therefore  identified  in  early  Christian  times 
with  the  modem  Kuriet-el-'anab,  grape- 
town,  the  woods  having  given  way  to  vines, 
and  which  is  about  ten  miles  off,  on  the  road 
to  Mizpah.  Conder,  however,  doubts  the 
correctness  of  this  view,  and  places  Kiqath- 
jearim  at  Sdba  (sea  'Tent  Work,'  L  1»  — 
22). 


1  ■!■. 


114  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  vi.  1—21. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — 9. — Seeking  light.  The  facts  are — 1.  The  Philistines,  oppressed  by  Provi- 
dence, are  uncertain  what  to  do  with  the  ark.  2.  They,  consulting  the  priests  and 
diviners,  are  advised  to  send  the  ark  away  with  all  due  honours  and  safeguards  in 
case  it  is  sent  at  all.  3.  They  are  instructed  how  to  carry  out  the  advice,  and  warned 
not  to  refuse  go  to  do.  4.  Having  done  their  best,  they  are  to  learn  the  truth  from 
the  issue.  The  incidents  recorded  furnish  an  instance  of  men  seeking  light.  The 
events  of  the  past  few  months  had  clashed  with  their  material  interests,  and  a  series 
of  observations  had  given  rise  to  the  opinion  that  these  events  were  traceable  to  a 
restlessness  on  the  part  of  the  Hebrew  Divinity.  They  did  not  wish  to  send  back  the 
ark.  At  the  same  time,  there  might  be  some  error  in  the  observations  already  made ; 
and  if  so,  the  troubles  of  the  land  and  the  presence  of  the  ark  would  be  a  mere  co- 
incidence. This  then  was  more  than  an  ordinary  case  of  perplexity.  The  Philistines 
knew  the  ark  to  be  a  superior  power.  Their  doubt  was  whether  it  was  indicating  its 
mind  by  the  events  which  troubled  the  land,  and  if  so,  what  should  be  their  conduct 
in  relation  to  it.  Thus  the  crude  ideas  and  superstitious  conduct  of  heathens  embrace 
truths  which  find  expression  in  modem  experience. 

"  I.  There  are  in  human  life  seasons  of  deep  pekplexitt,  when  men  want  to  know 
THE  TRUTH  CONCERNING  GoD.  More  intelligently  than  the  Philistines,  we  believe  in 
God  as  the  Lord  of  all,  and  the  ever-present  Worker  in  human  affairs.  Although 
events  move  on  in  well-defined  lines  of  natural  order,  we  know  that  God  uses  them 
to  indicate  his  will,  in  conjunction  with  the  intimations  furnished  by  his  word  and 
Spirit.  "  The  steps  of  a  good  man  are  ordered  by  the  Lord."  But  amidst  the,  voices 
that  fall  on  the  ear,  and  owing  to  dulness  of  perception,  the  soul  sometimes  is  in 
great  doubt  concerning  the  mind  of  God,  and  what  course  should  be  pursued.  This 
is  especially  true  when  events  run  counter  to  our  desires  and  apparent  interests,  and 
when  pride  of  spirit  is  cherished.  Home  may  be  wrecked.  Business  may  bode  dis- 
aster. Great  decisions  have  to  be  taken.  In  each  God  has  a  will  of  his  own,  and 
conduct  must  have  primary  regard  to  him.  The  desire  to  do  right  is  out  of  proportion 
to  the  perception  of  what  in  the  particular  instance  is  right. 

II.  The  COURSE  TO  BE  ADOPTED  FOR  THB  REMOVAL  OF  PERPLEXITY.  The  Philistines 
proved  themselves  to  be  men  of  good  sense  by  the  course  they  took.  The  particular 
methods  of  obtaining  more  light  will  always  depend  on  the  spiritual  state  and  previous 
attainments  of  those  seeking  it ;  yet  the  main  lines  pursued  will  be  the  same.  Sum- 
marising then  the  reference  here  to  men  of  experience,  and  the  advice  given  by  them, 
we  see  a  course  available  for  all.  1.  To  act  on  the  experience  of  the  past.  The 
priests  and  diviners  were  the  embodiments  of  generations  of  experience  in  matters 
pertaining  to  the  gods.  Their  advice,  therefore,  was  the  product  of  experience.  Like- 
wise for  every  man  there  is  a  rich  store  of  wisdom  in  the  events  of  his  own  life,  ii» 
the  records  of  history,  in  the  judgment  of  contemporaries.  Experience  is  a  process 
which  gradually  enkindles  and  feeds  a  lamp  within  the  spirit  of  a  man.  It  is  one  of 
God's  ways  of  making  our  path  plain.  Especially  should  the  experience  of  others 
both  show  us  the  line  of  duty  and  warn  us  of  the  risk  of  shutting  our  eyes  to  the  light. 
The  reference  to  the  experience  of  Pharaoh,  under  circumstances  in  some  respects 
similar  to  theirs,  was  extremely  judicious  on  the  part  of  the  Philistine  priests.  2.  To 
fulfil  all  known  religious  obligations.  The  advice  to  send  back  the  ark  intact,  with 
due  honours  and  with  emblems  of  confession  of'  sin,  was  based  on  the  best  religious 
knowledge  of  the  people.  The  only  way  of  ascertaining  the  real  mind  of  the  Hebrew 
Divinity  was  to  honour  and  propitiate  it.  In  this  crude  conception  we  have  a  great 
principle.  Our  escape  from  many  perplexities  depends  largely  on  our  careful  perform- 
ance of  such  religious  duties  as  are  irhposed  by  our  present  knowledge.  No  man  can 
know  the  will  of  God  as  he  ought  unless  he  obey  that  will  as  far  as  he  knows  it,  and 
at  any  cost.  If  prayer  is  a  clear  duty,  pray ;  if  confession  of  sin,  confess ;  if  some 
great  act  of  self-denial,  perform  it.  '1  he  perceptive  powers  are  clearer  when  calmed 
by  true  practical  religion.  The  discharge  of  high  duties  fits  for  discerning  others. 
A  sound  spiritual  condition,  conserved  by  daily  observance  of  religious  obligations,  ia 
a  powerful  solvent  of  doubts.     "  If  any  man  will  do  the  will  of  God,  he  shall  know  oi 


TH.  YL  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  118 


the  doctrine  whether  it  he  of  God."  _  8.  To  supplement  these  means  by  watcluiuj  care- 
fully for  new  indications.  The  Philistines  were  to  do  all  in  their"  power  to  enable 
them  to  judge  the  significance  of  coming  events.  We  cannot  always 'make  occasions 
for  Providence  to  reveal  itself  ;  but  we  can  fulfil  all  conditions  for  observing  clearly, 
atid  then  can  watch  the  indications  of  the  will  wliich  we  know  does  speak  to  us  in 
daily  life,  in  the  word  and  in  the  "  still  small  voice."  Then,  acting  in  a  reverent  spirit, 
straitness  will  yield  to  a  "large  place,"  and  darkness  will  be  made  light  before  us. 

General  lessons : — 1.  God  has  means  of  helping  even  the  most  ignorant  to  a  fuller 
knowledge  of  his  will.  2.  By  what  wise  and  unlooked-for  methods  God  accomplishes 
the  realisation  of  his  purpose  among  men  who  do  not  love  him  I  3.  How  superior  the 
privileges  of  thoB«  who  in  mental  darknesB  can  cry  direct  for  more  light  to  tiie  Father 
of  light  I 

Vers.  10 — 15. — Restored  hlesdngi.  The  facts  are — 1.  The  Hne  bearing  the  ark,  con- 
trary to  their  instincts,  go  away  from  their  home  to  Beth-shemesh.  2.  The  men  of 
Beth-shemesh,  seeing  the  returning  ark,  leave  their  occupations,  and  express  their  joy 
in  sacrificial  worship.  3.  The  Levites,  exceeding  their  privileges,  open  the  ark  and 
examine  its  sacred  contents.  4.  The  representatives  of  the  Piiilistines  observe  the 
issue  of  their  experiment  and  return.  The  rapid  succession  of  incideiits  connected 
with  the  restoration  of  the  ark  illustrates  several  important  truths. 

I.  The  SUPREMACY  OF  God  over  his  creatures.  As  a  human  device,  the  means  for 
ascertaining  the  will  of  the  God  of  Israel  were  excellent ;  and  it  is  a  mark  of  conde- 
scension tluit  God  should  thus  use  imperfect  men  to  efEect  his  purpose.  The  men 
argued  that  he  who  commands  disease  and  the  ravages  of  vermin  can,  if  disposed, 
efEect  his  will  through  the  agency  of  other  creatures.  God  is  not  indisposed  to 
exert  his  great  power,  should  moral  cause  exist,  even  through  the  actions  of  men  who 
act  up  to  the  measure  of  light  attained  to.  The  departure  of  the  kine  from  their 
home  and  young  to  a  strange  land  was  a  remarkable  instance  of  the  control  of  God 
over  the  strongest  instincts.  The  seeming  unniiUiralness  of  the  event  is  owing  to 
our  one-sided  views  of  God's  purposes  and  methods.  It  was  contrary  to  their  nature, 
as  ordinarily  exercised,  to  go  from  home.  It  was  not  contrary  to  the  nature  of 
things  for  them  to  do  the  will  of  their  Maker.  1.  It  is  a  reality  in  eoery  case  of 
animal  life  that  God's  will  is  done.  All  creatures  are  "his."  He  formed  their 
powers  and  gave  them  tendencies.  Therefore  every  creature,  in  following  its 
ordinary  course,  is  actually  carrying  out  a  Divine  intent.  In  this  the  kine  were  one 
with  all  cattle.  Animals  exist  not  for  themselves.  The  end  of  their  existence  is 
moral  and  spiritual.  The  fabric  of  the  universe  and  the  lower  creatures  are  for  the 
development  of  the  spiritual  and  eternal.  In  the  case  of  the  kine  a  great  spiritual 
end  was  subserved — the  restoration  of  the  ark  and  consequent  development  of  the 
"kingdom  which  cannot  be  moved."  The  original  appointment  of  instinct  and  the 
specific  control  of  it  are  acts  identical  in  kind — supernatural.  2.  There  are  other 
instances  of  special  control.  Balaam's  ass  was  used  to  reprove  the  prophet.  The 
lions  were  restrained  from  touching  Daniel.  In  either  case,  as  here,  the  event  was 
connected  with  a  manifest  spiritual  purpose ;  and  who  shall  say  that  he  who  governs 
men  arid  calms  the  sea  shall  not  be  free  to  control  the  movements  of  kine,  as  truly 
as  when  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem  he  guided  the  ass  on  which  he  sat  ?  3.  It  is  a 
means  of  teaching  important  truth.  This  subordination  of  the  most  powerful  im- 
pulses to  the  high  purposes  of  God  sets  forth  the  truth  that  the  most  powerful 
natural  attachments  must  yield  to  the  requirements  of  the  kingdom  of  God;  as 
well  perhaps  as  that,  in  coming  years,  the  inferior  creatures  will  subserve  the 
advance  of  Christ's  kingdom  as  certainly  as  that  they  will  share  in  its  blessings 
(Isa.  xi.  6,  7 ;  Matt.  xiii.  32). 

II.  The  JOT  OF  restored  blessings.  The  men  of  Beth-shemesh  were  the  first 
honoured  with  a  sight  of  the  ark,  and  with  the  instinct  of  the  true  Israelite  they 
appreciated  the  boon.  1.  The  blessing  now  received  was  very  great.  The  signifi- 
cance of  the  ark  to  Israel  cannot  be  fully  expressed.  Its  return  from  captivity 
meant  to  the  people  a  reinstatement  in  the  favour  of  God.  Their  cry  of  anguish 
and  the  intercession  of  Samuel  had  been  heard.  Likewise  the  Church,  after  seasons 
of  chastisement  and  loss  of  privilege,  knows  the  greatness  of  the  boon  when  God 

l2 


lie  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  vi.  1—21. 

makes  "  the  place  of  his  feet  glorious,"  and  comforts  Zion  with  the  light  of  his 
countenance.  2.  The  restoration  iook  wnexpeeted.  Both  as  to  the  fact  and  the 
means  there  was  no  anticipation  of  what  occurred.  Men  were  called  from  common 
toils  to  share  in  a  great  spiritual  joy.  Thus  does  God  in  his  mercy  break  in  on  tb 
cares  and  sorrows  of  common  life  with  blessings  in  excess  of  our  hopes.  Isra 
was  not  able  to  devise  means  of  delivery  from  Egypt,  and  surprise  filled  their  minds 
when  they  saw  the  salvation  of  God.  Christ's  appearance  after  death  even  took 
away  the  power  of  utterance  (Luke  xxiv.  36 — 41).  "For  a  small  moment  have  I 
forsaken  thee,  but  with  great  mercies  will  I  gather  thee."  3.  The  expression  of  joy 
was  natural.  It  was  most  proper  for  a  nature  toned  by  recent  chastisement  to  rush 
from  the  occupations  of  life  to  bid  welcome  to  the  long-wept-for  ark  of  God.  The 
recovery  of  property,  the  return  of  a  lost  son,  nothing,  could  stir  such  deep  feelings 
as  the  sign  of  the  restored  favour  of  Jehovah.  The  sacrifice  of  the  kine  was  a  fom 
of  penitence,  homage,  and  gratitude  culminating  in  highest  joy.  There  is  no  joy 
like  that  of  God's  assured  presence  and  favour.  It  is  a  gladness  beyond  that  of  the 
time  when  corn  and  wine  increase.  "  Then  was  our  mouth  filled  with  laughter,  and 
our  tongue  with  singing." 

III.  Unlawful  cueiositt.  A  debased  condition  is  not  recovered  from  suddenly. 
Despite  the  repentance  for  past  sin  and  gratitude  for  return  of  God's  favour,  the 
low  tone  of  life  consequent  on  former  practices  remained.  As  a  consequence  of  the 
singular  combination  of  good  and  bad  qualities  at  this  hopeful  turn  in  affairs,  the 
joy  of  the  day  was  marred  by  a  wicked,  profane  curiosity.  This  was  the  more 
culpable  because  the  inhabitants  were  chiefly  Levites,  who  must  have  been  acquainted 
with  the  very  strict  prohibition  to  manifest  any  rude  curiosity  in  reference  to  the 
sacred  symbols  (Exod.  iii.  5 ;  xix.  21 ;  Num.  iv.  20).  1.  Curiosity,  though  usefidin 
the  acquisition  of  knowledge,  is  sometimes  wicTced.  (1)  In  human  affaii-s,  as  when 
it  consists  in  an  idle  intrusion  into  the  secret  business  or  sorrows  of  others,  or 
endeavour  to  obtain  information  with  malicious  intent.  (2)  In  Divine  things,  as 
when  it  consists  in  a  restless  craving  to  know  the  secret  purposes  of  God ;  or  an 
endeavour  to  subject  the  Divine  nature  to  the  same  kind  of  criticism  and  analysis  as 
the  work  of  his  hand ;  or  a  fruitless  endeavour  to  solve  the  mystery  of  his  sove- 
reignty in  relation  to  the  existence  of  evil ;  or  a  rude,  irreverent  attempt  to  penetrate 
into  the  great "  mystery  of  godliness,''  the  person  of  Christ.  2.  The  wickedness  oj 
such  cariosity  is  evident,  because  of — (1)  The  relation  of  man  to  God.  God  is  the 
infinite,  eternal,  holy  One,  of  whom  all  that  is  is  but  the  dim  shadow.  No  ideas, 
no  beings,  not  even  the  totality  of  the  material  and  spiritual  universe,  are  commen- 
surate with  him.  On  the  other  hand,  man  is  only  one  among  many  creatures, 
limited  in  power,  defective  in  nature,  and  incapable  even  of  knowing  the  mysteries 
within  his  own  breast.  The  moral  evil  in  man  unfits  him  for  the  vision  of  God  even 
so  far  as  that  is  possible  to  holy  beings.  The  reverence  due  to  God  is  due  also  in 
measure  to  man  from  man  when  justice  and  fellow-feeling  bar  the  way  to  secret 
things.  (2)  The  habit  it  destructive  to  all  that  is  good.  In  no  instance  is  evil  better 
known  by  its  fruits  than  in  that  of  curiosity  carried  into  Divine  and  human  things. 
It  ia  the  ruin  of  reverence,  which  is  the  essence  of  worship,  the  guardian  of  all  that  is 
good  in  life,  the  crowning  grace  of  conduct,  and  the  spring  of  manifold  virtues.  It, 
w?ien  prevalent,  renders  man  distrustful  of  his  fellows,  and  loosens  the  bonds  of 
home.  No  society  can  exist  where  all  reverence  is  dead,  and  unbridled  curiosity  is  its 
death. 

IV.  An  IMPOKTANT  DISCOVERY.  The  five  lords  of  the  Philistines  witnessed  the 
restoration  of  the  ark  and  the  joy  of  the  men  of  Beth-sheraesh,  and  they  became 
wiser  men.  They  carried  back  the  information  that  Jehovah  was  indeed  the  De- 
stroyer of  Dagon,  the  Controller  of  disease,  the  Lord  of  the  brute  creation,  and 
unchanged  Friend  of  Israel.  Thus  in  defeat  there  was  a  triumph.  Thus  have  we  an 
indication  of  what  will  yet  be.  The  foes  of  the  Church  of  Christ  will  learn  that  he 
does  hold  the  mastery  over  all.  Ebbs  there  may  be  in  the  prosperity  of  the  Church, 
but  the  power  will  reassert  itself,  and  men  will  marvel  both  at  the  means  and  the 
fact.  A  great  discovery  will  be  made  to  all  creatures  when,  after  the  conflict  of  ages 
with  the  world-power,  the  true  Israel  of  God  shall  rejoice  in  the  perCeot  and  everlast- 
ing presence  of  their  Lord. 


CH.  Ti.  1—21.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMDEL.  117 


Vers.  17 — 21. — Trophies  and  chastisement.  The  facta  are — 1.  An  ennmeration 
by  the  Israelites  of  the  golden  iraag-es  sent  with  the  ark.  2.  A  terrible  chastisement 
on  the  men  of  Beth-shemesh  for  their  profane  cariosity.  8.  An  effort  to  send  the 
ark  away,  consequent  on  the  terror  created.  These  closing  incidents  of  the  restora- 
tion introduce  for  consideration — 

I.  The  TROPHIES  WON  IN  THE  CONFLICT  WITH  foes  of  the  Churoh  of  God.  Tlie 
golden  emerods  and  mice  were  expressions  of  pagan  superstition,  and  yet  of  sub- 
mission to  the  superior  power  of  Jehovah.  In  so  far  as  they  represented  the  five 
lords  of  the  country,  they  were,  in  the  eyes  of  Israel,  evidence  of  the  extent  to  which 
the  might  of  Jehovah  had  been  recognised.  As  the  pot  of  manna  and  Aaron's  rod 
were  kept  as  memorials  of  what  God  had  done,  and  prophetic  of  what  he  would  do, 
80  these  images  were  noted  in  the  annals  of  the  time  as  signs  of  the  same  power  in 
conquest.  The  remembrance  of  them  would  inspire  courage,  and  also  suggest  due 
fear.  The  Church  of  Christ  has  won  many  trophies-  Christ  himself  has  led  "  cap- 
tivity captive."  He  has  in  many  instances  snatched  learning,  science,  art,  states- 
manship, and  literature  from  the  hand  of  the  enemy,  and  made  them  contribute  to 
the  splendour  of  his  kingdom.  The  extent  to  which  trophies  have  been  gathered 
deserves  a  register  as  truly  as  that  given  of  the  offerings  of  the  Philistine  lords.  A 
calm  reflection  on  this  subject  will  inspire  the  Church  for  new  efforta,  and  awaken 
gratitude  for  the  past. 

II.  Chastisement  for  sins  of  profanitt.  The  joy  of  restoration  was  soon 
beclouded  by  the  sorrow  of  death.  The  death  of  seventy  men  for  the  sin  of  treating 
the  ark  of  God  profanely  raises  the  question  of  what  there  can  be  in  such  sins  to 
merit  so  severe  a  chastisement.  A  general  answer  to  such  a  question  is  that  we  are 
not  in  a  position  to  determine  for  God  the  form,  time,  or  extent  of  punishment  due 
to  sin.  None  can  adjudge  sin  correctly  but  the  perfectly  holy  One.  There  may  be 
far  more  in  an  act  than  comes  to  the  surface.  Hence  a  reverent  spirit  is  mostly 
concerned  to  know  the  fact.  But  there  ar?  a  few  considerations  which  may  throw  a 
little  light  on  the  apparent  severity  of  the  chastisement.  1.  The  essential  evil  of  the 
sin.  Much  difficulty  arises  from  not  considering  that  some  sins,  and  this  especially, 
are  a  most  virulent  moral  poison.  They  are  at  the  very  antipodes  to  the  true  spirit 
of  love  and  obedience.  Hence  the  dire  consequences  of  their  prevalence  come  more 
sharply  into  view  when  we  remember  the  special  contagion  of  example  in  such  cases 
as  these ;  for  profanity  of  spirit  is  easily  caught  from  example,  and  at  once  lowers 
the  entire  nature  of  a  man.  2.  The  liability  to  fall  into  it.  Not  only  is  the  sin 
heinous,  and  spread  by  example,  but  there  is  a  predisposition  to  it  which  gives  to  the 
slightest  encouragement  from  without  double  power.  The  evil  already  in  man  is 
good  soil  for  such  seed.  If  a  sinful  nature  means  aversion  to  a  holy  God,  then  it 
requires  only  a  small  encouragement  to  turn  that  aversion  into  the  positive  form  of 
disregard  of  the  Divine  presence.  3.  The  privileges  of  the  transgressors.  Punish- 
ment is  always  proportionate  to  privilege  abused.  As  officials  in  the  service  of  God, 
the  Levites  were  doubly  criminal.  Those  who  grow  up  amidst  the  sanctities  and 
quiet  reverence  of  the  sanctuary  or  pious  home  commit  deadly  sin  when  they  think 
or  act  towards  God  profanely.  Had  we  all  the  details  of  the  behaviour  of  the  men 
of  Beth-shemesh,  no  doubt  the  grossness  of  their  conduct  would  stand  out  in  fearful 
contrast  with  the  privileges  they  had  enjoyed  as  servants  of  the  altar.  4.  The  hear- 
ing on  ages  to  come.  Every  ein  bears  on  the  future,  and  so  does  its  punishment. 
The  deterrent  effect  of  punishment  is  important ;  and  its  infliction  with  this  refer- 
ence is  equitable,  seeing  that  the  sin  acts  on  others  and  in  ages  to  come.  The  effect 
of  the  death  of  the  men  at  Beth-shemesh  was  seen  in  the  salutary  fear  that  came  on 
all.  "  This  holy  Lwd  God  J"  It  was  a  great  gain  to  the  world  to  have  driven  home 
this  great  truth.  Nor  would  the  effect  end  there.  God  has  taught  the  entire  world 
by  the  terrible  things  in  righteousness  which  have  been  recorded.  Here  is  one  of 
the  means  of  the  education  of  the  future  race.  Men  are  more  reverent  for  what  they 
read  in  the  Old  Testament.  6.  The  infliction-  of  death  is  a  prerogative  of  God. 
God  sets  the  appointed  time.  Temporal  death  is  not  less  of  God  when  it  comes 
gradually.  Its  direct  infliction  is  the  form  in  which  he  marks  his  disfavour  and 
impresses  his  creatures.  If  seventy  men  sin,  and  commit  in  the  civil-religious  state 
of  Israel  a  capital  crime  (Num.  iv.  5, 15, 20),  they  of  course  must  pay  the  prescribed 


118  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  vi.  1—21. 

penalty.     It  is  an  awful  thing  to  die  by  the  sudden  stroke  of  God,  but  a  more  awful 
thing  to  be  in  a  state  of  mind  to  deserve  it. 

Practical  lessoru: — 1.  Let  us  keep  watch  over  the  first  risings  of  a  spirit  of  levity,  ■ 
2.  Cultivate  in  young  and  old,  by  all  conceivable  means,  reverence  for  all  things 
connected  with  the  worship  of  God,    3.  Remember  that  the  severity  of  God  ia  ranlly 
mercy  to  his  creatures  4b  a  whole. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  10 — ch.  vii.  1.  (Beth-shemesh  and  Kibjath-jeabim.) — Tht  return  of  the 
ark.  On  the  taking  of  the  ark  Israel  sank  to  the  lowest  point  of  degradation.  But 
"  when  the  night  is  darkest  then  dawn  is  nearest."  And  the  return  of  the  sacred 
symbol  was  the  first  gleam  of  returning  day.     It  was — 

I.  Restored  by  Divine  favous  (vers.  10 — 12),  which  was — 1.  Exceeding  ahvnd- 
ant  (1  Tim.  i.  14).  The  people  of  Israel  do  not  appear  to  have  made  any  effort  for 
its  restoration,  but  God  remembered  them,  and  for  their  sake  constrained  their  enemies 
to  send  back  the  precious  treasure.  "  That  is  free  love  which  never  has  been  desired, 
never  has  been  deserved,  and  nevercan  be  requited."  2.  Shown  in  an  «rtraor<Zt«ary 
manner.  It  was  brought  by  creatures  acting  contrary  to  their  natural  instincts,  under 
a  Divine  impulse,  in  a  direct  line  to  the  nearest  border-city  of  Israel — Beth-shemesh 
(the  house  of  the  sun)  ;  a  sign  to  Israel  as  well  as  the  heathen.  "  Two  kine  knew 
their  owner  as  (Isa.  i.  3)  Hophni  and  Phinehas  knew  him  not "  (Lightfoot).  God's 
favour  often  comes  by  the  most  unlikely  agencies  and  means.  His  power  is  universal, 
and  all  things  serve  him.  3.  Unexpected  and  surprising  (ver.  13).  It  was  the  time 
of  harvest;  and  the  men  of  Beth-shemesh  were  pursuing  their  ordinary  secular  occu- 
pations, thinking  nothing  of  the  ark,  when  they  suddenly  lifted  up  their  eyes  and 
beheld  it  approaching.  It  was  found  by  them  like  "the  treasure  hid  in  the  field." 
4.  Distinguishing.  Shown  toward  Beth-shemesh  beyond  other  cities,  and  toward 
Joshua  beyond  any  other  man  ;  for  sonie  reason,  perchance,  in  the  people  as  well  as 
in  the  locality.  The  city  we  know  was  a  priestly  city  (Josh.  xri.  10).  "  We  shall 
probably  be  doing  them  no  wrong  if  we  suppose  that  they  regarded  it»  presence  as 
an  honour  to  themselves.  It  distinguished  their  township  above  all  the  cities  of 
Israel." 

II.  Received  with  great  jot  (vers.  13 — 18).  We  can  imagine  how  promptly  they 
put  aside  their  harvest  work  and  gathered  with  one  accord  around  the  sacred  object. 
Their  joy  was  the  joy  of — 1.  Gratitude  for  the  favour  shown  toward  them  (1  Bangs 
viii.  62—66 ;  Ezra  vi.  16,  17).  2.  Devotion  (vers.  14,  16).  "  They  offered  burnt 
offerings  and  sacrificed  sacrifices  (peace  offerings)  unto  the  Lord."  3.  ffope  ;  for  in 
it  they  saw  a  proof  of  the  power  of  God  over  the  heathen,  and  a  promise  of  their  own 
freedom  and  prosperity.  4.  And  the  day  of  their  abounding  joy  was  commemorated 
by  means  of  the  great  stone  on  which  the  ark  and  the  coffer  containing  the  jewels  of 
gold  were  set,  "  which  remaineth  unto  this  day." 

III.  Regarded  with  irreverent  curiosity  (vers.  19,  20).  1.  Their  condtict  con- 
sisted of  "  looking  into  (or  upon)  the. ark."  Whether  they  actually  pried  into  it  is 
uncertain.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  precise  nature  of  their  conduct,  the  spirit 
in  which  they  acted  was  their  chief  offence  in  the  sight  of  him  who  "  looketh  at  the 
heart. "  There  may  be  much  sin  in  a  look.  2.  Their  sin  was  great ;  exhibiting  want 
of  reverence  and  godly  fear,  presumption,  perhaps  rationalism,  recklessness,  pro- 
fanity (Levit.  X.  3).  A  spirit  of  intelligent  curiosity  and  inquiry  is  of  unspeakable 
worth,  being  the  principal  means  of  discovering  truth  and  promoting  human  pro- 
gress ;  but  it  should  be  ever  joined  with  humility  and  reverence,  as  it  has  been  in 
the  greatest  minds.  "  Pools  rash  in  where  angels  fearto  tread."  The  fact  that  Beth- 
shemesh  was  a  city  of  the  priests  would  lead  us  to  expect  better  things  of  its  inhabit- 
ants. "  It  is  not  improbable  that  in  their  festive  rejoicing  they  may  have  fallen  into 
intemperance,  and  hence  into  presumptuous  irreverence,  as  it  is  thought  was  the  case 
with  Nadab  and  Abihu  "  ('  Sp.  Com.'").  3.  Their punishm^enc  was  severe  ;  for  "  of  fifty 
thousand  men,  seventy  died  a  sudden  aeath  "  (Hengstenberg ;  ver.  19).  What  is  sent 
as  a  blessing  is  often  turned  by  men  themselves  into  a  curse.  4.  The  effect  was 
morally  beneficial  on  the  people  generally.     "  Who  is  able  to  stand  before  this  holy 


CH.  VI,  1—21.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  lit 

Lord  God  ?  "  &c.  (ver.  20).  (1)  A  conviction  of  his  transcendent  and  awful  holiness. 
"  Our  God  is  a  consuming  fire  (Heb.  xii.  29).  (2)  A  feeling  of  their  own  deep  «n- 
fulnetg,  which  the  former  never  fails  to  produce  (Isa.  vi.  6  ;  Luke  v.  8).  (3)  A  per> 
■uasion  of  the  necessity  of ' '  righteousness  and  true  holiness  "  in  those  among  whom  he 
dwells ;  lor  their  request  to  the  inhabitants  of  Kirjath-jearim,  "  Come  ye  down,  and 
fetch  it  up  to  you,"  was  the  expression  of  something  more  than  selfish  dread  (ch.  v.  7), 
being  caused  by  the  belief  that  it  would  be  more  worthily  honoured  by  others  than 
by  themselves.  The  conduct  of  a  single  city  sometimes  reveals  the  moral  condition 
of  a  whole  nation.  And  Israel  was  evidently  not  prepared  to  receive  openly  and 
fully  the  sign  of  God's  presence  among  them,  nor,  until  they  should  have  passed 
through  long  and  painful  discipline,  any  further  signal  manifestation  of  his  favour. 
IV.  Reinstated  in  bespeotfdl  but  impbefect  honoue  (ver.  21;  ch.  vii.  1), 
From  Beth-shemesh  it  was  taken  (not  to  Shiloh,  which  had  been  rendered  unworthy, 
and  was  now  perhaps  in  ruins,  but)  to  Kirjath-jearim  (city  of  forests  or  woods,  Ps. 
cxxzii.  6),  where  it  was — 1.  Settledf  among  a  willing  people,  and  in  tiie  house  of  • 
devout  man — Abinadab,  "  on  the  hill."  "  God  will  find  out  a  resting-place  for  the 
ark."  When  one  people  prove  themselves  unworthy  of  it,  and  wish  to  part  with  it, 
he  will  provide  another  people  of  greater  worth,  and  ready  to  welcome  it.  "  It  is  no 
new  thing  for  the  ark  to  be  in  a  private  dwelling-house.  2.  Placed  under  special 
and  proper  guardianship.  "  Sanctified  (consecrated)  Bleazar  his  son  to  keep  the  ark 
from  profane  intrusion.  Even  in  the  most  corrupt  times  there  are  individual  in- 
stances of  true  piety.  These  are  honoured  of  God,  and  for  their  sakes  others  are 
spared  (Isa.  L  9).  3.  Disassociated  from  the  tabernacle  and  its  services.  After  the 
capture  of  the  ark  the  desecrated  tabernacle  appears  to  have  been  removed  from  Shiloh 
to  Nob,  where  we  find  it  long  afterwards  (ch.  xxi.  6),  attended  by  more  than  eighty 
priests,  and  subsequently  to  Gibeon  (1  Kings  iii.  4 ;  1  Chron.  xvi.  39  ;  zzi.  29 ;  2 
Chron.  i.  3,  6,  7),  where  it  finally  fell  mto  decay  and  perished ;  the  ark  itself  remained 
in  Kirjath-jearim  about  seventy  years,  when  it  was  removed  to  the  house  of  Obed-edom 
(2  Sam.  vi.  3,  11.  Gibeah  =  the  hill),  and  shortly  afterwards  to  Jerusalem,  where  it 
abode  "  in  curtains  "  until  deposited  in  the  temple  of  Solomon.  The  separation  was 
anomalous,  preventive  of  the  full  observance  of  the  prescribed  order  of  Levitical 
services,  and  indicative  of  the  imperfect  moral  relations  which  subsisted  between  the 
people  of  Israel  and  their  Divine  King.  4.  Long  disregarded  by  the  nation.  No 
public  assemblies  appear  to  have  met  at  the  place  where  it  stood ;  no  sacrifices  to 
have  been  ofEered  there,  no  festivities  held,  as  previously  at  Shiloh.  It  is  not  even 
mentioned  again  until  the  time  of  David,  when  it  was  said, "  We  inquired  not  at  (or 
for)  the  ark  in  the  days  of  Saul  "  (1  Chron.  xiii.  3).  Its  neglect  was  permitted  because 
its  proper  use  was  impossible  until  a  thorough  internal  reformation  and  more  com- 
plete union  of  the  nation  should  be  effected.  "  It  was  made  evident  that  the  nation 
was  not  yet  worthy  to  receive  the  perfect  fulfilment  of  the  promise,  '  I  will  dwell  in 
your  midst.'  They  endeavoured  to  dispose  of  the  ark  in  the  best  possible  way.  It 
was  buried,  as  it  were,  in  Kirjath-jearim  until  the  time  when  God  would  bring  about 
its  joyful  resurrection  "  (Hengstenberg). — D. 

Ver.  13.  (Bbth-shbmesh.) — The  ark  in  harvest.    It  was  in  the  time  of  harvest 

that  the  ark  was  restored  to  Israel.  Whilst  the  cornfields  of  the  Philistines  wero 
wasted  by  an  extraordinary  plague,  the  valley  of  Beth-ahemesh  was  covered  with 
golden  grain,  and  the  men  of  that  city  were  busily  occupied  in  gathering  it  in  (Buth 
i.  6).  But  at  the  sight  of  the  sacred  symbol  they  left  their  secular  occupation, 
gathered  around  it  with  great  joy,  and  spent  the  day  in  "  offering  burnt  offerings  and 
sacrificing  sacrifices  to  the  Lord  "  (ver.  16).  We  may  regard  the  harvest  as  repre- 
senting material  blessings,  which  are  more  richly  bestowed  at  this  season  of  the  year 
than  any  other ;  the  ark  as  representing  spiritual  blessings :  "  the  law  which  came 
by  Moses,"  and  "the grace  and  truth  which  came  by  Jesus  Christ;  "  the  throne  of 
grace,  and  the  mercy  and  grace  which  are  there  obtained.  And  the  fact  just  men- 
tioned suggests  a  comparison  between  the  former  and  the  latter.  Both  come  from 
the  same  hand;  but  spiritual  are  superior  to  material  blessings,  inasmuch  as  they— 
I.  Reveal  more  of  the  Divine  goodness.  Consider  them — 1.  In  the  principle 
from  which  they  proceed.     The  one  class  of  benefits  from  benevolence  in  general ; 


120  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  vi.  1—21. 

the  other  from  benevolence  in  the  form  of  mercy.  "According  to  his  mercj  l^e 
saved  us  "  (Titus  iii.  6).  2.  In  the  mode  by  which  they  are  communicated.  Tl  e 
operation  of  the  laws  of  nature  (Gen.  viii.  22  ;  Jer.  v.  21) ;  the  gift  and  sacrifice  of 
his  only  begotten  Son.  "Through  Jesus  Christ."  3.  In  the  nearwess  with  which  the 
great  Benefactor  comes  to  us.  "  Thou  visitest  the  earth  "  (Ps.  Ixv.  9)  ;  but "  blessed 
is  the  man  whom  thou  choosest  and  causest  to  approach  unto  thee  "  (Ps.  Ixv.  4),  in 
that  closer  fellowship  which  those  who  are  reconciled  in  Christ  enjoy,  and  whose 
hearts  are  the  temple  of  thine  abode,  the  habitation  of  thy  Spirit.  "  Revelation  is  the 
voluntary  apjiroximation  of  the  infinite  Being  to  the  ways  and  thoughts  of  finite 
humanity  ;  and  until  this  step  has  been  taken  by  Almighty  grace,  how  should  man 
have  a  warrant  for  loving  him  with  all  his  mind,  and  heart,  and  strength  ?  "  (A  H. 
Hallam). 

II.  Involve  more  valuable  good.  1.  The  one  pertains  to  the  body,  the  other  to 
the  sovl-  2.  The  one  to  man  considered  simply  as  a  creature,  needing  support ;  the 
other  as  a  sinner,  needing  forgiveness,  renewal,  salvation.  3.  The  one  pertains  to 
time,  the  other  to  eternity  ;  "  bread  that  perisheth,"  "  bread  that  endureth  to  ever- 
lasting life  "  (John  vi.  27,  61) ;  "  that  good  part  which  cannot  be  taken  away  "  (Luke 
X.  42). 

III.  Produce  more  exalted  jot.  "  Rejoiced."  "  The  joy  in  harvest "  (Isa.  ix.  3). 
1.  In  its  relation  to  God.  Tlie  one  is  felt  less  and  the  other  more  directly  in  him. 
The  difEerence  is  very  much  the  same  as  that  which  exists  between  the"  joy  felt  at 
receiving  a  present  from  a  friend  at  a  distance,  and  that  of  seeing  his  face  and  holding 
personal  intercourse  with  him.  And  what  are  all  the  harvests  which  the  earth  ever 
produced  compared  with  one  smile  of  the  Father's  countenance,  one  whisper  of 
Divine  love  ?  (Ps.  iv.  6,  7).  2.  In  its  influence  on  the  heart ;  elevating,  purifying, 
enlarging,  strengthening,  satisfying  it.  3.  In  its  power  over  circumstances.  The 
joy  of  our  harvest  may  be  speedily  turned  into  sorrow  by  bereavement  (ver.  19)  and 
other  af&ictions  ;  but  the  joy  which  is  felt  in  God  is  independent  of  outward  circum- 
stances, lifts  the  Boul  above  them  (Hah.  iii.  17,  18),  lives  in  death,  and  is  perfected  in 
heavenly  bliss. 

IV.  Incite  to  more  complete  consecratioh.  1.  With  respect  to  the  Giver.  His 
bestowment  of  "  fruitful  seasons,  filling  our  heart  with  food  and  gladness,"  incites  to 
some  return  to  him  (Exod.  xxiii.  14 — 17)  ;  but  his  bestowment  of  mercy  and  grace,  to 
the  "  whole  burnt  offering  "  of  the  man  himself  (Rom.  xii.  1).  2.  With  respect  to 
our  fellow-men.  The  one  incites  to  the  giving  of  "  those  things  which  are  necessary 
for  the  body"  (Exod.  xxiii.  11)  ;  the  other  incites  (and  effectually  constrains)  to  the 
giving  of  what  is  good  for  the  whole  man,  body  and  soul ;  to  self-sacrifice,  and  the 
"  peace  offerings  "  of  brotherly  kindness,  and  of  charity  toward  all  men.  3.  The 
whole  course  of  life ;  not  in  one  or  two  acts  merely,  but  in  a  continued  service  of  love 
to  be  completed  in  eternity. 

Conclusion. — 1.  If  God  has  bestowed  upon  you  temporal  good,  rejoice  not  in  it  so 
much  as  in  spiritual.  2.  If  he  has  withheld  it,  rejoice  in  the  higher  good  which  is 
yours.     3.  "Seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  &c.  (Matt.  vi.  33).— D. 

Vers.  19,  20. — Irreverence.  I.  The  offenoi.  The  Philistines  are  not  blamed  for 
sending  away  the  ark  of  God  on  a  wooden  car.  They  did  not  know,  or,  if  they  knew, 
they  had  no  means  of  observing,  the  mode  of  carriage  by  Levites  which  had  been 

Srescribed  in  the  Mosaic  law.  In  placing  the  ark  on  a  new  car  never  before  used,  and 
rawn  by  young  cows  that  had  never  before  worn  a  yoke,  the  Philistines  meant  to 
show  respect.  But  the  men  of  Beth-shemesh,  being  Israelites,  and  having  Levites 
among  them,  knew,  or  ought  to  have  known,  the  laws  regarding  the  sacred  ark.  So 
they  were  more  severely  judged.  Their  familiar  handling  of  the  ark  was  a  pre- 
sumptuous sin.  Irreverence  had  grown  during  the  years  of  misgovemment  and 
license  through  which  Israel  had  passed.  It  is  evident  that  before  the  people  would 
have  dared  to  send  for  the  ark  to  Shilob,  and  take  it  into  the  field  of  battle,  they  must 
have  lost  much  of  the  veneration  with  which  their  fathers  had  regarded  the  symbol 
of  Jehovah's  presence.  And  now  the  men  of  Beth-shemesh  actually  presumed  to  look 
into  the  ark,  perhaps  to  ascertain  whether  the  Philistines  had  put  any  gold  into  it, 
besides  the  golden  offerings  which  they  had  placed  in  a  separate  cofier.    So  doing, 


OH.  VII.  1—17.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


121 


they  forgot,  or  wilfully  broke,  the  law  which  allowed  none  of  the  people  at  large  so 
much  as  to  approach  the  ark,  and  required  that  the  priests  should  cover  it  with  a 
veil,  before  the  Kohathites  might  carry  it;  and  in  carrying  it  those  Levites 
might  not  lay  their  hands  upon  it,  but  were  commanded  to  bear  it  on  gilt  staves 
passing  through  golden  rings  in  the  four  comers  of  the  sacred  chest.  Indeed  the 
Kohathites,  though  thus  honoured  as  the  bearers  of  the  ark,  were  forbidden  not  only 
to  touch  it,  but  even  to  go  into  the  most  holy  place  to  see  it  covered  under  pain  of 
death. 

II.  The  penalty.  The  Lord  saw  it  needful  to  restore  reverence  for  his  law  and 
for  the  ark  of  his  testimony  by  striking  a  blow  at  presumption  which  would  not  be 
soon  forgotten.  Accordingly,  seventy  of  the  country  people  at  Beth-shemesh  were 
smitten  with  death.  On  the  same  ground,  a  few  years  later,  was  Uzzah_  the  Leyite 
stricken  dead  because  he  put  his  hand  on  the  ark  of  God.  What  a  warning  against 
irreverence  I  For  this  cause  men  may  die  close  to  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  perish 
beside  the  mercy-seat.  Nay,  that  which  is  the  greatest  blessing  may  be  turned  by 
presumption  into  the  greatest  disaster.  The  savour  of  life  may  be  turned  into  a 
savour  of  death.  It  is  especially  a  warning  to  those  who  "  name  the  name  of  the 
Lord."  The  ignorant  and  profane  are  judged,  but  not  so  strictly  as  those  who  "  pro- 
fess and  call  themselves  Christians;"  just  as  the  Philistines  were  afflicted  with  boils, 
but  the  Israelites  were  visited  with  death.  God  is  much  displeased  with  listless  minds, 
irreverent  postures,  and  heedless  spirits  in  his  Church.  No  doubt  it  may  be  pleaded 
that  such  faults  come  of  want  of  thought,  and  not  of  any  evil  intent ;  but  want  of 
thought  is  itself  a  very  grave  ofiEence  in  such  a  matter  as  the  service  of  God.  Even 
levity  is  inexcusable  ;  for,  at  all  events  in  adult  persons,  it  comes  of  hardness  of 
heart,  ingratitude  to  Christ,  neglect  of  reflection  on  sacred  themes  and  objects,  en- 
grossment of  thought  and  affection  with  the  things  which  are  seen,  and  an  indifEer- 
ence  to  the  presence  and  purpose  of  the  Holy  Spirit.'  Let  us  study  reverence.  "  God 
is  greatly  to  be  feared  in  the  assembly  of  the  holy  ones,  and  to  be  had  in  reverence 
of  all  that  are  round  about  him." — P. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  VIL 


Vm.  1. — At  Kirjath-jearim  the  people  re- 
verentty  undertook  the  charge  of  the  ark, 
and  carried  out  their  arrangements  so  care- 
folly  that  no  further  calamity  occurred.  On 
its  arrival  they  placed  it  in  the  house  of 
Ahinadah  in  the  hilL  More  probably  at 
Gibeah,  as  it  is  translated  in  2  Sam.  vi 
3,  4.  In  Josh.  XV.  57  a  village  of  this  name 
is  mentioned  in  the  tribe  of  Judah  not  far 
from  Kirjath-jearim  [ibid.  ver.  60),  and  pro- 
bably Abinadab,  who  lived  there,  was  a 
Levite,  and  so  his  house  was  chosen,  and 
his  son  Eleazar  sanctified  to  keep  the  ark. 
The  names  of  both  father  and  son  are  com- 
mon in  the  Levitical  genealogies,  and  none 
but  a  member  of  this  tribe  would  have  been 
selected  for  so  holy  a  duty.  If,  however, 
the  ti-anslation  m  the  hill  be  preferred,  we 
may  suppose  that  it  was  because  lofty  heights 
were  still  considered  fit  places  for  Jehovah's 
worship,  or  there  may  even  have  been  a 
"high  place"  there,  of  which  Abinadab  was 
the  keeper.  What  exactly  were  the  duties 
of  Eleazar  we  cannot  tell,  as  the  word  to  keep 
i.s  very  indefinite ;  but  probably,  after  the 
fearfiil  ruin  at  Shiloh,  all  regular  services 
and  sacrifices  were  in  abeyance  until  the  re- 


turn of  happier  times.  Even  here  it  was  the 
men  of  the  city  who  sanctified  Eleazar,  and 
not  a  priest. 

The  bbformation  op  Israel  (vers.  2 — 6). 
Ver.  2.  —  While  the  ark,  &c.  The  literal 
translation  of  this  verse  is,  "  And  it  came  to 
pass,  from  the  day  that  the  ark  rested  at 
Kirjath-jearim,  that  the  time  was  long ;  for 
it  was  twenty  years."  The  words  dwell 
wearily  upon  the  length  of  this  mournful 
period,  during  which  Israel  was  in  a  state  of 
subjection,  to  the  Philistines,  with  its  national 
life  crushed  to  the  ground,  and  its  strength 
wasted  by  unjust  exactions  and  misrule. 
For  though  the  Philistines  gave  up  the  ark, 
there  was  no  restoration  of  the  national 
worship;  nor  did  they  abandon  the  political 
fniits  of  their  victory  at  Eben-ezer.  But 
quietly  and  calmly  Samuel  was  labouring  to 
put  all  things  right.  It  was  the  principle 
of  the  theocracy  that  Jehovah  pimished  his 
subjects  for  their  sins  by  withdrawing  his 
protection,  and  that  on  their  repentance 
he  took  again  his  place  at  their  head  as 
their  king,  and  delivered  thera.  Samuel's 
whole  effort,  therefore,  was  directed  to  bring- 
ing the  people  to  repentance.  What  means 
he  used  we  axe  not  told,  nor  what  was  his 
mode  of  life  ;  but  probably  it  was  that  of  a 


122 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[cB.  VII.  1—17. 


fugitive,  going  stealthily  from  place  to.  place 
that  he  might  teach  and  preach,  hiding  in 
the  caverns  in  the  limestone  range  of  Judsea, 
emerging  thence  to  visit  now  one  quarter  of 
the  country  and  now  another,  ever  in  danger, 
but  gradually  awakening,  not  merely  those 
districts  which  were  contiguous  to  the  PhUia- 
tines,  but  all  Israel  to  a  sense  of  the  great- 
ness of  their  sins,  and  the  necessity  of  renewed 
trust  and  love  to  their  God.  -  And  so  a 
fr«3h  spiritual  life  sprang  up  among  the 
people,  and  with  it  came  the  certainty  of  the 
restoration  of  their  national  independence. 
All  the  house  of  Israel  lamented  after 
Jehovah.  The  word  used  here  is  rare,  and 
the  versions  all  differ  in  their  translation  of 
it.  Really  it  is  a  happy  one,  embracing  the 
two  ideas  of  sorrow  for  sin,  and  also  of  re- 
turning to  and  gathering  themselves  round 
Jehovah.  The  Syriac  alone  retains  this 
double  meaning,  by  saying  that  "  they  all  cast 
themselves  down  after  Jehovah,"  t.  e.  .that 
they  sought  him  with'  deep  humility.  Gradu- 
ally, then,  a  change  of  heart  came  over  the 
people  ;  but  the  removal  of  the  ark  to  a  more 
fit  place,  and  the  restoration  of  Divine  service 
with  ministering  priests  and  Levites,  could 
take  place  only  after  the  Philistine  yoke 
had  been  broken.  From  eh.  xiii!  19  —  22 
we  learn  how  vigilant  and  oppressive  that 
tyranny  was  ;  and  the  heart  of  the  writer,  in 
inditing  this  verse,  was  full  of  sorrow  at  the 
thought  that  the  repentance  of  Israel  was  so 
alow  and  unready,  and  that  therefore  it  had 
to  wait  twenty  years  before  deliverance 
came. 

Ver.  8. — If  ye  do  return,  4&  At  length 
everything  was  ripe  for  a  change,  and  the 
reformation  wrought  privately  in  their  hearts 
was  followed  by  public  action.  Samuel's 
secret  addresses  had  no  doubt  been  watched 
with  anger  by  the  Philistines,  but  he  now 
ventures  upon  open  resistance ;  for  this  public 
summons  to  Israel  to  put  away  its  idols  by 
a  national  act  was  a  summons  also  to  an 
uprise  against  foreign  domination.  We  must 
suppose  that  the  people  had  often  assured 
Samuel  in  his  wanderings  of  the  reality  of 
their  repentance,  and  of  their  readiness  to 
stake  everything  upon  the  issue  of  war.  As  a 
statesman,  he  now  judges  that  the  time  has 
come,  and  convenes  a  national  assembly. 
But  everything  would  depend  upon  their 
earnestness.  They  were  virtually  unarmed  ; 
they  would  have  to  deal  with  an  enemy  long 
victorious,  and  who  held  the  most  important 
posts  in  their  country  with  garrisons.  Ter- 
rible sufifering  would  follow  upon  defeat. 
Was  their  faith  strong  enough,  their  courage 
desperate  enough,  for  so  fearful  a  risk? 
Especially  as  Samuel  is  never  described  to  us 
as  a  warrior  or  military  hero.  He  could 
inspire  no  confidence  as  a  generaL  He  him- 
gelf  makes  everything  depend  upon  thei» 


faith,  and  all  be  can  promise  ia,  "  I  will  pray 
for  you  unto  Jehovah  "  (ver.  6). 

Ver.  4. — Then  the  children  of  Israel  did 
put  away  [the]  Baalim  and  [the]  Ashtaroth. 
This  must  have  been  done  by  a  public  act, 
by  which  at  some  time  previously  arranged 
the  images  of  their  Baals  and  Astartes  were 
torn  from  their  shrines,  thrown  down,  and 
broken  in  pieces.  Of  course  this  was  an 
overt  act  of  rebellion,  for  these  deities  were 
especially  Phoenician  idols,  and  subsequently 
it  was  the  Phosnician  Jezebel  who  tried  so 
fanatically  to  introduce  their  worship  inx) 
Israel  in  Ahab's  time.  To  cast  off  the  Philis- 
tine deities  was  equivalent  to  a  rebellion 
generally  against  Philistine  supremacy.  Baal 
and  Astarte,  the  husband  and  the  wife,  re- 
presented the  reproductive  powers  of  nature, 
and  under  various  names  were  worshipped 
throughout  the  East,  and  usually  with  lewd 
and  wanton  orgies. 

Ver.  5.— Gather  all  Israel  to  Mizpeh. 
Mizpah,  for  so  the  place  should  be  spelt, 
means  a  watch-tower  (Gen.  xxxL  49),  and  so 
is  a  not  uncommon  naine  for  spots  among 
the  hills  commanding  an  extensive  outlook. 
This  was  probably  the  Mizpah  in  the  tribe 
of  Benjamin,  distant  about  five  miles  from 
Jerusalem  (see  Conder,  '  Tent  Work,'  L  25) ; 
and  though  Samuel  may  have  partly  chosen 
it  as  a  holy  place  (Judges  xi.  11 ;  xx.  1), 
yot  the  chief  reason  was  probably  its  lofty 
situation,  500  feet  above  the  neighbouring 
tableau,  which  itself  was  2000  feet  above  the 
sea  leveL  It  was  thus  difficult  to  surprise, 
and  admirably  adapted  for  warlike  purposes. 
The  gathering  of  the  people  at  Mizpah  was 
the  necessary  result  of  the  public  insult 
offered  to  the  Philistine  gods,  and  virtually 
a  declaration  of  war,  as  being  an  assertion  of 
national  independence. 

Ver.  6.  —  They  .  .  .  drew  water,  and 
poured  it  out  before  Xehovah.  While  the 
drawing  of  water  was  a  joyful  act  (Isa.  xiL 
3 ;  John  vii.  37,  38),  as  symbolising  the 
winning  from  the  depths  below  of  the  source 
of  life  and  health,  the  pouring  it  out  before 
Jehovah  expressed  sorrow  for  sin,  and  so  it 
is  explained  by  the  Chaldee  Paraphrast: 
"They  poured  out  their  heart  in  penitence 
like  water  before  the  Lord  "  (comp.  Ps.  xxiL 
14).  It  might  here  also  signify  weakness 
and  powerlessness,  the  being  "as  water  spilt 
upon  the  ground,  which  cannot  be  gathered 
up  again  "  (2  Sam.  xiv.  14).  They  further 
expressed  their  sorrow  by  fasting,  enjoined 
"for  the  afflicting  of  their  souls  upon  the 
great  day  of  atonement  (Levit.  xvi.  29,  31 ; 
xxiii.  27,  82  ;  Num.  xxix.  7).  And  to  these 
symbolical  acts  they  joined  the  confession 
of  the  mouth,  acknowledging  that  "they 
had  sinned  against  Jehovah." 

And  Samuel  judged  the  children  of  Israel 
in  Ulzpeh.     That  is,  he  now  became  the 


CH.  vn.  1 — 17.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


ISS 


Bcknowleclged  rnler  of  Israel  in  things  tem- 
poral, both  civil  and  military,  as  ne  had 
previously  been  in  things  spiritual  by  virtue 
of  his  office  as  prophet.  This  was,  of  course, 
the  result  of  the  decisive  action  he  had  taken 
in  summoning  this  national  convention  ;  but 
the  words  strongly  suggest  that  there  was 
some  direct  appointment,  or  at  the  very 
least  a  national  acknowledgment  of  Samuel's 
•uthority,  especially  as  they  precede  the 
history  of  the  defeat  of  the  Philistines.  He 
had  summoned  the  people  together  as  Nabi, 
prophet,  and  when  he  said,  "  I  will  pray  for 
you  unto  Jehovah,"  there  was  the  implied 
meaning  that  he  would  be  with  them  only 
in  that  capacity.  But  when  the  time  came 
to  appoint  a  general,  who  would  act  under 
him  as  Barak  had  acted  under  Deborah,  the 
great  chiefs,  probably,  who  saw  in  him  the 
prime  mover  of  all  that  was  being  done, 
urged  him  also  to  take  the  command, and  upon 
his  consent  he  became  also  Shophet  or  judge. 
Israel's  deliverance  from  the  ttban- 
irr  OP  THE  Philistines  (vers.  7 — 14).  Vers. 
7,  8. — When  the  children  of  Israel  heard  it, 
they  were  afraid  of  the  Philistines.  This  was 
perfectly  natural,-  and  implied  no  intention 
on  the  part  of  the  Israelites  not  to  fight  it 
out.  No  dominant  nation  would  permit  a 
subject  race  to  hold  such  a  meeting  as 
Samuel's  at  Mizpah  without  having  recourse 
to  arms  ;  but  the  Pliilistines  acted  with  such 
promptness  and  vigour  as  brought  home  to 
the  assembled  Israelites  not  merely  the  con- 
viction that  they  would  have  to  fight,  but 
that  they  must  do  it  at  once,  and  with  the 
combined  forces  of  the  enemy.  In  spite, 
nevertheless,  of  their  fears,  they  determine 
to  await  the  attack,  and  that  this  decision 
was  taken  in  faith  their  own  words  prove. 
for  they  say,  Cease  not  to  cry  unto  Jehovah 
our  God  for  us,  that  he  will  lave  ns  out  of 
the  hand  of  the  Fhilistinea.  The  Words 
literally  are,  "  Be  not  silent  from  crying," 
ke.  Let  him  mediate  for  them  with  God, 
and  they  will  await  the  onslaught  of  the  foe. 
Ver.  9. — And  Samuel  took  a  sucking  Iamb. 
Samuel  now  appears  as  priest,  and  makes 
iitercession  and  atonement  for  them.  The 
lamb  was  at  least  seven  days  old,  for  so  the 
law  required  (Levit.  xxii.  27),  but  probably 
not  much  older ;  for  the  word,  a  rare  one, 
occurring  elsewhere  only  in  Isa.  Ixv.  25, 
means  something  small  and  tender:  this 
then  he  offered  for  a  burnt  offering  wholly 
unto  Jehovah.  The  A.  V.  translates  in 
this  way  because  chalil,  "  whole,"  is  mas- 
culine, -while  'olah,  "a  burnt  offering,"  is 
feminine  ;  but  chaJU  had  in  course  of  time 
come  to  be  used  as  a  substantive  (Levit.  vi. 
23  ;  Deut.  xiii.  16  ;  xxxiii.  10),  and  is  really 
here  in  opposition  to  'olah,  and  so  the  two 
together  signify  "»  whole  burnt  offering," 
and  clearly  indicate  that  the  lamb  was  en- 


tirely consumed  by  fire.  'Olah  meant  that 
which  ascends,  and  symbolised  devotion  and 
consecration  to  God.  Chcdil  intensified  this 
signification,  and  showed  that  all  was  God's, 
and  no  part  whatsoever  reserved  for  the 
priest  or  the  offerer.  And  thna  then  Samnel's 
burnt  offering  implied  that  the  people  gave 
themselves  unreservedly  to  Jehovah.  And 
Jehovah  heard  him.  Really,  "Jehovah 
answered  him,"  by  the  thunder  mentioned 
in  ver.  10.  For  thunder  was  regarded  as 
God's  voice  (ch.  ii.  10),  and  in  Ps.  ixix.  we 
have  a  poetic  description  of  its  majesty  and 
power.  Express  mention  is  also  made  in 
Ps.  xcix.  6  of  Jehovah  having  thus  answered 
the  prayers  of  Moses  (Exod.  xix.  19),  and  of 
Samuel. 

Vers.  10, 11. — As  Samuel  was  offering,  &c. 
We  have.here  a  detailed  and  lively  descrip- 
tion of  the  whole  event.  The  lamb  is  still 
burning  upon  the  altar,  and  Samuel  still 
kneeling  before  it,  when  the  Philistine  hosts 
appear  upon  the  lofty  plateau  just  below  the 
hill  of  Mizpah,  and  marshal  themselves  for 
battle.  It  seemed  as*  if  Israel's  case  were 
hopeless,  and  many  a  heart,  no  doubt,  was 
bravely  struggling  against  ita  fears,  and 
scarcely  could  keep  them  down.  But  as  the 
enemy  drew  near  the  electric  cloud  formed 
in  the  heavens,  and  Jehovah  thundered  with 
a  great  voice  (so  the  Hebrew)  on  that  day 
upon  the  Philistines.  Alarmed  at  so  un- 
usual a  phenomenon,  the  Philistines  hesitate 
in  their  advance,  and  Samuel,  seeing  their 
consternation,  gives  the  signal  for  the  charge, 
and  Israel,  inspirited  by  the  voice  of  Jehovah, 
rushes  down  the  hill  upon  the  foe.  Full  of 
enthusiasm,  they  forget  the  poorness  of  their 
weapons,  and  the  weight  of  their  impetuous 
rush  breaks  through  the  opposing  Une.  And 
.now  a  panic  seizes  the  Philistines;  they 
attempt  no  further  resistance,  but  flee  in 
dismay  from  the  pursuing  Israelites.  Their 
course  would  lead  them  down  a  huge  valley 
1000  feet  deep,  at  the  bottom  of  which  was 
a  torrent  rushing  over  a  rocky  bed  ;  nor  was 
their  flight  stayed  until  they  came  under 
Beth-car.  Of  this  place  we  know  nothing, 
but  probably  it  was  a  fastness  where  the 
Philistines  could  protect  themselves  from 
further  attack. 

Ver.  12. — Then  Samuel  took  a  stent,  and 
.  .  .  called  the  name  of  it  Eben-ezer.  We 
saw  on  ch.  iv.  1  that  the  place  where  Israel 
then  suffered  defeat,  but  which  now  received 
a  more  happy  name,  was  an  open  plain,  over 
which  the  people  now  chased  their  then 
victorious  enemies.  Here,  then,  Samuel  set 
up  a  memorial,  according  to  Jewish  custom, 
and  called  its  name  Help-stone.  In  giving 
his  reason  for  it,  hitherto  hath  Jehovah 
helped  us,  there  is  a  plain  indication  of  the 
need  of  further  assistance.  There  was  a  long 
struggle  before  them,  and  Jehovah,  who  had 


124 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL, 


[CH.  VII.  1 — 17. 


tided  them  m  mightily  at  its  heginning, 
would  also  help  them  unto  the  end.  The 
memorial  stood  halfway  between  Mlzpeh 
»nd  Shen,  both  which  names  have  the  article 
in  Hebrew,  because  one  signifies  the  watch- 
tower,  the  other  the  tooth.  It  was  a  steep, 
pointed  rock,  but  is  not  mentioned  elsewhere. 
Derd,  the  French  for  tooth,  is  a  common 
name  for  mountains  in  the  Alps  and  Pyrenees. 

Ver.  13. — So  the  Philistines  were  subdued. 
Not  completely,  for  we  find  tliat  they  had 
garrisons  in  Israel  when  Saul  was  made  king ; 
but  it  was  a  thorough  victory  for  the  time, 
and  was  followed  up,  moreover,  by  an  invasion 
of  Philistia,  in.  which  Samuel  recovered  the 
towns  which  had  been  wrested  from  Israel 
upon  the  western  borders  of  Judah  and 
Benjamin.  Moreover,  the  enemy  came  no 
more  into  the  coast  of  Israel.  That  is,  all 
invasions  ceased.  And  the  hand  of  Jehovah 
was  against  the  Philistines  all  the  days  of 
Samuel.  This,  of  course,  includes  the  reign 
of  Saul,  till  within  four  years  of  hi^,  death  ; 
for  Samuel  continued  to  be  prophet,  and  to 
a  certain  extent  shophet;  even  when  Saul  was 
king.  The  words,  moreover,  imply  a  struggle, 
during  which  there  was  a  gradual  growth  in 
strength  on  Israel's  part,  and  a  gradual  en- 
feeblement  on  the  part  of  the  Philistines, 
until  David  completely  vanquished  them, 
though  they  appear  again  as  powerful  enemies 
in  the  days  of  King  Jehorara  (2  Chron.  xxi. 
16).  It  is  certain,  however,  that  fifteen  or 
twenty  years  after  this  battle  the  Philistines 
were  again  in  the  ascendant  (ch.  xiiL  19 — 
23),  and  it  was  this  which  made  the  Israelites 
demand  a  king  (ch.  ix.  16).  But  it  is  the 
method  of  the  Divine  historians  to  include 
the  ultimate  results,  however  distant,  in 
their  account  of  an  event  (see  on  ch.  xvi.  21 ; 
xvii.  55 — 58)  ;  and  Israel's  fi-eedom  and  the 
final  subjugation  of  the  Philistines  were  both 
contained  in  Samuel's  victory  at  Mizpah. 

Ver.  14. — From  Ekron  even  unto  Gath. 
Not  that  Israel  captured  these  two  towns,  but 
they  mark  the  limits  upon  theborders,  within 
which  the  Philistines  had  previously  seized 
towns  and  villages  belonging  to  Israel,  and 
which  Samuel  now  recovered.  There  was 
peace  between  Israel  and  the  Amorites.  In 
Israel's  weakness  the  remains-  of  this  once 
powerful  Canaanitish  .stock  had  probably 
made  maty  a  marauding  expedition  into  the 
land,  and  carried  off  cattle  and  other  plunder ; 
now  they  sue  for  peace,  and  unite  with  Israel 
against  the  Philistines. 

Samuel's  conduct  as  judge  (vers.  15 — 
17).  Vers.  15, 16.— And  Samuel  judgedlsrael 
all  the  days  of  his  life.  As  long  as  Samuel 
lived  there  was  no  clear  limitation  of  his 
powers  as  shophet  compared  with  those  of 
Saul  as  king.  In  putting  Agag  to  death  (ch. 
XV.  83)  he  even  claimed  a  higher  authority, 
and  though  he  voluntaiily  left  as  a  rule  all 


civil  and  military  matters  to  tte  Ung,  yet 

he  never  actually  resigned  the  supreme  con- 
trol, and  on  fitting  occasions  even  exercised 
it.  It  was,  however,  practically  within 
narrow  limits  that  he  personally  exercised 
his  functions  as  judge  in  settling  the  causes 
of  the  people ;  for  Bethel,  and  Gilgal,  and 
Mizpeh  were  all  situated  in  the  tribe  of 
Benjamin.  Both  Bethel  and  Mizpah  were 
holy  spots,  and  so  also,  probably,  was  Gilgal ; 
and  therefore  we  may  conclude  that  it  .was 
the  famous  sanctuary  of  that  name  (seech, 
xi.  14),  and  not  the  Gilgal  mentioned,  in  2 
Kings  iL  1  ;  iv.  38.  For  this  latter,  situated 
to  the  south-west  of  Shiloh,  near  the  road 
to  Jerusalem,  had  no  religious  importance, 
and  would  not,  therefore,  attract  so  many 
people  to  it  as  one  that  was  frequented  for  sacri- 
fice. Probably,  too,  it  was  upon  the  occasion 
of  religious  solemnities  that  Samuel  visited 
these  places,  and  heard  the  people's  suits. 

Ver.  17. — His  return  was  to  Eamah.  We 
have  seen  that  Elkanah  was  a  large  land- 
holder there,  and  Samuel  had  now  apparently 
succeeded  to  his  father's  place.'  And  there 
he  built  an  altar  unto  Jehovah.  This  old 
patriarchal  custom  (Gen.  xii.  7)  long  con- 
tinued, and  it  was  only  gradually  that  local 
shrines  and  worship  on  high  places  were 
superseded  by  attendance  upon  the  temple 
services  at  Jerusalem.  At  this  time  there  was 
especial  need  for  such  altars.  The  established 
worship  at  Shiloh  had  been  swept  away,  the 
town  destroyed,  the  priests  put  to  the  sword, 
and  the  ark,  though  restored,  was  resting 
in  a  private  dwelling.  Probably  Samuel  had 
saved  the  sacred  vessels,  and  much  even  of 
the  tabernacle,  bat  no  mention  of  them  is 
here  made.  We  see,  however,  both  in  the 
erection  of  this  altar  and  all  through  Samuel's 
life,  that  the  Aaronie  priesthood  was  in  abey- 
ance, and  that  he  was  not  only  prophet  and 
judge,  but  also  priest.  In  thus  restoring 
the  priesthood  in  his  own  person  he  was 
justified  not  merely  by  his  powers  as  pro- 
phet, but  by  necessity.  Gradually,  with  more 
prosperous  times,  matters  returned  to  their 
regular  channel ;  but  even  when  Ahiah, 
the  gi-andson  of  Eli,  was  with  Saul  (ch.  xiv. 
3),  he  was  employed  not  for  the  offering  of 
sacrifice,  but  for  divining  with  the  Urim  and 
Thummin_  On  a  most  important  occasion 
the  offering  of  sacrifice  is  spoken  of  as  un- 
doubtedly Samuel's  right,  and  when  he  de- 
layed his  coming  no  mention  is  made  of  a 
priest,  but  Saul  is  said  to  have  offered  the 
victim  himself  (ch.  xiii.  9).  It  is  plain, 
therefore,  that  we  must  not  tie  down  the 
priesthood  too  tightly  to  the  house  of  Aaron  ; 
for  throughout  there  lies  in  the  background 
the  idea  of  a  higher  priesthood,  and  with  this 
Samuel  was  invested,  as  being  a  type  of  him 
who  is  a  Priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of 
Melchisedek  (comp.  ch.  ii  35). 


OB.  TO.  1—17.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  125 


HOMILBTIOa 

Vers.  1,  2. — Fitness  for  service.  The  facts  are — 1.  At  the  request  of  the  terrified 
men  of  Beth-shemesh  the  men  of  Kiijath-jearim  hring  the  ark  to  their  high  place. 
2.  Arrangements  are  made  in  the  house  of  Abinadab  for  the  due  care  of  the  ark.  3. 
The  time  of  the  sojourn  of  the  ark  in  this  place,  up  to  the  date  of  Samuel's  test  of 
repentance,  was  twenty  years.  4.  Towards  the  close  of  this  period  the  people  long 
for  the  full  restoration  of  the  Divine  favour.  A  new  stage  was  being  entered  on  in 
the  process  of  restoration  to  full  privileges,  and  God  must  have  men  fitted  to  the 
occasion.  The  ark  could  not  go  to  Shiloh  for  evident  reasons ;  so  far  as  the  Divine 
will  could  be  gathered  from  the  controlled  action  of  the  kine,  Beth-shemesh  was 
the  place  for  it  in  which  to  rest.  But  the  profane  conduct  of  the  officials  proved 
that  the  privilege  must  be  forfeited,  and  the  unmitigated  terror  of  the  survivors 
indicated  that  they  possessed  not  the  spiritual  qualifications  for  the  respectful,  loving 
guardianship  of  Israel's  glory.  For  some  reason  the  men  of  Kirjatn-jearim  had  a 
reputation  which  justified  the  belief  that  they  dared  and  could  safely  convey  and 
keep  what  their  neighbours  dare  not  touch.     Their  actions  justified  this  belief. 

I.  New  forms  of  sebvicb  are  constantly  arising  in  the  unfolding  of  God's 
PUBPOSES.  There  was  once  a  need  of  workmen  to  build  the  ark,  of  men  to  bear  it,  of 
kine  to  bring  it  back,  and  now  of  men  to  carry  and  keep  it  in  all  decency  and  order. 
Emergencies  are  inherent  in  the  outworking  of  the  Church's  mission.  Ages  bring 
their  demands.  Education,  national  affairs,  assaults  on  truth,  openings  for  the  gospel 
in  foreign  lands,  and  many  other  things,  call  for  new  lines  of  action  or  modific  itions 
of  old.     And  thus  it  will  be  till  the  world  is  brought  to  Christ. 

II.  There  are  always  in  reserve  'I'he  men  fitted  fob  the  work  God  has  to 
BE  done.      If  Beth-shemesh  cannot  supply  the  men  who  know  how  to  behave 

Eroperly  towards  the  sacred  symbol,  there  are  others  elsewhere.  The  qualities  are 
eing  acquired  parallel  with  the  providential  processes  that  evolve  the  new  demand. 
God  takes  car«  of  all  sides  of  his  holy  cause.  Those  disqualified  must  yield  the 
privilege  of  new  and  important  service  to  the  qualified,  and  God  knows  where  these 
are.  In  every  age  he  has  his  chosen,  secret  methods  of  laying  hold  of  ability,  learning, 
•trength  of  purpose,  and  whatsoever  else  may  be  required  to  do  his  will. 

III.  The  fundamental  fitness  fob  God's  service  on  new  occasions  is  true 
reverence  and  interest.  Many  minor  qualities  were  requisite  to  the  bringing  and 
caring  for  the  ark,  but  the  primary  was  that  of  proper  reverence  for  the  ark  of  God 
and  due  interest  in  its  sanctity  and  use.  The  men  of  Beth-shemesh  lacked  this ; 
for  they  lost  true  reverence  in  terror  and  dread,  and  they  were  distrustful  of 
their  ability  to  keep  the  ark  with  due  honour  to  it  and  benefit  to  themselves. 
Here  we  have  in  incidental  contrast  a  religion  characterised  by  dread,  and  a  religion 
of  true  reverence.  1.  The  religion  of  dread  is  a  sense  of  infinite  holiness  and  power 
unrelieved  by  a  recognition  of  other  Divine  attributes.  The  men  of  Beth-shemesh  had 
been  struck  with  the  awful  holiness  of  Jehovah,  and  of  his  mighty  power  expressing 
holiness  in  acts  of  swift  judgment.  Thus,  generally,  when  religion  consists  mainly 
in  this  there  is  a  shrinking  from  God's  presence ;  attention  to  ordinances  under  the 
sheer  force  of  conscience.  In  so  far  as  Christian  men — so  called — know  only  such  a 
religion  they  approximate  towards  paganism.  T'-e  religion  of  true  reverence  is  a 
tense  of  in^nite  holiness  and  power  toned  hy  a  trustful  love.  The  men  of  Kirjath- 
]earim  were  not  perfect,  but  they  had  as  correct  views  as  their  neighbours  of  the 
holiness  and  power  of  Jehovah ;  and  yet  it  is  obvious,  from  the  quiet,  interested 
manner  in  which  they  received  and  provided  for  the  ark,  that  they  in  some  degree 
loved  and  trusted  their  God.  In  true  reverence  the  awe  created  by  ineffable  holiness 
and  almighty  power  is  mitigated  by  the  remembrance  that  he  is  merciful  and  gracious, 
and  cares  for  his  people,  even  in  their  self-brought  sorrows.  When  this  reverence  is 
perfected  in  Christian  life  by  a  due  appreciation  of  the  august  majesty  and  love  seen 
m  the  sacrificial  work  of  Christ,  the  heart  rests  in  God  with  all  the  reverential  lovo 
of  a  child.    Duty  and  privilege  then  are  coincident. 

General  lessons  : — 1.  We  should  be  on  the  look-out  for  any  new  work  God  may  haT9 
for  91  to  do.    2.  Never  despair  of  God  finding  agents  for  the  rarious  enterpnse^ 


126  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  vn.  1—17. 

opened  up  by  hia  own  proridence.  3.  Cultivate  eyeiy  poisible  quality,  and  kold 
it  in  readiness  for  any  use  which  God  may  make  clear.  4.  Court  the  honour  and 
bliss  of  welcoming  to  city  or  home  the  treasures  dear  to  God,  be  they  ordinances  of 
worship  or  those  commissioned  to  do  his  will ;  for  such  bring  blessings  with  them — 
"  angels  unawares." 

Divine  reserve.  The  return  of  the  ark  was  an  outward  sign  of  the  returning 
favour  of  God,  and  was  so  understood  by  the  men  of  Betli-shemesh.  But  the  full 
service  of  the  tabernacle,  with  the  ark  as  its  centre  and  glory,  was  not  established. 
Nor  were  the  Philistines  deprived  of  their  hold  on  Israel.  The  Divine  power  was 
held  in  reserve.  The  set  time  to  favour  Zion  in  plenitude  had  not  arrived.  The 
reasons  for  this  are  clear.  The  people  were  too  degraded  to  enjoy  the  full  benefit  of 
the  services  and  festivals.  A  degenerate  priesthood,  steeped  in  vice,  cannot  at  once 
pass  on  to  the  holy  duties  of  Jehovah's  worship.  A  regenerative  process  requires 
time,  and  twenty  years  was  not  too  long  for  the  old  generation  of  priests  to  die  off 
and  give  way  to  men  brought  up  under  better  influences.  The  general  truth  here 
tet  forth  is,  that  it  is  in  the  heart  of  God  to  do  great  thingsfor  his  people,  but  ihatjfor 
good  reasons  he  holds  himself,  so  to  speak,  in  reserve-— veiling_  his  glory,  bestowing 
his  blessing  sparsely.  Indeed,  there  is  even  a  wider  application  of  the  truth  than 
in  relation  to  the  Church.    Take  a  few  illustrations. 

L  Cbbatioh.  The  material  and  spiritual  universe  is  the  outcome  of  the  power  and 
wisdom  of  God.  But  vast  and  intricate  as  it  is,  no  one  can  suppose  that  it  is-  coex- 
tensive with  all  that  is  in  his  nature.  There  are  not  two  infinites.  The  power  and 
wisdom  of  God  are  in  excess  of  what  are  traceable  in  the  works  he  has  formed. 
There  is  a  vast  reserve,  which  for  aught  we  know  may  some  time  come  out  in  an 
order  of  things  not  now  conceived  or  deemed  possible.  It  is  a  crude  philosophy 
which  teaches  that  God  has  done  all  he  intends  to  do  in  the  way  of  positive  creation. 
Every  new  spirit  that  comes  into  being  is  an  evidence  of  the  Divine  reserve. 

II.  Revelation.  There  is  a  varied  revelation  of  God,  but  in  each  case  it  may  be 
said  that,  supposing  we  have  learnt  all  they  teach,  we  "  know  only  in  part."  For  as 
there  is  more  in  God  than  in  his  works  and  word,  there  is  a  reserve  of  truth  which 
may  yet  be  drawn  upon.  In  the  gradual  bestowment  of  revelation  we  see  how  God 
keeps  back  from  one  age  what  he  gives  to  another.  Christ  had  many  things  to  say 
once  which  his  disciples  could  not  then  bear  to  hear.  There  must  be  deep  and  far- 
reaching  principles  of  the  Divine  government  which  underlie  the  at  present  revealed 
facts  of  the  Trinity,  atonement,  human  responeihility,  and  future  punishment ;  and 
these  are  kept  out  of  full  view  till,  perhaps,  we  become  free  from  the  flesh. 

I  I.  National  pbosperitt.  All  true  national  prosperity  is  of  God.  If  it  comes 
not  to  men,  it  is  because  he  withholds  the  blessings  desired.  The  absence  of  pros- 
perity has  a  practical  side ;  it  means  that  God  reserves  good  because  conduct  and 
motive  are  not  what  he  approves.  There  was' nigh  at  hand  all  the  power  and  wisdom 
by  which  Israel  should  cease  to  depend  on  Philistines  for  axes  and  coulters,  but  it 
came  not  forth.  Had  Israel  in  earlier  or  later  times  been  more  true  to  God,  he  would 
have  "fed  them  also  with  the  finest  of  the  wheat "  (Ps.  Ixxxi.  13 — 16). 

IV.  Church  privileges  and  usefulness.  "  Glorious  things  "  are  spoken  of  Zion. 
The  Church  inherits  a  wondrous  destiny.  She  is  to  be  the  envy  of  the  world.  Her 
"  feet "  are  to  be  "  beautiful ;  "  her  garments  "  white ;  "  her  influence  as  the  "  light " 
and  "  salt."  And  all  this  not  by  virtue  of  what  may  be  in  the  Church  of  herself, but 
because  of  the  power  and  grace  of  God  within  her.  If  she  is  "  in  the  dust,"  we  ask 
the  cause ;  the  first  answer  is,  because  God  stays  his  hand,  keeps  the  residue  of  the 
Spirit,  holds  himself  in  reserve.  The  second  answer  is,  that  this  Divine  reserve  is 
in  consequence  of  the  Church  having  backslidden  from  her  God  and  disqualified 
herself  from  being  a  vehicle  for  the  full  flow  of  the  blessing  that  is  to  enrich  man- 
kind.    The  Divine  light  is  to  shine  from  "  golden  candlesticks." 

v.  Personal  beliqious  iexfibience.  Personal  religion  is,  in  one  sense,  the  passing 
into  and  dwelling  within  the  soul  of  the  power  and  love  of  God — by  the  Holy  Spirit. 
It  is  the  proper  heritage  of  a  believer  to  enjoy  a  sense  of  the  Divine  favour  not 
known  to  the  unbelieving.  A  vision  of  God  sweet  and  blessed  comes  to  the  pure  in 
heart.     Christ  manifests  himself  as  he  does  not  to  the  world>     But  the  bc^^ksUding 


em.  VII.  1—17.]  THB  FIBST  BOOK  OF  8AMUKL,. 


lil 


Boul  does  not  ahan  to  the  full  bliss.  "Why  art  thou  cast  down  ?  "  is  often  asked. 
The  answer  is,  there  is  not  the  spiritual  fitness  for  perfect  fellowship.  Some  *'  idols  " 
have  been  cherished.  Divine  reserve  is  a  discipline  to  cause  the  heart  to  lament  after 
God. 

Oeneral  lessont ;— 1.  There  is  ample  ground  for  believing  that  all  things  shall  be 
subdued  unto  Christ.  His  areflrf  power  is  yet  to  be  put  forth.  2.  Inquiry  should  be 
made  as  to  the  existence  of  anything  in  motive,  conduct,  or  spirit  which  keeps  the 
Church  from  enjoying  the  full  exercise  of  the  power  of  God.  3.  We  may  profitably 
reflect  on  what  might  be  ours  in  private  life  if  by  our  devotedness  to  God  we  secured 
more  of  the  "  residue  of  the  Spirit" 

Vers.  3—12. — Ebmeter.  The  facts  are— 1.  Samuel  calls  on  the  people  to  prove 
their  desire  to  return  to  God  by  putting  away  idols  and  preparing  their  hearts 
for  a  blessing.  2._  A  response  to  the  call  is  followed  by  a  summons  to  Mizpah  for 
prayer  and  humiliation.  3.  A  rumoured  approach  of  the  Philistines  excites  fear, 
and  an  urgent  request  for  Samuel's  intercession  with  God.  4.  While  Samuel  is 
engaged  in  worship  God  discomfits  the  assailing  Philistines  by  thunder.  6.  The 
victory  is  commemorated  by  raising  the  stone  Bbenezer.  This  paragraph  is  to  be 
considered  in  relation  to  Israel's  true  goal  in  life — to  fulfil  the  Messianic  purposes  of 
their  existence  as  a  chosen  people.  Associated  with  this  ulterior  object,  and  sub- 
servient to  it,  was  the  full  favour  and  blessing-  of  God.  This,  again,  was  to  be 
indicated  by  the  restoration  in  developed  form  of  the  holy  services  and  festivals 
connected  with  the  ark  and  the  sanctuary.  The  turning-point  in  the  degeneracy  had 
come  in  a  sense  of  desolation  and  misery  consequent  on  the  recent  defeat  and  the 
capture  of  the  ark.  The  return  of  the  ark  gently  fanned  the  flickering  flame  of 
hope,  but  as  yet  the  goal  was  far  distant,  and  the  conditions  of  attaining  to  it  were  very 
unsatisfactory.  The  narrative  sketches,  in  the  instance  of  Israel,  an  outline  of  trut 
effort  towards  the  goal  of  life,  and  the  encouragements  to  persevere  in  the  effort. 
The  Christian  Church  and  the  individual  soul  have  each  an  issue  of  life  to  attain  to. 
It  is  also  true  of  them  that  they  start  from  a  relatively  low  and  unsatisfactory 
position,  and  will  succeed  in  their  endeavour  only  as  they  observe  conditions 
inseparable  from  their  position. 

I.  The  MEANS  AND  CONDITIONS  OF  REALISING  LIFE'S  PURPOSE.  Confining  attention 
to  those  involved  in  this  portion  of  history,  we  find  them  to  be — 1.  A  hearty  renun- 
ciation of  all  thai  is  alien  to  the  mind  of  God.  Idols  had  to  be  put  aside.  Man  is 
attached  to  idols.  They  may  be  feelings  entertained,  passions  gratified,  favourite 
motives  cherished,  customs  cultivated,  aims  kept  in  view,  objects  unduly  loved. 
The  "  covetousness  "  which  clings  to  forbidden  things  is  "  idolatry."  In  so  far  as 
these  things  absorb  our  feeling  and  receive  our  attention  after  that  God  has  indicated 
that  they  ought  not,  so  far  do  we  set  them  up  as  deserving  regard  and  love  in  preference 
to  himself.  The  Church  and  the  individual  must  search  and  cast  aside  all  that  is 
alien  to  the  mind  of  God.  2.  Confession  of  sin  and  humiliation  of  spirit.  No  soul 
can  attain  to  its  goal,  no  Church  can  do  its  work  and  acquire  purity  and  freedom, 
apart  from  sincere  confession  and  deep  humiliation  for  what  is  past.  Israel's 
gathering  at  Mizpah  to  acknowledge  their  guilt  and  bow  before  God,  as  though  they 
were  "like  water  spilt  on  the  ground"  (ver.  6 ;  cf .  2  Sam.  xiv.  14),  was  a  great  step 
towards  recovery  of  strength  and  joy.  Seasons  may  arise  when  special  services 
shall  alone  give  due  expression  to  the  sense  of  shame  and  sorrow  for  the  past ;  but 
daily  sin  needs  to  be  confessed  and  the  spirit  to  be  chastened  before  the  holy  One 
whom  we  serve.  Power  for  holy  deeds  grows  out  of  true  penitence.  3.  Adaptation 
of  the  mind  to  a  better  course  in  the  future.  The  "  preparing  "_  of  "  the  heart  "  unto 
the  Lord  implies  a  self-control,  a  searching  of  the  seat  of  feeling,  a  cleansing  pro- 
cess by  such  spiritual  helps  as  God  may  give,  a  fitting  one's  self  internally  for  a 
higher  mode  of  life  than  yet  has  been  known.  Internal,  carefully-sought  reforma- 
tion is  a  guarantee  of  improved  external  acts.  Most  of  us  are  not  in  a  mood 
adapted  to  the  grand  future  which  God  has  in  reserve.  We  are  to  seek  it.  Fellow- 
•hip  with  God  more  pure,  and  close,  and  constant  is  not  the  result  of  accident, 
but  is  the  issue  of  an  earnest  endeavour.  4.  Special  prayer  for  power  to  live  a 
better  life     The  cry  of  Israel's  heart  was  a  prayer  for  more  than  human  aid  to  help 


128  THE  F1K8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  vii.  1—17. 

them  to  perfect  the  renunciation  of  false  gods  and  the  contrition  due  for  sin.  And 
the  aid  of  the  prophet's  powerful  intercession  was  to  give  more  effect  to  their  own 
cry.  Life,  to  be  blessed  in  issue,  must  be  one  of  prayer — an  incessant  cry  for  help  to 
live.  And,  also,  recourse  must  he  had  to  the  true  Intercessor,  who  is  "  touched  with 
the  feeling  of  our  infirmities."  The  Church  has  not  duly  appreciated  this  means  of 
accomplishing  its  purpose  in  the  world.  In  so  far  as  the  indi vid  ual  Christian  is  a 
man  of  prayer,  and  looks  daily  to  the  Intercessor,  will  he  press  on  till  he  attains  to 
"  the  mark  and  prize  of  his  high  calling."  5.  A  due  recognition  of  the  atonement  of 
Christ.  Not  without  reason  was  the  "  sucking  lamb  "  offered  when  Israel  sought 
the  Lord.  The  "way  to  God  "  was  clearly  recognised.  And  the  life  of  man  will  be 
right  and  will  press  on  to  a  safe  and  blessed  issue  only  so  far  as  the  Lamb  of  God  is 
recognised  as  the  "  way."  The  Church  can  fulfil  her  mission  in  the  world  only  by 
faitlifiilly  exhibiting  the  cross  of  Christ  to  the  guilty  and  desponding.  6.  Deter- 
mined conflict  with  the  natural  enemies  of  God  and  man.  Israel  had  to  fight  Philis- 
tines. Only  on  condition  of  supplementary  acts  of  confession  and  worship,  by 
earnest  conflict  with  the  foe,  could  they  secure  peace  in  their  borders,  and  finally 
answer  their  Messianic  purpose  of  existence.  In  like  manner  the  Church  and  the 
individual  must  "  war  a  good  warfare."  The  militant  character  should  be  maintained 
as  long  as  there  is  an  enemy  to  Christ  in  the  heart  as  in  the  world. 

II.  The  ENCOURAGEMENT  TO  PERSEVEEE  TO  THE  END.  The  raising  of  the  stone 
"Ebenezer"  was  an  act  retrospective  and  prospective.  The  hopes  inspired  in  the 
mind  of  Samuel  when  first  he  undertook  the  work  of  reformation  were  being  justified 
by  events,  and  he  desired  the  people  to  share  in  his  expectations.  In  so  far  as 
fidelity  has  been  shown  by  the  Christian  Church  or  by  the  individual  in  complying 
with  the  requirements  of  life's  true  issue,  so  far  is  there  in  every  instance  a  ground 
of  confident  expectation.  For  consider — 1.  The  primary/ basis  of  confdence.  In 
Israel's  case  the  return  of  the  ark  within  their  borders  was  a  pledge  of  mercy  for 
the  penitent.  They  were  not  lost  without  remedy.  And  in  the  more  glorious  mani- 
festation of  God  in  Christ  we  have  the  pledge  that  there  is  mercy  for  all,  and  that 
ill  energy  spent  conformably  .to  the  object  of  his  presence  among  men  will  be 
crowned  with  success.  2.  The  consdousness  of  being  on  the  side  ofrigM.  There  is 
in  even  the  fallen  a  remnant  of  the  original  sense  of  right  which  tumishes  a  ground 
of  appeal,  and  assures  of  responsibility.  The  guiltiest  man  in  Israel  knew  that  to 
forsake  Jehovah  was  wrong.  In  turning  unto  the  Lord  and  seeking  his  favour  the 
people  were  sustained  by  the  deep  conviction  of  right  in  hope  of  attaining  the 
desired  good.  The  moral  support  of  such  a  consciousness  is  great  to  every  one. 
The  soul  that  seeks  holiness  and  eternal  life  may  look  on  with  hope.  A  voice  within 
declares  that,  being  on  the  side  of  eternal  right,  we  must,  so  far,  win.  The  struggling 
Church  of  Clirist  feels  the  force  of  the  same  conviction  which  gives  the  foretaste  of 
victory.  3.  The  manifest  improvement  in  one's  condition  proportionate  to  desire 
and  effort.  In  so  far  as  Israel's  desire  and  effort  were  sincere  and  carried  through, 
to  that  degree  did  the  personal,  domestic,  and  national  life  rise  above  the  baneful 
circumstances  resulting  from  former  sins.  Every  good  feeling,  every  tear  of 
penitence,  every  casting  away  of  idols,  left  its  mark  on  the  surface  of  society,  and 
indicated  what  might  be  expected  if  only  the  reformation  be  carried  through.  God 
gives  according  to  our  work.  Likewise  all  Christian  desire  and  effort  succeed  so  far 
as  they  are  genuine.  The  acquired  results  of  fidelity  to  God  confirm  the  truth  that 
everything  promised  shall  in  due  time  be  realised.  Each  step  in  the  ascent  heaven- 
wards is  to  a  clearer  view  of  the  summit  of  our  ambition.  4.  The  assured  sympailvy 
of  the  great  Intercessor.  Perhaps  nothing  gave  downcast  Israel  so  much  encourage- 
ment of  final  restoration  to  God,  with  its  ulterior  consequences,  as  the  effort  of 
Samuel,  the  chosen  prophet,  to  assure  them  of  his  full  sympathy.  Ho  was  their 
friend,  and  in  him  they  found  solace  and  hope.  As  a  prefigurement  of  the  one 
true  Intercessor,  we  see  here  what  reason  we  have  for  boldness.  The  pains  which 
Christ  has  taken  to  assure  every  earnest  soul  personally,  and  the  Church  collectively, 
of  his  deep  sympathy  are  most  extraordinary.  By  word,  deed,  tears,  sorrow,  death, 
yes,  by  resumed  life  and  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  he  would  have  us  know  that  we 
are  not  alone.  The  past  may  be  black  and  full  of  sadness,  but  with  him  as  Helper 
»nd  Friend  who  may  not  hope  on  ?    6.  The  co-operation  of  Providence.     Providence 


OK  VII.  1—17.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  129 

workB  for  men  in  forms  a(Japted  to  their  mental  and  spiritual  condition.  Whether 
the  thunder  which  discomfited  the  Philistines  was  a  special  exertion  of  Divine  power 
out  of  the  ordinary  course  of  atmospheric  changes,  or  a  coincidence  brought  about 
by  him  who,  in  the  primary  settlement  of  nature,  foresees  his  own  relations  to  his 
people,  and  harmonises  physical  and  moral  lines,  the  result  abides.  God  fights  for 
those  who  fight  for  righteousness.  Providence  does  not  always  favour  the  search 
after  wealth,  or  pleasure,  or  ease,  but  it  does  always  favour  the  Christian  in  his  con- 
flict with  sin.  A  "  besom  of  destruction  "  is  being  formed  for  use  against  the  forces 
of  evil.  Never  in  the  history  of  the  world  has  a  case  arisen  in  which  defeat  has 
come  on  any  soul  that  has  sincerely  trusted  in  God  and  conformed  to  his  require- 
ments. They  that  "  trust  in  the  Lord  are  as  Mount  Zion,  which  cannot  be  moved." 
The  battle  is  not  to  the  strong,  but  to  those  who  are  under  the  cover  of  the  Almighty 
hand. 

III.   The  GBOUNDB  OF  ENCODEAQEMBNT,  WHEN  FAIBLT  BEOUGHT  BEFOBE   THE  MIND, 

OFEBATE  IN  TWO  WAYS.  1.  Retrospectively.  The  retrospective  survey,  which  brings 
the  mind  in  view  of  facts  bearing  on  the  future,  also  awakens  gratitude  for  what  has 
been  already  accomplished.  It  was  with  no  formal  thankfulness  that  Samuel 
inscribed  "  Ebenezer ; "  and  the  poor  wayward  people,  whose  sins  had  borne  such 
bitter  fruit,  caught  his  spirit  as  they  reflected  on  the  mercy  that  was  proved,  by 
recent  events,  not  to  be  clean  gone  for  ever.  Sinful  hearts,  when  penitent,  love  to 
look  back  on  even  the  slightest  sign  of  God's  love  and  care.  The  development  of 
gratitude  itself  is  the  introduction  of  a  new  and  helpful  power  in  the  sore  conflict 
with  sin  and  sorrow.  If  only  men  would  consider,  by  careful  retrospection,  what 
God  has  done  for  them  I  Men  too  often  dwell  on  their  own  deeds  and  failings,  and 
80  nourish  despondency.  "  Be  ye  thankful "  is  apostolic  exhortation.  And,  despite 
all  defections,  blunders,  and  disasters  of  the  Church,  how  tenderly  and  wisely 
he  has  led,  chastened,  and  worked  with  the  people  called  after  his  holy  name. 
Powerful  reasons  still  exist  for  the  contending  hosts  to  raise  their  cheerful,  grate- 
ful "  Ebenezer."  2.  Prospectively.  "  Hitherto  "  is  relative.  There  is  a  future  term 
in  the  thought ;  and  its  use,  as  the  result  of  a  survey  of  grounds  of  encouragement, 
means  that  the  heart  is  bracing  itsdffor  new  exertions.  Samuel  would  work  on, 
devising  in  cheerful  spirit  new  means  of  further  raising  the  people,  while  they 
would  avail  themselves  of  his  assistance  to  regain  lost  joys  and  honours.  A  higher 
tone,  a  more  vigorous  effort,  would  mark  the  coming  years. 

Practical  lessons : — 1.  It  is  very  useful  in  prirate,  domestic,  and  Church  life 
occasionally  to  take  a  solemn  review,  with  appropriate  religious  exercise,  of  progress 
made,  and  of  what  God  has  done  for  us.  2.  We  should  study  more  carefully  the 
formative  power  of  a  frequent  consideration  of  the  mercies  of  God.  3.  When 
engaged  in  actual  religious  work  and  worship  to  which  God  has  clearly  called  us, 
we  may  be  certain  that  our  general  interests  will  not  be  allowed  to  sufEer  from  the 
hand  of  enemies,  seen  or  unseen.  4.  If  we  honour  God  to  the  extent  of  our  spiritual 
attainments,  power  will  come  for  doing  him  still  greater  honour. 

Vers.  13 — 17. — First-fruits  of  repentance.  The  facts  are — 1,  Israel  enjoy  fret> 
dom  from  the  oppression  of  the  Philistines  and  regain  lost  cities.  2.  Their  restless 
ancestral  enemy  the  Amorite  is  quiet.  3.  Samuel  quietly  and  happily  attends  to  hia 
civil  functions.  4.  Eamah,  the  home  of  Samuel,  is  blessed  with  an  altar  to  Jehovah. 
The  mention  of  these  suggestive  facts  immediately  after  the  reference  to  the  call  to 
repentance  and  its  response  exhibit  the  natural  results  of  the  efEorts  of  prophet  and 
people.    A  fruitful  theme  is  given. 

I.  In  BELATION  TO  ISBAEL  THESE   FRUITS  WERE  MOST    IMPORTANT  ;  jUst  SUoh    aS    a 

nation  might  well  prize.  An  active,  powerful  foe  was  held  in  restraint.  Territory 
and  cities  were  restored  to  the  government  and  general  influence  of  a  true  man  of 
God.  Their  fathers'  foe,  who  disputed  the  march  of  Joshua,  and  ever  lay  as  a 
savage  beast  by  their  side,  was  controlled  by  an  unseen  hand.  An  orderly  and 
beneficent  civil  administration,  diligently  maintained  on  religious  principles,  was 
enjoyed  by  the  various  districts,  and  the  residence  of  the  ruler  of  the  people  was 
conspicuously  a  centre  of  religious  influence.  Blessed  fruits  of  national  repentance  1 
When  will  nations  learn  the  clear  lessons  of  this  precious  book  of  God  ? 
1  BAM.  ■ 


1»  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  to.  1—17. 

n.   In  RELATION  TO  THE  EBLIGIOUB  LIFE  OF  CHRISTIANS  THESE   FACTS  ABE  FTOL  OF 

fllOHiFicANCS.  It  IB  not  wise  to  geek  out  spiritual  meanings  from  every  simple 
historic  fact  in  the  Old  Testament.  Plain  history  is  not  given  as  a  religious  enigma 
to  be  Bolyed  by  some  transcendental  insight.  Yet  there  are  analogies  between 
national  and  individual  life,  and  principles  of  holiness  and  righteousness  work  in 
the  same  directions  in  both.  As  there  is  a  Babylon  both  spiritual  and  historical,  so 
there  is  the  Philistine  and  Amorite  of  our  great  warfare.  As  treasures  change 
hands  in  Israel's  conflict,  so  there  are  valuable  possessions  in  man  which  may 
be  dominated  by  opposing  powers.  Thus,  then,  we  may  consider  some  of  the  Jirst- 
fruits  of  repentance  in  Christian  life.  1.  The  great  world-power  is  largely  subdued 
and  east  off.  The  man  who  in  his  life  has  passed  through  what  Israel  did  in  answer 
to  Samuel's  call  finds  that  the  evil  influences  of  the  world  around  have  less  hold  on 
him.  They  are  repressed.  Their  force  has  been  weakened,  if  not  annihilated. 
2.  Fatties  onee  governed  hy  unhallowed  tendencies  are  restored  to  the  rightful 
ruler.  The'-e  are,  so  to  speak,  cities — seats  of  power  and  resotirce — in  every  man's 
nature.  While  in  a  sinful  course  of  life  these  are  dominated  largely  by  principles 
alien  to  Ood,  and  adverse  to  true  self-interest:  true  repentance  brings  every  faculty, 
thought,  and  desire  into  a  willing  subordination  to  him  whose  right  it  is  to  reign. 
The  soul  is  a  "  holy  land  "  in  which  Christ  is  King.  3.  Deep-seated,  corrupt  passions 
are  quieted.  There  are  ancient,  very  corrupt  passions  oi  a  fleshly  character  em- 
bedded in  human  nature.  These  Amorites  of  our  experience  are  unusually  powerful 
during  a  life  of  sinful  indulgence.  They  grow  fat  and  flourish.  One  of  the  first  con- 
sequences of  the  new  life  is  to  tone  them  down.  The  causes  of  their  extreme  activity 
and  restlessness  are  partially  removed.  A  strong  hand  holds  them  down  in  compara- 
tive quietude.  Their  destiny,  like  that  of  Israel's  cruel  foe,  is  to  be  utterly  destroyed ; 
but  even  now,  compared  with  former  almost  irresistible  aggressions,  there  is  peace 
with  them.  4.  A  considerable  degree  of  prosperity  and  order  is  maintained.  The 
reformed  soul  has  law  administered  within  itself.  Every  interest,  every  claim  of 
striving  powers  and  tendencies,  is  considered  and  decided  in  harmony  with  the  law  of 
Christ.  The  intellect  does  not  absorb  the  time  and  energy  due  to  the  culture  of  the 
emotions,  and  vice  versd.  To  some  degree  the  inner  man  is  in  an  orderly,  prosperous 
condition.  He  is  an  improved  being.  6.  The  holy,  elevating  power  of  devotion  is 
cherished  at  the  centre  of  influence.  Samuel's  home  was  the  centre  of  influence  in 
Israel,  and  it  was  made  by  express  arrangement  conspicuously  devout.  There  is  in 
our  nature  a  seat  of  supreme  influence.  The  faculties  and  tendencies  of  the  soul  act 
in  subordination  to  the  commanding  afEection  of  life.  True  repentance  issues  in  the 
heart  becoming  the  seat  of  a  powerful  influence  dominating  all  else.  There  is  an 
altar  there  on  which  the  inextinguishable  fire  bums,  filling  with  its  heavenly  glory 
the  entire  man.  "  Old  things  have  passed  away ;  all  things  are  become  new."  Are 
these  fruits  f oimd  in  all  Uves  called  Christian  ?  They  ought  to  be,  and  are,  if 
"  Christiaii "  is  more  than  a  name. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 18. — Steps  of  return  to  God.  The  whole  interest  of  this  passage  is  moral 
No  stress  is  laid  on  uie  forms,  or  even  the  authorised  appurtenances,  of  religion.  The 
ark,  of  which  we  have  heard  so  much,  and  which  had  been  treated  with  a  singular 
mixture  of  superstition  and  profanity,  plays  no  part  in  the  history.  It  is  left  for 
years  in  a  quiet  retreat.  Israel  had  backslidden  from  the  Lord.  The  steps  of  their 
return  have  a  meaning  and  a  moral  lesson  for  all  generations. 

I.  Tee  FEELING  OF  A  OBEAT  MOBAL  AND  SPIRITUAL  WANT.  "  The  house  of  Israel 
lamented  after  the  Lord."  For  twenty  years  the  ark  had  been  withdrawn,  and  under 
the  yoke  of  the  Philistines  the  spirit  of  Israel  seemed  to  be  quelled  and  stupefied. 
Even  Samuel  appears  to  have  held  himself  in  reserve  till  a  time  should  arrive  more 
favourable  for  the  moral  suasion  and  admonition  of  a  prophet.  And  heathen  worship 
crept  over  the  land.  But  at  last  conscience  began  to  stir,  the  soul  of  the  people  wm 
weary,  and  there  rose  a  wistful,  sorrowful  cry  after  the  God  of  their  fathers.  This 
sorely  is  always  the  beginning  of  a  backslider's  restoration.  He  wearies,  and  is 
ashamed  of  his  own  ways ;  feels  his  folly  and  wickedness,  and  then  sighs  after  a 
forfeited  blssssrtnsss — laments  after  the  Lord. 


n.  Tn.  1—17.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  181 

II.  Rbfbi^tamok  fbeached  and  pbactisbd.  When  the  time  came  for  the  people  to 
h«ar  him  with  an  awakened  conscience,  Samuel  addressed  all  the  tribes  with  a  voioa 
of  moral  authority  that  recalls  the  admonitions  of  Moses  and  the  last  words  of  Joshua 

Ser.  3).  And  the  people  obeyed  his  word,  showing  their  repentance  in  the  most 
orongh  and  practical  way  by  "  putting  away  Baalim  and  Ashtaroth."  So  must 
every  true  prophet  or  preacher  oi  righteousness  summon  men  to  repentance,  and 
testify  to  them  that  God  will  not  take  their  part  while  their  hearts  are  disloyal  to 
him.  It  is  useless  to  lament  after  the  Lord  and  still  retain  false  gods.  Our  God  is 
not  mocked,  nor  can  his  favour  be  gained  by  mere  words  and  empty  sighs. 

III.  A  NBW  OBDER  BEGUN.  At  Mizpah,  after  solemn  public  confession  of  sin 
against  Jehovah,  "  Samuel  judged  the  people  of  Israel."  He  seized  the  opportunity 
to  institute  a  more  authoritative  and  vigorous  administration  of  public  affairs.  He 
knew  well  the  need  of  establishing  order  and  discipline  under  the  sacred  law.  And 
the  people  consented.  So  when  there  is  sincere  repentance  a  new  order  begins.  The 
authority  of  the  law  of  the  Lord  over  conscience  and  life  is  acknowledged,  and  there 
is  evinced  a  new  obedience. 

IV.  A  riOHT  FOB  HOLT  LiBBBTT.  The  Philistines  had  no  objection  to  the  Iiraelite 
worship  of  Baal  and  Astarte ;  but  so  soon  as  they  heard  of  their  return  to  the 
service  of  Jehovah  and  of  the  increased  authority  of  Samuel,  they  mustered  their 
forces  to  attack  them.  And  the  faith  of  the  penitent  tribes  was  not  yet  sufficiently 
established  or  assured  to  prevent  their  being  "  afraid  of  the  Philistines."  They  stood 
their  ground,  however,  and  asked  Samuel  to  pray  for  them  to  the  Lord.  So  they  got  the 
victory.  When  a  backslider  returns  to  God,  endeavouring  to  regain  his  self-respect, 
and  to  resume  his  place  as  a  well-doer,  he  finds  that  evil  rises  up  within  him  and 
fights  hard  for  the  mastery.  As  Pharaoh  would  not  let  the  people  go,  and  the 
Philistines  would  not  let  them  restore  religion  or  regain  national  independence  with- 
out a  struggle  to  keep  them  down,  so  does  sin  strive  to  retain  under  its  yoke  the  sinner 
who  is  escaping  through  repentance.  But  let  faith  appeal  to  God  along  with  the 
burnt  offering  of  entire  consecration  to  him.     He  gives  the  victory  to  the  weak. 

V.  Gbatbfol  acknowlbdgmbnt  of  help  from  God.  Samuel  knew  the  value  to  a 
nation  of  inspiriting  recollections,  and  therefore  set  up  a  stone  or  pillar  to  commemo- 
rate the  great  victory.  But  he  was  careful  to  make  it  a  witness  not  to  Israel's 
prowess,  but  to  Jehovah's  timely  help.  It  was  Ebenezer,  the  stone  of  help.  It  said 
"Te  Deum  Laudamus."  The  spiritual  life  has  its  Ebenezers, — many  of  them. 
Nations  are  ready  enough  to  raise  proud  pillars  and  triumphal  arches  to  celebrate 
their  feats  in  war.  Europe  has  ever  so  many  columns,  streets,  squares,  and  boule- 
vards, and  bridges  named  after  battles.  Let  us  remember  the  battles  of  principle, 
the  fights  with  temptation  through  which  we  have  passed.  When  we  have  failed, 
ours  is  the  shame.  When  we  have  overcome,  to  God  be  the  glory.  We  recommend 
not  remembrance  only,  but  some  stone  of  remembrance.  It  is  a  true  and  wise  impulse 
which  has  often  led  Christians  to  commemorate  o  great  deliverance  or  consolation 
vouchsafed  to  themselves  by  building  a  church,  an  hospital,  or  an  almshouse,  or  by 
founding  a  mission,  or  some  institution  of  learning  or  benevolence.  Such  a  stone  of 
remembrance  helps  him  who  rears  it  to  resist  the  tendency  to  let  religious  impressions 
and  memories  fade  from  the  mind,  and  it  proclaims  to  others  that  some  men,  at  all 
events,  have  proved  God  as  the  Hearer  of  prayer  and  the  Helper  of  the  needy. — F. 

Vers.  2—6.  (Mizpah.)— J  nationcU  revival.  The  history  of  religion  in  the  world 
is  largely  a  history  of  a  series  of  declensions  and  revivals ;  the  former  being_  due  to 
the  downward  tendency  of  human  nature,  the  latter  to  the  ^acious  interposition  of 
God.  Of  this  fact  the  period  of  the  judges  afEords  an  illustration.  The  revival  which 
took  place  at  its  commencement  (Judges  ii.  1 — 5)  is  specially  worthy  of  notice ;  another, 
and  more  important,  occurring  toward  its  close,  is  here  described.  It  was — 1._  Needed 
on  account  of  the  condition  of  the  people  of  Israel.  The  great  defeat  which  they 
suffered  twenty  years  before  (ver.  1 ;  ch.  iv.  1 ;  vi  1)  checked  their  prevailing  sin, 
especially  as  manifested  in  sacerdotalism,  formalism,  superstition,  and  presumption  ; 
but  it  by  no  means  cured  it.  Superstitious  veneration  for  sapred  objects  passed  rapidly, 
•8  commonly  happens,  into  unbelieving  irreverence  (ch.  vi.  19)  and  spiritual  indifier- 
aooe ;  whilst  participation  in  Uxo  false  worship  and  corrupt  practices  of  the  heathen 

1:2 


182  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL;  [oh.  til  1—17. 

continued,  and  even  increased  (ver.  4).  The  law  of  God  was  made  void,  and  his  presence 
withdrawn.  2.  Effected,  under  God,  hy  the  influence  of  one  man — Samuel.  Nothing 
is  expressly  said  concerning  him  during  these  twenty  years  ;  but  he  appears  to  have 
retired  from  Shiloh  to  Bamah,  his  native  place,  and  it  is  not  likely  that  he  remained 
there  altogether  inactive  for  so  long  a  time.  The  statement  of  ch.  iii.  20, 21 ;  iv.  1,  must 
be  considered  as,  to  some  extent,  prospective.  The  oppression  of  the  Philistines  was 
not  such  as  to  interfere  with  him,  nor  was  his  activity  of  such  a  kind  as  to  cause 
them  much  concern.  His  holy  example  and  quiet  labours  doubtless  contributed 
greatly  to  the  keeping  alive  of  true  piety  in  the  hearts  of  a  faithful  few ;  and  when  the 
time  came  for  more  public  efEort  he  stood  ready — in  the  full  maturity  of  his  powers, 
above  forty  years  of  age — to  utter  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  to  take  the  leadership  of 
the  nation.  "  During  the  long  oppression  of  a  stormy  time  the  nation  at  last  gathered 
more  and  more  unanimously  around  Samuel,  like  terrified  chickens  around  the  parent 
hen  "  (Ewald).  3.  Marhed  by  features  of  a  peculia?  nature.  Every  great  religious 
revival  that  has  been  recorded  in  sacred  history  or  has  occurred  in  the  Christian 
Church  has  had  a  character  of  its  own,  determined  by  the  wants  of  the  age.  And 
this  revival  was  characterised  by  the  restoration  of  the  moral  law  to  commanding  influ- 
ence on  the  conscience  of  the  people  by  means  of  the  prophetic  ministry.  The  o£Sce 
of  hereditary  priest  became  secondary  to  that  of  inspired  prophet,  and  was  even 
absorbed  in  it  for  a  while  ;  for  Samuel,  although  not  a  priest,  acted  constantly  as  such 
in  ofiering  sacrifice ;  and  the  Levitical  law  lay  in  abeyance,  or  was  modified  in  practice 
under  his  direction.  "  As  Moses  established  the  theocracy,  Samuel  restored  its  funda- 
mental principles  to  the  supreme  place  in  the  national  Ufe,  and  thus  in  a  true  and 
noble  sense  was  its  second  founder."  The  revival  he  was  the  chief  instrument  in 
effecting  involved  a  more  complete  separation  from  idolatry,  laid  the  basis  of  higher 
internal  unity,  and  was  followed  by  prosperity  and  independence.  In  the  description 
of  it  we  observe — 

I.  A  GENERAL  CONCERN  ABOUT  THE  PRESENCE  OF  THE  LoRD.      "  And  all  the  house  of 

Israel  lamented  after  the  Lord  "  (ver.  2).  1.  Occasioned  by  the  experience  of  the 
long  and  bitter  effects  of  transgression.  2.  Impljang  a  sense  of  misery  in  the  absence 
of  God.  The  idols  to  which  men  give  their  affections  cannot  satisfy  the  heart  (Hosea 
ii.  7,  8;  V.  15 j  vi.  1).  "It  is  well  to  feel  worn  and  fatigued  with  the  fruitless 
search  after  happiness,  that  we  may  welcome  our  Deliverer  "  (Pascal).  3.  Consisting 
of  an  intense  longing  after  his  favour  and  fellowship.  "  The  phrase,  '  lamented  after 
the  Lord,'  is  taken  from  human  affairs,  when  one  follows  after  another  and  entreats  him 
with  lamentations  until  he  assents.  An  example  of  this  is  the  Syrophenician  woman  " 
Matt.  XV.  (S.  Schmid).  The  sorrow  thus  felt  was  a  "  godly  sorrow ; "  a  sorrow  which 
comes  from  God,  is  felt  for  God,  and  tends  to  God,  and  which  works  genuine  repent- 
ance, effectual  deliverance,  and  lasting  satisfaction  (2  Cor.  vii.  10).  4.  Felt  by  the 
nation  as  a  whole.  "  All  the  house  of  Israel."  And  wherever  such  concern  is  felt  it 
is  a  sure  sign  of  God's  returning  favour.  "  They  inclined  after  the  Lord ;  they 
groaned,  complained,  bemoaned  themselves  in  their  following  the  Lord,  as  a  child 
followeth  his  departing  parent ;  they  called,  cried,  and  lifted  up  their  voice  after  the 
Lord  by  earnest  prayer  and  supplication.  Why  ?  (1)  Because  God  is  infinitely  more 
worthy  than  all  ordinances  ;  his  presence  is  valuable  in  itself.  (2)  God  purposely  with- 
draws, that  men  may  lament  after  him  ;  as  when  a  mother  steps  out  of  a  child's  sight, 
and  when  she  seems  to  be  gone  the  child  raises  a  cry  after.her.  (3)  Because  sincere 
lamenting  after  the  Lord  may  occasion  his  return  "  (0.  He3rwood,  iii.  419). 

II.  An  earnest  attention  to  the  word  of  the  Lord  (ver.  3).  The  word  was — 1. 
Revealed  in  former  days,  and  included  in  the  law  of  Moses  (Deut.  vi.  14^.  There  is 
not  generally  so  much  need  of  new  truth  as  that  the  old  should  be  vitalised.  How 
much  of  dead  truth  lies  in  the  mind  of  every  man  1  2.  Spoken  with  new  power ; 
opportunely,  faithfully,  and  with  holy  zeal,  by  the  prophet  who  had  been  commissioned 
to  utter  it.  The  preaching  of  the  word  is  necessary  and  important  in  every  genuine 
revival  of  religion.  That  word  is  a  fire,  a  hammer,  and  a  two-edged  sword  (Heb.  iv. 
12).  3.  Adapted  to  the  condition  of  the  people.  (1)  To  test  uie  sincerity  of  their 
desires  and  purposes.  "  If,"  &c.  (2)  To  tiistruct  them  in  their  duty.  "  Put  swsy  fli« 
strange  gods,"  &o.  Prepare  your  hearts  —  "  Fix  your  hearts  towaids,  or  in  trust  m. 
God '  (H«b.  xiii.  9).    (3)  To  mamrage  tbem  to  hope  for  deliverance.    "  And  he  will 


CH.  VII.  1—17.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  I.^: 


deliver  you  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philstiines."  4.  Listened  to  in  a  right  spirit ;  with 
fresh  interest,  reverence,  self-application,  and  a  determination  to  put  it  into  practice, 
When  the  heart  is  prepared  the  truth  is  invested  with  new  meaning  and  power ;  at 
words  written  on  paper  with  invisible  ink  are  clearly  perceived  when  held  to  the  fire. 
"  Faith  Cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God  "  (Bom.  x.  17). 

III.  A  SINCERE  RENUNCIATION  OF  SIN  AGAINST  THE  LORD  (ver.  4),  which  W»B — 1.  A 

proo/of  their  genuine  repentance  ;  "aheart  broken /or  sin,  and /j-oro  sin."  %  Shown 
with  respect  to  the  transgressions  to  which  they  were  specially  addicted — ^the  worship 
of  Baalim  (images  or  modifications  of  Baal,  the  principal  male  divinity  of  the 
Phoenician  and  Canaanitish  nations — the  sun-god)  and  Ashtaroth  (images  of  their 
supreme  female  divinity, "  the  queen  of  heaven,"  the  Syrian  Venus — Astarte),  and  the 
corrupt  practices  connected  therewith  (Judges  ii,  11,  13).  3.  Combined  with  positive 
acts  of  obedience  and  piety.  They  not  only  ceased  to  worship  false  gods,  but  also 
"served  the  Lord  alone"  (Matt.  vi.  24).  Sin  is  most  effectually  broken  off  "by 
righteousness  "  (Dan.  iv.  27) ;  an  old  affection  most  effectually  expelled  by  a  new  one. 
The  heart  cannot  rest  without  some  object  of  love  and  trust.  And  if,  "  when  the 
unclean  spirit  is  gone  out  of  a  man,"  it  be  not  immediately  replaced  by  a  pure  spirit, 
it  is  sure  to  return  "  with  seven  other  spirits  more  wicked  than  himself  "  (Matt.  xii. 
43).  4.  Made  by  men  individually  and  in  private ;  whereby  they  become  prepared 
to  make  a  national  profession,  and  to  receive  the  Divine  blessing.  God  can  bless  men 
only  by  "  turning  every  one  of  them  from  his  iniquities  "  (Acts  iii.  26). 

IV.  A  PUBLIC  CONSECRATION  TO  THE  SERVICE  OP  THE  LoRD  (vers.  5,  6).  At  the  Word 
of  Samuel  a  national  assembly  was  gathered  together  at  Mizpah  for  the  purpose  of 
openly  expressing  and  confirming  the  general  feeling ;  and  there  under  the  open  sky 
they  "yielded  themselves  to  the  Lord"  (2  Chron.  xxx.  8)  with — 1.  Solemn  vows  of 
obedience  to  the  law  of  their  God.  "  They  drew  water  and  poured  it  out  before  the 
Lord."  "  We  take  this  act  to  have  been  a  sign  and  symbol,  or  rather  confirmation  of 
an  oath — a  solemn  vow.  To  pour  out  water  on  the  ground  is  in  the  East  an  ancient  way 
of  taking  a  solemn  oath — the  words  and  promises  that  had  gone  forth  from  their  mouth 
being  as  water  spilt  upon  the  ground  that  cannot  be  gathered  up  again  "  (Kitto).  2. 
Sincere  humiliation  on  account  of  former  disobedience.  The  symbol  just  mentioned  is 
interpreted  by  some  as  denoting  the  pouring  out  of  their  hearts  in  penitence.  They 
also  "  fasted  on  that  day,  and  said  there.  We  have  sinned  against  the  Lord. "  3.  Prayers 
and  supplications  for  Divine  mercy  and  help.  "  I  will  pray  for  you."  "  Cease  not  to 
cry  unto  the  Lord  our  God  for  us,"  implying  that  Samuel  had  already  prayed  for  them. 
He  gave  expression  to  their  desires,  and  made  intercession  on  their  behalf.  "  So 
Moses  prayed  for  the  people  at  Rephidim  and  for  Miriam,  so  Elijah  prayed  at  Carmel, 
so  Ezra  prayed  at  the  evening  sacrifice,  so  the  high  priest  prayed  for  the  house  of 
Israel  on  the  day  of  atonement,  and  so  does  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ever  live  at  God's 
right  hand  to  make  intercession  for  us  "  ('  Sp.  Com.').  4.  Devout  acknowledgment  of 
the  prophet  of  the  Lord  as  their  leader  and  judge.  "  And  Samuel  judged  the  children 
of  Israel  in  Mizpah."  On  that  day  he  commenced  his  public  labours  as  judge,  and  a 
great  moral  and  spiritual  reformation  was  inaugurated.  It  was  a  day  long  remem- 
bered (2  Chron.  xxxv.  18 :  "  There  was  no  passover  like  to  that  kept  in  Israel  from 
the  days  of  Samuel  the  prophet "),  and  such  a  day  as  every  godly  man  desires  to  see 
in  this  land  (Ps.  Ixxxv.  6  ;  Hos.  xiv.  1—3 ;  Hab.  iii.  2).— D. 

Ver.  6.  (Mizpah.) — Confession  0/  sin.  "We  have  sinned  against  the  Lord." 
When  any  one  has  done  wrong  to  another  be  uught  to  make  acknowledgment  and 
reparation  to  him  (Matt.  v.  23,  24).  We  are  directed  to  "  confess  our  faults  one  to 
another  "  (James  v.  16)  ;  and  there  are  cases  to  which  we  may  derive  benefit  from 
confessing  our  sins  against  the  Lord  to  a  godly  man.  The  passage  just  referred  to, 
however,  affords  no  ground  for  "  auricular  confession  "  to  a  priest ;  nor  does  the 
commission  given  to  the  apostles  (John  xx.  23),  since  (in  addition  to  other  reasons) 
it  pimply  conferred  authority  to  declare  the  ordinances  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and 
especially  the  terms  or  conditions  according  to  which  sins  are  remitted  or  retained ;  and 
the  practice  of  such  confession  is  most  injurious.  But  we  ought  all  to  confess  our 
sins  to  God.  Every  wrong  done  to  men  is  a  sin  against  God,  and  there  are  multitudes 
pf  sins  against  him  that  do  not  directly  affect  our  fellow-men.     "  In  many  things  we 


134  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [cH.  vii.  1—17. 

all  o£Eend."  And  the  word  of  God  often  enjoins  the  confession  of  all  our  offenceg 
before  Mm,  and  declares  it  to  be  the  necessary  condition  of  obtaining  forgiveness. 
Consider — 

L  What  it  imfliis.  1.  That  we  see  the  essential  evil  of  sin.  "  Sin  is  the  trans- 
gression of  the  law  "  (1  John  iii.  4).  More  generally,  it  is  whatever  is  contrary  to 
the  character  and  will  of  God.  As  he  is  the  only  perfect  Being,  and  deserves  and 
claims  the  supreme  love  of  men,  so  the  root  of  sin  consists  in  the  absence  of  such 
love,  and  the  departure  of  the  heart  from  its  true  rest ;  and  whenever  man  departs  from 
God  he  falls  into  selfishness,  vanity,  and  misery.  Sin  is  aversion  to  God  and  devotion 
to  self  f  see  Tulloch,  '  Christian  Doctrine  of  Sin ').  "  Against  thee,  thee  only,  have  I 
sinned,  Ac.  (Pi.  li.  4).  2.  That  we  are  convinced  of  the  JMi^  desert  of  sin.  "  How- 
beit,  thou  art  Just  in  all  that  is  brought  upon  us,"  &c.  (Neh.  ix.  33).  3.  That  we  are 
resolved  upon  an  entire  renunciation  of  sin.  liis  determination  springs  from  a  real 
hatred  towards  it,  and  is  associated  with  "  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness." 
Confession  is  of  the  nature  of  a  solemn  oath  of  abjuratiotk  "  Whoso  confesseth  and 
forsaketh  his  sins  shall  find  mercy  "  (Prov.  xxviii.  13). 

II.  How  IT  SHonLD  BB  MADE.  1,  Under  a  due  impression  of  the  greatness  of  onr 
sin.  (1)  In  order  to  this  we  must  contemplate  the  holy  love  of  God,  his  just  require- 
ments, his  merciful  blessings  and  boundless  claims;  above  all,  we  must  stand  before 
the  cross  and  behold  that  great  sight  (Luke  xxiii.  48).  "  There  is  no  better  way  to 
obtain  the  gift  of  tears  for  having  offended  God  than  meditation  on  the  greatness  of 
God's  goodness  and  of  his  love  which  he  has  shown  to  man."  (2)  We  must,  in  the 
light  that  shines  upon  us,  consider  the  particular  transgressions  we  have  committed 
in  thought,  word,  and  deed  against  God,  our  neighbour,  and  ourselves,  —  sins  of 
omission  and  commission, — and  the  sinful  disposition  revealed  by  them  and  pervading 
our  whole  life  (Luke  xviii.  13).  General  confessions  of  sin  without  personal  and 
particular  application  are  of  little  worth.  "  Usually,  the  more  particular  we  are  in 
the  confession  of  sin,  the  more  comfort  we  have  in  the  sense  of  pardon"  (M.  Henry). 
(3)  In  this  manner  we  shall,  by  Divine  grace,  be  filled  with  self-abasement,  godly 
sorrow,  and  true  repentance.  "  That  which  makes  manifest  is  light ; "  and  in  propor- 
tion to  the  brightness  with  which  the  light  of  truth  shines  upon  us  will  it  manifest 
our  sin  (1  John  i.  8)  ;  just  as  a  sunbeam  darting  across  a  room  shows  us  the  floating 
dost  that  was  not  seen  before  (Job  xlii.  5,  6).  2.  In  sincere,  frank,  and  unreserved 
acknowledgment  of  our  sin ;  without  any  attempt  to  cover,  excuse,  or  palliate  it. 
"  Pardon  my  iniquity,/or  it  is  great "  (Ps.  xxv.  11 ;  xxxii.  3—6).  3.  With  a  turning 
of  the  heart  to  God  in  faith  and  prayer  and  acts  of  obedience.  "  For  thou.  Lord,  art 
good,  and  ready  to  forgive ;  and  plenteous  in  mercy  unto  all  them  that  call  upon  thee  " 
(Ps.  Ixxxvi.  5). 

"  Bepentance  is  heart's  sorrow 
And  a  clear  life  ensuing  "  (Shakespeare). 

IIL  Bt  whom.  1.  Each  individual  (Luke  xv.  21).  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner"  (Luke  xviii.  13).  2.  Each  family.  "Every  family  apart"  (Zech.  xii.  14). 
3.  The  whole  people.  Those  who  have  united  in  sinning  must  unite  in  confessing 
their  sin  (cli.  xii.  19 ;  Ezra  ix.  6 — 16  ;  Dan.  ix.  4—19).  "  We  have  all  sinned  and 
come  short  of  the  glory  of  God." 

IV  Whv  it  is  necessary.  1.  That  we  may  give  glory  to  God.  By  it  we  act  in 
Bccoraaricc  with  his  will,  justify  him  in  his  dealings  with  us,  and  give  to  him  the  honour 
which  is  his  dueu  "  Give  glory  to  God,  and  make  confession  unto  him  "  (Josh.  vii.  19). 
2.  That  we  iiny  be  prepared  to  receive  pardon,  peace,  and  salvation.  Until  we  open 
our  lif  arts  to  God  he  will  not  open  his  heart  to  us.  We  must  cease  to  have  fellowship 
with  I'luls  in  order  that  we  may  have  fellowship  with  the  holy  One,  and  become  tiie 
haliiiiiioii  ot  his  Spirit  (2  Cor.  vi.  16).  3.  That  we  may  have  confidence  in  the 
fulli'iiieiit  of  his  promises.  This  is  conditioned  by  our  fulfilment  of  his  require- 
ments, without  wliicli  our  confidence  is  vain.  "If  we  confess  our  sins,"  &c.  (1  JohB 
i.  9).  "  And  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an  Advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the 
righteous"  (1  John  ii.  1). — D. 

Vers.  7— 14.  {'Rw^mm.)— The  victory  of  Ehmezer.  Whenever  a  people  is  set  right 
in  its  relation  to  God  and  purified  from  its  sin,  it  is  certain  to  obtain  victory  over  its 


OH.  viL  1—17.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  IM 

enemies  and  enjoy  prosperity  and  peace.  Israel  was  now  restored  from  its  apostasy, 
and  on  the  very  spot  where  it  experienced  an  overwhelming  defeat  twen^  year* 
before  it  gained  a  signal  triumph.     We  have  here — 

I.  The  gathering  of  the  enemy  (ver.  7).  1.  So  long  as  the  yoke  of  the  ungodlj 
is  patiently  borne  they  remain  quiet,  and  do  not  deem  it  needful  to  harass  the  victims 
of  their  oppression.  2.  The  revival  of  piety  and  activity  seldom  fails  to  call  forth 
the  fierce  opposition  of  evil  men.  The  spirit  of  good  and  the  spirit  of  evil  are  con- 
trary the  one  to  the  other,  and  the  more  intense  the  former  becomes,  the  more  intense 
also  becomes  the  latter.  The  "prince  of  this  world  "  dislikes  to  be  deprived  of  his 
captives,  and  therefore  seeks  to  prevent  sinners  from  coming  to  the  Lord  (Luke  ix. 
42),  and  hinders  saints  from  working  for  him  (1  Thess  ii.  18).  3.  The  purpose  for 
which  the  pious  assemble  is  not  always  understood  by  their  enemies ;  their  meeting 
for  prayer  is  sometimes  mistaken  for  an  organising  of  a  political  or  military  attack 
upon  them  ;  and  their  union  for  any  purpose  whatever  is  instinctively  felt  to  bode 
them  no  good,  and  regarded  as  a  sufiScient  ground  for  their  dispersion.  "  Now  we  ' 
see  here — (1)  How  evil  sometimes  seems  to  come  out  of  good.  (2)  How  good 
is  aometimes  brought  out  of  that  evil.  Israel  could  never  be  threatened  more 
aeasonably  than  at  this  time,  when  they  were  repenting  and  praying;  nor  could 
the  Philistines  have  acted  more  impoliticly  for  themselves  than  to  make  war 
upon  Israel  at  this  time,  when  they  were  making  their  peace  with  God  "  (Matthew 
Henry). 

II.  Thb  pbepabation  fob  the  conflict  (vers.  7,  8,  9).  1.  Mistrmt  of  self. 
"  They  were  afraid  of  the  Philistines."  Their  experience  of  defeat  and  oppression 
had  taught  them  their  own  weakness  and  cured  their  presumption.  The  conscious- 
ness of  human  weakness  is  the  condition  of  receiving  Divine  strength  (2  Cor.  xii. 
10 ;  Heb.  xi.  34).  2.  Trtist  in  God-  "  Cease  not  to  cry  unto  the  Lord  our  God  for 
us,"  &c.  (ver.  8).  Their  need  impelled  them  to  look  to.  God,  whom  they  called 
thdr  God,  with  reference  to  his  covenant,  and  from  whom  they  expected  deliverance 
according  to  the  promise  previously  g^ven  to  them  (ver.  3).  "They  have  found 
their  God  again,  after  whom  they  had  till  now  sighed  and  mourned  "  (Erdmann). 
Their  urgent  request  of  Samuel  was  an  evidence  of  their  reliance  on  Jehovah  and 
the  proper  way  of  seeking  his  aid,  for  Samuel  was  not  only  a  spokesman  for  God  to 
men,  but  also  a  spokesman  for  men  to  God,  and  he  proceeded  to  exercise  the  priestly 
function  of  mediation  by  offering  sacrifice  and  making  intercession.  3.  Self-dedicor 
iion,  of  which  the  whole  burnt  offering  was  the  expression  and  appointed  means, 
"  the  sign  of  complete  consecration  of  the  whole  man,  and  here  of  the  whole  people ;  " 
the  su^ing  lamb  being  a  symbol  of  their  new  life  now  freely  devoted  to  God. 
Samuel  acted  as  priest  at  Mizpah  and  elsewhere  by  Divine  commission  under  peculiar 
circumstances ;  the  regular  priesthood  being  in  abeyance,  the  ark  separated  from  the 
tabernacle,  Shiloh  desolate,  and  no  other  place  chosen  by  God  "  to  put  his  name 
there ; "  and  as  preparatory  to  the  time  "  when  in  every  place  incense  shall  be  offered 
to  my  name,  and  a  pure  offering"  (Mai.  i.  11).  "A  most  important  part  of  the  pro- 
phetic ofSce  was  to  maintain  the  spiritual  character  of  the  Hebrew  worship,  and  to 
prevent  the  degeneracy  of  the  people  into  such  ritualism  as  they  had  fallen  into  at 
the  time  our  Lord  appeared"  (Kitto).  "Let,  then,  thy  oblation  be  without  earthly 
affection  or  seLf-will  of  any  kind.  Look  neither  to  earthly  nor  heavenly  blessings, 
but  only  to  the  will  and  order  of  God,  to  which  thou  shouldst  submit  and  sacrifice 
thyself  wholly  as  a  perpetual  burnt  offering,  and,  forgetting  all  created  things,  say, 
'  Behold,  my  Lord  and  Creator,  each  and  all  of  my  desires  I  give  into  the  hand  of 
thy  will  and  thine  eternal  providence.  Do  with  me  as  seemeth  good  to  thee  in  life 
and  death,  and  after  death ;  as  in  time,  so  in  eternity  "  (Scupoli).  4.  Prayer.  "  And 
Samuel  cried  unto  the  Lord  for  Israel "  with  a  piercing  and  prolonged  cry.  And  with 
his  prayer  their  own  rose  up  to  heaven.  "  By  prayer  (if  thou  use  it  well)  thou  wilt 
put  a  sword  into  the  hand  oi  God,  that  he  may  fight  and  conquer  for  thee. "  A  praying 
army  is  irresistible.  What  victories  have  been  achieved  by  prayer  I  "  The  forty  years' 
domination  of  the  Philistines  over  Israel  (Judges  xiii.  1)  could  not  be  overthrown  by 
the  supernatural  strength  of  Samson,  but  was  terminated  by  the  prayers  of  Samuel " 
(Wordsworth).  Samson  only  began  to  deliver  Israel  (Judge*  ziii.  6) ;  Samnel  com- 
pleted the  woric 


136  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  vii.  1—17 

III.  The  eeception  of  help  (vers.  9,  10).  1.  It  came  in  answer  to  prayer.  "And 
the  Lord  answered  him."  2.  It  came  at  the  moment  of  their  greatest  extremity. 
"And  as  Samuel  was  offering  up  the  burnt  offering,  the  PhilistineB  drew  near  to  battle 
against  Israel."  But  man's  extremity  is  God's  opportunity  (Gen.  xxii.  11 — 14).  3. 
It  came  in  an  extraordinary  manner.  "  The  Lord  thundered  with  a  great  thunder  on 
that  day."  It  was,  as  it  were,  his  voice  in  answer  to  prayer.  The  ordinary  forces 
of  nature  operated  in  such  a  manner  as  to  make  it  plainly  appear  that  they  were 
directed  by  his  hand  (1  Sam.  ii.  10).  4.  It  was  most  efectual.  "  They  were  dis- 
comfited and  smitten  before  Israel "  (Job  xl.  9  ;  Ps.  Ixxvii.  18). 

IV.  The  pursuit  op  the  fob  (ver.  11).  1.  The  sense  of  the  presence  of  God 
inspires  his  people  with  fresh  confidence  and  courage,  and  without  it  they  can  do 
nothing.  2.  The  help  of  God  does  not  render  their  co-operation  unnecessary.  It 
rather  calls  for  the  putting  forth  of  their  strength.  He  gives  them  strength  that  it 
may  be  employed  against  the  enemy,  and  in  the  faithful  and  zealous  use  of  it  he 
gives  them  more  strength,  and  crowns  their  efforts  with  success.  3.  Victory  over  the 
enemy  should  be  followed  up  to  the  utmost  (Judges  viii.  4).  "  They  smote  them 
until  they  came  to  Beth-car.  How  often  from  not  following  up  a  victory  are  its 
advantages  lost  I 

V.  The  memorial  of  the  victobt  (ver.  12).  1.  The  help  which  is  derived  from 
God  should  be  gratefully  ascribed  to  him.  2.  Thanksgiving  to  God  should  be 
expressed  in  a  definite  and  permanent  form.  3.  One  deliverance  is  an  earnest  of 
another.  4.  The  memorial  of  past  deliverance  should  incite  to  future  confidence, 
and  the  continued  use  of  the  means  in  connection  with  which  it  was  achieved. 
"  Hitherto ;  for  all  Jehovah's  help  is  only  hitherto — ^from  day  to  day,  and  from  place 
to  place ;  not  uncondition  ally,  not  wholly,  not  once  for  all,  irrespective  of  our  bearing  " 
(Edersheim),  More  conflicts  have  to  be  waged,  and  it  is  only  in  mistrust  of  self, 
trust  in  God,  self -dedication,  and  prayer  that  they  can  be  waged  successfully.  "  The 
life  of  man  is  nothing  else  but  a  continual  warfare  with  temptation.  And  this  is  a 
battle  from  which,  as  it  ends  only  with  life,  there  is  no  escape ;  and  he  who  fights 
not  in  it  is  of  necessity  either  taken  captive  or  slain.  Because  of  this  warfare  thou 
must  watch  always,  and  keep  a  guard  upon  thy  heart,  so  that  it  be  ever  peaceful  and 
quiet"  (Scupoli). 

VI.  The  magnitude  op  the  result  (vers.  13,  14).  A  true  revival  is  always 
followed  by  beneficial  and  lasting  effects.  1.  The  power  of  the  enemy  is  broken. 
"  The  Philistines  were  subdued,  and  came  no  more  into  the  coasts  of  Israel.''  2.  A 
sure  defence  is  afforded  against  every  attempt  they  may  make  to  regain  their 
dominion.  "The  hand  of  the  Lord  was  against  them  all  the  days  of  Samuel."  S. 
Lost  territory  is  restored  (ver.  14).  Along  the  whole  line,  extending  north  and  south, 
from  Ekron  to  Gath.  4.  Far-reaching  peace  is  established.  "  And  there  was  peace 
between  Israel  and  the  Amorites."  "  When  a  man's  ways  please  the  Lord  he  maketh 
even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him  "  (Prov.  xvi.  7).  The  battle  of  Ebenezer 
may  be  considered  one  of  the  decisive  battles  of  the  world,  inasmuch  as  it  intro- 
duced a  new  order  of  things  in  Israel,  and  contributed  in  an  eminent  degree  to  its 
subsequent  prosperity  and  power.  "  'The  revival  of  religion  has  ever  had  a  most 
important  bearing  on  social  and  moral  improvement.  The  return  of  man  to  God 
restores  him  to  his  brother.  Restoration  to  the  earnest  and  hearty  performance  of 
religious  duties  towards  God  leads  to  a  corresponding  reformation  in  relative  and 
political  duties.  Those  countries  in  Europe  which  have  had  the  greatest  religious 
reforms  have  advanced  most  in  liberty,  civilisation,  and  commerce.  They  are  not 
trodden  by  the  iron  heel  of  despotism,  and  they  possess  the  greatest  amount  of 
domestic  quiet.  It  was  the  revival  of  religion  which  secured  the  Protestant  succession 
to  England,  and  many  of  the  liberties  which  we  now  enjoy.  It  was  the  revival  of 
religion  that  gave  such  a  martyr-roll  to  the  Scottish  Covenanters,  and  led  to  the  revo- 
lution settlement  of  1688.  In  Israel  every  revival  of  religion  w«s  succeeded  by 
national  prosperity  and  political  independence  "  (R.  Steel). — ^D. 

Ver.  12.  (Between  Mizpah  and  Shkn— the  tooth  or  crag.)  —  The  stone  of  hdp. 
The  setting  up  of  memorial  stones  was  one  of  the  earliest  methods  adopted  for  the 
purpose  of  recording  interesting  and  important  events.    These  memorials  consiiteti 


CH.  VII.  1—17.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  181 

of  a  single  block  or  of  a  heap  of  stones ;  they  generally  received  some  significant 
name,  or  were  marked  with  a  brief  inscription,  and  they  sometimes  became  centres 
around  which  the  people  gathered,  and  were  replaced  by  more  imposing  structures. 
The  earliest  instance  mentioned  in  the  Bible  was  at  Bethel  (Gen.  xxviii.  8).  Other 
instances.  Gen.  zzxi.  45 ;  Exod.  zvii.  16  ;  Josh,  iv,  9,  21, 22 ;  zxiv.  26.  This  memorial 
was  set  up — 

I.  On  the  opportune  reception  of  Divine  help.     Looking  backward  on  the 

KRst,  let  us  remember — 1.  How  much  that  help  has  been  needed  by  us — in  sorrow, 
ibour,  conflict,  danger,  which  our  own  strength  was  wholly  inadequate  to  meet. 
2.  How  often  it  has  been  afforded  when  we  were  at  the  point  of  despair.  But  why, 
it  rrifiy  be  asked,  should  God  have  allowed  us  to  arrive  at  such  a  point?  (1)  To  teach 
us  the  very  truth  concerning  ourselves,  and  deliver  us  from  a  vain  confidence  in  our- 
selves. "  This  unfortunate  self-reliance  forms  within  us  a  little  favourite  sanctuary, 
which  our  jealous  pride  keeps  closed  against  God,  whom  we  receive  as  our  last  resource. 
But  when  we  become  really  weak  and  despair  of  ourselves,  the  power  of  God  expands 
itself  through  all  our  inner  man,  even  to  the  most  secret  recesses,  filling  us  with  all 
the  fulness  of  God  "  (A.  Monod).  (2)  To  produce  in  us  humility  and  submission,  to 
excite  us  to  fervent  prayer,  and  to  strengthen  and  perfect  our  faith.  (3)  To  afford 
occasion  for  a  more  impressive  manifestation  of  his  power  and  grace.  3.  How 
completely  it  has  been  adapted  to  our  need  and  accomplished  our  deliverance.  Here 
we  are  this  day,  after  the  trouble  and  conflict,  ourselves  monuments  of  his  mercy  I 
"  We  went  through  fire  and  through  water:  but  thou  broughtest  us  out  into  a  wealthy 
place  "  (Deut.  viii.  2  ;  Ps.  Ixvi.  12  ;  Ixxvii.  lO  ;  Acts  xxvi.  22). 

II.  In  grateful  recognition  of  Divine  help.  Looking  upward  to  heaven,  let  na 
reflect — 1.  How  plainly  the  Source  of  our  deliverance  now  appears.  "  Hitherto  hath 
the  Lord  helped  us."  "Not  with  thy  sword,  nor  with  thy  bow"  (Josh.  xxiv.  12). 
His  arm  alone  has  brought  salvation  nigh.  We  see  it  now  more  clearly  than  we  did 
before,  and  as  we  meditate  upon  it  our  hearts  overflow  with  thankfulness.  We  have 
not  always  recognised  the  Source  of  our  mercies,  and  therefore  often  omitted  to  be 
thankful ;  but  who  can  fail  to  see  these  signal  tokens  of  his  power  ?  "  Not  unto  us," 
4c.  (Ps.  cxv.  1).  2.  How  much  we  owe  to  the  God  of  our  salvation.  Everything. 
3.  How  we  can  best  testify  the  gratitude  of  our  hearts.  "  What  shall  I  render  unto 
the  Lord  ?  "  (Ps.  cxvi.  12).  Loud  songs  of  praise.  Renewed  vows  of  consecration. 
Earnest  written  or  spoken  words  for  God.  Large  gifts  of  what  he  has  given.  Fresh 
acts  of  piety  and  beneficence.     These  shall  be  the  memorial  we  now  set  up. 

III.  As  A  permanent  record  of  Divine  help.  Looking  forward  to  the  future,  let 
us  consider — 1.  How  helpful  the  record  may  ba  to  ourselves  in  times  of  conflict  and 
trial.  For  such  times  will  come ;  we  are  liable  to  forget  what  has  occurred  ;  and  it 
will  remind  us  of  him  who  changes  not,  and  incitft  us  to  faith  and  prayer.  2.  How 
useful  it  may  be  to  others  in  similar  circumstances.  What  he  has  done  for  us  he  can 
do  for  them,  and  seeing  it  they  "  may  take  heart  again."  3.  How  conducive  it  may 
be  to  the  glory  of  God.  As  often  as  we  behold  it  we  shall  be  stirred  to  fresh  thanks- 
giving. When  we  are  gone  it  will  still  endure.  Others  will  gather  around  it,  and 
ask  the  meaning  of  the  "great  stone  which  remaineth  unto  this  day  "  (ch.  vi.  18), 
and,  on  being  told,  will  give  glory  to  God.  So  his  praise  shall  be  perpetuated  from 
generation  to  generation,  until  it  merge  into  the  anthem  of  heaven. 

Conclusion. — 1.  Let  us  be  thankful  for  the  memorials  of  Divine  help  which  others 
have  left  for  our  benefit.  They  are  among  the  greatest  treasures  the  earth  contains, 
•nd  meet  our  view  wherever  we  turn.  2.  Let  us  do  something  to  add  to  these 
treasures,  and  further  enrich  the  earth.  3.  Above  all,  let  us  seek  to  be  ourselves 
the  everlasting  monuments  of  the  Divine  power  and  grace. — D. 

Vers.  15 — 17.  (Ramah,  Bethel,  Gilgal,  Mizpah.) — Samuel  the  judge.  The  "judges  " 
«f  Israel  were  deliverers  from  oppression,  leaders  in  war,  perpetual  dictators  in 
national  affairs,  and  supreme  arbiters  in  judicial  matters.  "  All  that  was  greatest 
in  those  times  was  certainly  due  to  them,  and  some  of  their  names  shine  eternally 
like  bright  stars  in  the  long  night  of  a  troubled  age  "  (Ewald,  '  History ').  Of  these 
judges  Samuel  was  the  last  and  greatest.  His  superiority  appears  in  —  1.  The 
tharactM  he  possessed.     He  was  free  from  the  vices  into  which  some  of  the  mos^ 


IM  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [CB.  vn.  1—17 

distingniahed  amongst  them  fell,  and  surpassed  them  in  the  virtnea  they  exhibited. 
He  had  higher  conceptions  of  God  and  his  law,  held  more  intimate  communion  with 
him,  and  was  altogether  of  a  nobler  type  of  human  excellence.  His  constant  aim 
was  to  do  the  will  of  God ;  he  was  upright  in  heart  and  life,  humble,  patient,  gener- 
ous, and  full  of  disinterested  zeal  and  holy  energy  in  seeking  the  true  welfare  <a  men. 
In  these  respects  he  approached  as  nearly,  perhaps,  as  any  of  the  servants  of  God 
under  the  old  covenant  the  perfection  of  him  who  was  "without  sin."  2.  The 
method  he  pursued.  As  he  efEected  the  deliverance  of  Israel  not  by  the  sword, 
but  by  "  the  word  of  God  and  prayer,"  so  he  continued  to  make  use  of  die  same 
means  as  the  most  efEective  in  preserving  their  liberty  and  increasing  their  strength 
and  happiness.  His  method  was  moral  rather  than  physical.  He  taught  them  "to 
do  justly,  love  mercy,  and  walk  humbly  with  their  God  "  (Micah  vi.  8).  His  poKcy 
was  one  of  peace,  and  he  relied  on  God  to  restrain  the  aggression  of  surroimding 
nations,  and  afford  protection  against  their  attacks.  Nor  was  his  trust  misplaced. 
3.  The  work  he  accomplished.  Idolatry,  which  was  rebellion  against  the  Divine 
King,  was  banished.  The  principles  of  the  theocracy  were  confirmed.  Order,  justice, 
and  peace  were  established ;  and  closer  unity  prevailed  among  the  tribes,  based 
npon  their  common  loyalty  to  their  King.  "  This  was  the  great  achievement  and 
crowning  point  of  his  service  to  Israel  and  the  God  of  Israel ;  the  scattered  and  dis- 
united tribes  became  again  a  nation.  The  rival  tribes  Ephraim  and  Judah  make 
common  cause  against  the  common  enemy,  and  the  more  distant  tribes  do  not  seem 
to  withhold  their  allegiance  "  (Milman).  The  labours  of  Samuel  as  judge  are  here 
summed  up  in  a  few  sentences,  suggestive  of  some  things  wherein  he  was  an  in- 
structive example  to  rulers,  statesmen,  magistrates,  and  "all  that  are  in  authority." 
Notice — 

I.  His  supbemk  concebn  fob  belioion.  Samuel  was  first  a  prophet,  then  a  "  faith- 
ful priest,"  finally  a  ruler  and  judge.  "  His  judicial  work  not  only  proceeded  from 
the  prophetical,  but  was  constantly  guided  by  it.  For  we  may  presume  not  only 
that  he.  gave  legal  decisions  with  prophetical  wisdom,  but  also  that,  in  general,  he 
conducted  the  affairs  of  the  people  as  a  man  who  had  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord '" 
(Nagelsbach).  At  the  different  places  to  which  "he  went  from  year  to  year  in 
circuit " — Bethel,  Gilgal,  and  Mizpah — ^he  probably  taught  the  word  of  God  and  offered 
sacrifice,  combining  his  prophetic  and  priestly  with  his  judicial  work.  At  Ramah 
he  built  an  altar  to  the  Lord,  "  testifying  thereby  the  power  from  which  alone  he 
could  receive  either  the  authority  or  wisdom  to  judge."  The  position  of  Samuel 
was  peculiar,  and  his  work  unusually  comprehensive ;  but  it  may  be  observed  of 
every  good  civil  magistrate  that — 1.  He  is  qualified  for  his  ofiBce  by  his  possession  of 
reverence  for  God.  "  He  that  ruleth  over  men  must  be  just,  ruling  in  the  fear  of 
God  "  (2  Sam.  zxiii.  3).  He  feels  his  responsibility  to  the  supreme  King  and  Judge, 
by  whose  providence  he  has  been  placed  in  authority,  and  has  constant  regard  to  his 
will.  2.  His  personal  piety  pervades  his  public  activity.  The  one  is  not  separated 
from  the  other,  but  is  its  animating  spirit,  and  thereby  he  seeks  to  afford  in  his  judg- 
ments a  reflection  of  the  perfect  judgments  of  God.  3.  His  highest  desire,  knowing 
that  "  righteousness  exalteth  a  nation,"  is  to  see  the  people  all  righteous.  That  end, 
he  is  persuaded,  cannot  be  attained  by  force  ;  but,  as  a  godly  man,  he  ever  seeks  it 
by  moral  means  ;  and,  in  his  public  capacity,  he  endeavours  to  do  something  towards 
it  by  restraining  the  violence  of  the  wicked  and  protecting  the  good  in  their  labours 
"  unto  the  kingdom  of  God." 

II.  His  FAITHFUL  ADMINISTRATION  OF  JUSTICE.  In  the  theocracy  the  laws  were 
already  given,  and  Samuel's  judicial  work  consisted  in  arranging  for  their  proper 
administration,  in  which  he  doubtless  availed  himself  of  the  method  formerly 
appointed  (Deut.  xvi.  18 — 20),  reserving  to  himself  the  proper  interpretation  and 
application  of  them  in  more  difficult  and  important  cases.  For  this  purpose  he  went 
to  different  centres  of  the  land  at  stated  times,  and  "  judged  Israel  in  all  those  places." 
He  has  been  not  inappropriately  called  the  Hebrew  Aristides.  Like  him,  the  faithful 
magistrate — 1.  Strives  to  bring  justice  within  easy  reach  of  every  man.  2.  Admin- 
isters it  wisely,  impartially,  fearlesdy,  without  respect  of  persons  (Exod.  rviii.  21, 22  ; 
2  Chron.  xix.  6 — 7  ;  Jer.  xxii.  3).  3.  Devotes  himself  disinterestedly  and  diUgentW 
to  the  common  weal  (oh,  zii.  3).    "  The  Hebrew  judges  wan  not  wtly  lunple  in  theu 


CH.  Tn  1—17.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  IN 

manners,  moderate  in  their  desires,  and  free  from  avarice  and  ambition,  bat  tiiey 
were  noble  and  magnanimous  men,  who  felt  that  whatever  they  did  for  their  country 
was  above  all  reward,  and  could  not  be  recompensed ;  who  desired  merely  to  be 
public  benefactors,  and  chose  rather  to  deserve  well  of  their  country  than  to  be 
enriched  by  its  wealth  "  (Jahn, '  Heb.  Com.,'  sect.  22). 

III.  His  wise  provision  foh  education.  During  the  period  of  his  judgeship 
Samuel  appears  to  have  established  one  or  more  "  schools  of  the  prophets,"  in  which 
he  taught  young  men  sacred  knowledge,  and,  in  connection  with  it,  reading,  writing, 
and  music,  thus  preparing  them  to  give  instruction  to  the  people,  which  the  Levites 
had  failed  to  do  (ch.  x.  10 ;  xix.  20).  So  a  wise  statesman,  seeing  that  "  for  the  soul  to 
be  without  knowledge  is  not  good,"  and  that  "  the  people  are  destroyed  for  lack  of 
knowledge,"  adopts  proper  means  for  the  education  of  the  young,  the  diffusion  of 
knowledge,  and  the  advancement  of  the  race  (Ps.  Ixxviii,  6 — 8).  "  Education  is  the 
debt  which  one  generation  owes  to  another"  (J.  S.  Mill).  The  schools  of  the 
prophets  "  were  hearths  of  spiritual  life  to  Israel.  Their  aim  was  not  to  encourage 
a  contemplative  life  (like  the  cloisters),  but  to  arouse  the  nation  to  activity.  Every 
prophetic  disciple  was  a  missionary  "  (Hengstenberg). 

IV.  His  consistent  conduct  at  home.  "And  his  return  was  to  Ramah;  for 
there  was  his  house;  and  there  he  built  an  altar  unto  the  Lord"  (ver.  17).  There, 
also,  he  continued  his  judicial  labours.  The  faithful  magistrate,  whilst  he  does  not 
allow  his  public  duty  to  interfere  with  proper  attention  to  his  duty  to  his  own  house- 
hold, seeks  to  make  the  latter  helpful  to  the  former.  He  exemplifies  in  his  private  life 
the  conduct  he  openly  commends  to  others,  and  "  walks  in  his  house  with  a  perfect 
heart"  (Ps.  ci.  2).  Though  he  be  not  a  Nazarite,  he  is  simple,  self-denying,  and 
unostentatious  in  his  habits ;  and  though  he  be  not  wealthy,  he  is  kind  to  the  poor, 
hospitable  to  friends  (ch.  ix.  24),  and  liberal  towards  the  Lord  (1  Chron.  xxvi.  28 ;  "  all 
that  Samuel  the  seer  had  dedicated  ").  He  recognises  the  presence  and  claims  of 
God  in  his  home,  sanctifies  it  by  prayer  (Job  i.  6),  endeavours  to  make  it  a  centre 
whence  holy  influences  emanate  to  all,  and  does  all  things  to  the  glory  of  God  (1 
Cor.  X.  31).  "  The  indispensable  basis  afforded  by  the  home  and  its  eternal  sanctity 
no  superior  religion  and  legislation  should  seek  to  destroy,  or  even  to  disturb ;  and, 
on  a  comprehensive  survey,  we  cannot  fail  to  recognise  that  there  is  no  other  ancient 
nation  in  which,  during  the  days  of  external  power,  domestic  life  remained  for  a  long 
period  so  vigorous ;  and,  secondly,  during  the  gradual  decline  of  the  external  power, 
became  so  little  weakened  and  corrupted  as  was  the  case  with  Israel"  (Ewald,.' An- 
tiquities '). 

V.  His  long  continuance  in  office.  "  And  Samuel  judged  Israel  all  the  days 
of  his  life  "  (ver.  15).  "  Simple  words,  but  what  a  volume  of  tried  faithfulness  is 
unrolled  by  them  I "  He  pursued  his  course  till  he  was  "  old  and  gray-headed  "  (oh. 
xii.  2) — nearly  twenty  years  from  the  victory  of  Ebenezer.  The  appointment  of  a  fang 
relieved  him  of  a  portion  of  the  burden  ;  but  he  still  continued  to  exercise  his  pro- 
phetic office,  and,  "  as  last  judge,  he  held  in  his  hands  the  highest  control  of  the 
theocracy  and  the  kingdom.  He  devoted  his  last  years  to  the  training  of  youthful 
disciples  for  future  service ;  and  when  at  length  he  died,  "  all  the  Israelites  were 
gathered  together,  and  lamented  him,  and  buried  him  in  his  house  at  Ramah"  (ch. 
XXV.  1).  His  protracted  labour  was  an  evidence  of  his  public  spirit,  indomitable 
energy,  and  efficient  service,  and  the  principal  means  of  raising  the  Qation  to  its 
subsequent  power  and  glory. — O. 

EXPOSITION. 
Saul  (ohs.  tiii. — xxxi.). 

ation  of  our  Lord,  namely,  prophecy  and  the 
kingdom.  The  first  seven  chapters  give  as 
the  history  of  Samuel's  birth,  and  of  the 
gradual  development  in  him  of  those  spiritual 
powers  which  finally  made  him  not  merely 


CHAPTER  VIII. 


Thb  great  interest  of  the  First  Book  of 
Samus!  lies  in  the  fact  that  we  have  ir  tt  the 
orderly  consolidation  of  two  of  the  main 


factors  in  tn*  preparation  tor  tne  manitest-  j  a  prophet,  bnt  the  founder  of  piopnecy  as  a 


140 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


[OB.  Tm.  1— n, 


pennanent  »nd  regnkrly-organised  institn- 
tion  of  the  Jewish  Church.     The  whole  of 
the  rest  of  the  book,  while  adding  many 
interesting  particulars  ahout  Samuel,  is  occu- 
pied with  the  establishment  of  the  kingdom 
and  with  Saul.     We  have  in  him,  both  in 
his  uprise  and  his  fall,  one  of  the  most  re- 
markable personages  of  the  Old  Testament 
But  his  character  for  good  and  for  evil  will 
develop  itself  as  we  proceed.      Before,  how- 
ever, we   can   appreciate  his  history,  it  is 
necessary  for  us  to  understand  something  of 
the  vast   issues    that  depended  upon    the 
change  of  government  effected  in  his  person. 
With  Samuel,  then,  and  Saul  we  have  come 
to  the  time  when  the  prophet  and  the  king 
take  their  due  place  in  the  development  of 
Israel     They  were  both  essential  to  its  pro- 
gress, and  the  accomplishment  of  its  Divine 
mission,   and    in  Deut.    xvii.    14 — 20,  and 
again  ibid,  xxviii.  36,  the  establishment  of 
llie  monarchy  is  spoken  of  as  a  virtual  neces- 
sity.    It  was  not  Israel's  highest  ideal,  far 
fiom  it     Had  religion  been  as  far  advanced 
as  in  the  days  of  Ilczekiah  and  Isaiah,  the 
theocracy  might  bave  existed  in  such  a  form 
as  would  have  insureil  the  national  safety. 
But  such  as  the  people  were  in  the  centuries 
which  followed  the  conquest  of  Canaan,  it 
was  rather  a  high  and  glorious  idea  than  ■ 
fact  capable  of  being  realised.     It  was  one 
of  those  magnificent  thoughts  which  raised 
the   Israelites  so   high  above  the  level  of 
ordinary  nations,  and  gave  such  grandeur 
and  nobleness  to  the  long  struggle  of  their 
history  ;  but  it  was  a  thought,  the  value  of 
which  lay  in  its  giving  them  a  future,  to- 
wards which  their  faces  were  ever  turned, 
and  which,  by  the  sublimity  of  its  concep- 
tion, ever  drew  them  onwards  and  upwards 
to  all  that  was  best  and  most  Pivine. 

To  be  then  Jehovah's  own  subjects,  ruled 
directly  by  him,  a  republic  with  Jehovah  for 
its  chief,  and  its  officers  speaking  at  his  com- 
mand, and  under  his  direct  influence  and 
control — this  was  Israel's  grand  ideal.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  it  did  not  give  them  peace  at 
home  nor  security  from  foreign  invasion.  It 
did  not  even  enable  them  to  advance  in  the 
path  of  culture  or  morality,  nor  did  it  so 
work  as  to  bind  the  twelve  tribes  together 
into  a  harmonious  whole.  Throughout  the 
Book   of  Judges  we  find   the   recoici   of  a 


desperate  struggle  in  which  Israel  again  and 
again  is  in  danger  of  being  utterly  destroyed 
from  among  the  nations,  and  at  the  end  af 
this  period  the  Philistines  are  the  dominant 
power,  and  Israel  is  disarmed  and  virtually 
at  their  mercy.  The  cause  of  this  was  that 
somehow  or  other  the  priests  and  Levites 
were  unable  to  prevent  the  people  from  laps- 
ing into  idolatry,  and  though  upon  their 
repentance  Jehovah,  as  their  King,  did  on 
every  emergency  raise  men  to  be  their 
saviours,  yet  the  system  was  too  cumbrous 
and  exceptional  for  ordinary  times.  It  was 
only  in  times  of  trouble  that  the  nation 
roused  itself  to  the  conviction  that  it  was 
Jehovah's  realm,  and  fought  with  the  hero- 
ism which  so  grand  a  thought  must  give  it ; 
at  other  times  it  sank  down  each  day  to  a 
lower  level,  till  all  that  the  last  judge,  Sam- 
son, could  do  was  to  arouse  the  national  spirit 
to  a  prolonged  resistance  and  a  last  effort 
against  the  dangers  and  difficulties  that  were 
threatening  Israel  with  gradual  extinction 
(see  on  ch.  i  8), 

This  powerlessness  in  war  was  the  in- 
evitable result  of  having  no  settled  ordinary 
ruler,  whose  business  it  was  to  convoke  the 
national  forces,  and  provide  for  the  general 
safety  ;  but  it  was  by  no  means  the  worst 
evil  attendant  in  practice  upon  the  theocracy. 
In  the  three  last  chapters  of  the  Book  of 
Judges  we  have  the  history  of  a  feaiful 
crime,  punished  with  equally  fearful  cruelty. 
What  makes  it  the  more  remarkable  is  that 
it  took  place  in  the  days  of  Phinehas,  the 
grandson  of  Aaron,  at  a  time  when  the 
public  morality  stUl  stood  high,  and  religion 
had  great  influence  over  the  people.  Now, 
had  there  been  a  king  he  would  have 
punished  the  malefactors,  as  a  matter  of 
course ;  but  when  it  had  to  be  done  by  an 
extraordinary  gathering  of  the  people  in 
arms,  the  Benjamites,  always  a  high-spirited 
tribe,  imagined  themselves  bound  in  honour 
to  resist  an  invasion  of  their  tenitory,  and  a 
violent  civil  war  was  the  result  So  em- 
bittered did  the  feelings  of  the  Israelites 
become  at  the  brave  defence  of  the  Benja- 
mites, that  when  at  last  they  had  over- 
powered them,  they  burned  their  cities  with 
fire,  and  put  men,  women,  children,  and 
cattle  to  an  indiscriminate  slaughter.  Re- 
penting soon  afterwards  of  their  revolting 


OH.  Tin.  1—22.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


141 


emelty,  they  treated  the  men  of  Jabesh- 
GUead  with  almost  equal  violence,  on  the 
pretence  of  their  not  having  taken  part  in 
the  war,  but  really  to  provide  the  remaining 
Beigamites  with  wives.  Now,  both  at  the 
beginning  and  end  of  this  narrative,  it  ia 
carefully  pointed  out  that  all  this  crime  and 
cruelty  was  the  result  of  the  state  of  anarchy 
which  everywhere  prevailed.  "  In  those  days 
there  was  no  king  in  Israel !  every  man  did 
that  which  was  right  in  his  own  eyes  "  (Judges 
ixi  25).  There  was  no  regular  administra- 
tion of  justice,  no  person  whose  business  it 
was  to  maintain  law  and  order,  no  one  whose 
authority  kept  malefactors  in  awe,  and  who, 
when  a  crime  had  been  committed,  would 
punish  it  in  a  regular  manner,  and  with  the 
general  approval  of  all  parties  ;  and  so  every 
species  of  villainy  could  be  practised  with 
impunity,  until  the  patience  of  the  com- 
munity was  exhausted,  and  it  visited  the 
ofiendeiB  with  a  violence  so  summary  as  to 
make  it  repent  afterwards  of  its  own  cruelty. 
The  position  of  these  three  chapters,  im- 
mediately preceding  in  the  Hebrew  the  Books 
of  Samuel  (for  the  insertion  of  the  Book  of 
Ruth  is  a  modem  attempt  at  a  chronological 
arrangement),  seems  intended  to  point  out 
that  the  king  was  as  absolutely  necessary  for 
the  well-being  of  the  Hebrew  commonwealth 
as  he  was  essential  for  the  perfecting  of  the 
Messianic  idea.  It  is  in  Christ's  kingdom 
that  the  theocracy  becomes  a  realised  fact, 
and  Christ  is  above  all  things  a  King.  Now 
in  Israel  the  King  was  emphatically  the 
Anointed  One,  i.  e.  the  Messiah  or  Christ  (ch. 
ii  10,  35  ;  z.  1  ;  xii.  3,  &o. ).  True  it  is  that 
in  Christ  all  offices  must  be  united,  and  he 
must  be  a  Priest  to  make  atonement  and  a 
Prophet  to  teach  as  well  as  a  King  to  rule  ; 
yet  we  find  in  Israel,  as  the  type  of  Christ's 
kingdom,  that  priest  and  prophet  stood  at 
the  king's  beck.  In  Solomon  we  have  the 
delineation  of  Israel's  king  in  his  fall  power 
and  glory  ;  and  we  find  him  thrusting  out 
Abiathar  from  being  high  priest  (1  Kings  ii. 
21),  appointing  the  order  of  service  for  the 
priests  and  Levites  (2  Chron.  viii.  14),  and 
having  the  prophets  in  attendance  upon  him 
to  record  his  noble  deeds  {ibid.  ix.  29).  To 
Solomon's  reign  the  Israelites  ever  looked 
back  as  giving  the  ideal  of  what  their 
"anointed  one"  should  be,  and  onward  they 


looked  to  the  coming  of  One  who  should  per- 
fect this  ideal,  and  instead  of  staining  it 
with  sin,  as  Solomon  did,  should  raise  it  to 
the  full  and  vast  dimensions  of  Israelite 
thought.  Most  painful  must  it  have  been 
to  the  nation  that  each  one  of  its  first  three 
kings,  though  rising  every  one  far  above  the 
level  of  ordinary  men,  yet  fell  so  very  far 
short  of  their  ideal  And  then  came  the 
rent  in  the  kingdom,  and  an  ideal  king  was 
possible  no  longer. 

But  the  prophets  kept  the  thonght  ever 
alive  in  the  hearts  of  the  people,  and  in  the 
fulness  of  time  the  Messiah  came.  Mean- 
while the  establishment  of  the  earthly 
monarchy  was  an  essential  condition  for  the 
security,  the  continuance,  and  the  develop- 
ment of  Israel.  Without  a  king  Israel  could 
never  have  performed  its  work  of  preparing 
for  Christ.  Even  the  organisation  of  prophecy 
was  delayed  tm  there  was  a  king,  because 
when  a  nation  has  to  fight  for  its  very  exist- 
ence there  is  no  room  for  a  literary  and 
educated  order  of  men.  Learning  would 
have  died  out  in  the  middle  ages  had  there 
not  been  cloisters  into  which  men  who  loved 
mental  culture  might  retire.  Still  it  was 
not  this  which  made  the  people  cling  so 
tenaciously  to  the  hope  held  out  to  them  by 
Moses,  but  the  daily  vexation  of  PhiliHine 
misrule.  And  what  the  Philistines  were  to 
them  now  aU  the  neighbouring  nations  had 
previously  been  in  turn.  Throughout  the 
Book  of  Judges  we  find  a  state  of  things 
described  from  which  aU  thoughtful  men 
must  have  desired  deliverance,  and  the  few 
exceptions,  as  when  they  flourished  for  a 
time  under  the  strong  hand  of  Gideon,  only 
served  to  bring  out  the  contrast  more  clearly 
between  times  when  they  had  a  ruler  and 
times  when  they  had  none.  We  need  not 
wonder,  therefore,  at  the  persistency  with 
which  the  people  urged  their  demand,  even 
after  the  dark  pictiures  which  Samuel  had 
drawn  of  what  a  king  might  become  if  he 
degenerated  into  a  tyrant.  But  our  admira- 
tion is  due  to  the  patriotism  and  generosity 
which  made  this  noble-minded  man  grant 
their  request,  though  he  knew  that  he  there* 
by  limited  his  own  powers,  and  gave  hia 
sons  an  inferior  place.  So  also  had  Mosei 
done  before.  While  he  gave  Aaron  high  ind 
perpetoal  office,  he  let  his  own  family  fall 


142 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[CH.  VIII.  1— 2t. 


back  into  the  position  of  ordinary  Israelites. 
And,  moreover,  the  king  whom  Samnel 
chose  was  a  grand  hero,  though,  like  so  many 
men  gifted  with  great  powers  of  command,  he 
fell  through  that  self-will  which  is  the  be- 
setting sin  of  ruling  natures.  Few  men  can 
endure  the  trial  of  the  possession  of  absolute 
power,  and  least  of  all  those  endowed  with 
an  energetic  and  resolute  temperament.  It 
is  •  noble  testimony  that  David  bears  to 


Saul  and  his  heroic  son  in  the  "  Song  of  tkt 
Bow"  (2  Sam.  i  19—27):  "mighty"  they 
were,  and  "the  beauty  of  Israel,"  though 
Saul  marred  his  gloiy  by  great  and  ruinous 
faults.  "With  Saul,  then,  the  rest  of  the  book 
is  occupied,  and  it  divides  itself  into  two 
parts — (1)  the  founding  and  establishment  of 
Saul's  kingdom  (chs.  viiL — zr.) ;  and  (2)  its 
gradual  decay  and  final  fall  (chi.  zvi — zzzi  )l 


The  Establishment  of  Saul's  Kinodom  (ohb.  Tin. — it.). 


BxraonoN  of  Samuel's  sons  (vers.  1 — 5). 
Ver.  1. — ^When  Samuel  was  old.  As  Samuel 
lived  for  very  many  years  after  this  time, 
till  towards  the  close  of  Saul's  reign,  he  was 
probably  not  more  than  sixty  when  this 
happened.  The  dates  are  all  very  uncertain, 
but  he  was  probably  between  twenty  and 
thirty  when  Shiloh  was  captured,  and  no 
doubt,  according  to  Israelite  custom,  had 
married  as  soon  as  he  arrived  at  manhood. 
Then  came  the  most  important  and  active 
period  of  his  life,  during  which  the  ark 
rested  for  twenty  years  in  the  house  of 
Abinadab,  and  Samuel  was  traversing  every 
part  of  the  country,  preaching  repentance, 
and  preparing  the  people  for  a  revolt  from 
the  tyranny  of  the  Philistines.  Upon  this 
followed  the  victory  at  Mizpah,  and  the 
establishment  of  Samuel  as  judge.  Now 
some  considerable  time  would  elapse  before 
Samuel  so  felt  the  weight  of  increasing  years 
as  to  delegate  a  part  of  his  authority  to  his 
sons,  and  more  again  before  the  national  dis- 
content at  their  covetousness  became  general. 
The  Talmud,  however,  represents  Samuel  as 
being  at  this  time  only  fifty-two  years  of 
ago,  while  Abravanel  says  seventy,  and  the 
latter  number  is  by  no  means  impossible ; 
for  as  a  Nazarite  Samuel  would  lead  a  life 
of  perfect  temperance,  and  his  predecessor 
Eli  lived  to  be  ninety-eight,  and  died  then 
by  an  accident.  Still,  probably,  Abravanel's 
calculation  is  too  high,  and  we  must  remem- 
ber that  besides  the  misconduct  of  Samuel's 
sons,  there  was  the  growing  danger  of  the 
re-establishment  of  the  domination  of  the 
Philistines  to  quicken  the  people's  move- 
ments. They  had  garrisons  again  in  Israel 
when  Saul  was  chosen  king,  and  it  was  this 
which  made  the  nation  long  for  a  change,  but 
their  choice  would  probably  have  fallen  upon 
one  of  Samuel's  sons  had  either  of  them  been 
worthy.  A  king  they  had  long  wished  for  ; 
it  is  only  when  they  saw  that  none  of  Samuel's 
race  would  give  them  internal  peace  and 
security  that  they  took  public  action  for  the 
appointment  of  som%  one  else. 

Ver.  2. — The  name  of  his  firstborn  was 
JfoeL  The  names  of  Samuel's  sons  are  pledges 


of  his  faith — Joel  meaning  Jtihovah  it  God, 
and  Abiah  Jah  it  Father.  The  name  given 
in  1  Chron.  vl  28,  Vashni,  is  a  mistake. 
It  means,  "and  the  second,"  the  name  of 
Joel  the  firstborn  having  somehow  been 
omitted.  The  names  of  Saul's  sons,  and 
even  of  Jonathan's,  unlike  those  in  Samuel's 
family,  bear  witness  to  their  religion  having 
been  of  a  curiously  mixed  character.  In 
Beer-sheba.  Not,  therefore,  in  any  of  the 
places  to  which  Samuel  went  in  person,  and 
which  were  all  near  Ramah,  his  home.  Beer- 
sheba  was  in  the  extreme  south  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah  (see  on  Gen.  xxi  31),  on  the  Philis 
tine  border,  and  his  being  able  to  place  his 
sons  there  in  authority  proves,  not  merely 
that  his  rule  was  acknowledged  throughout 
the  whole  country,  but  also  that  the  Philis- 
tines did  not  interfere  much  with  the  internal 
arrangements  of  the  Israelites.  Josephus 
('  Antiq.,'  vi  3,  2)  represents  only  one  son 
as  placed  at  Beer-sheba,  and  says  that  the 
other  was  judge  at  Dan,  but  it  may  be 
doubted  whether  the  northern  tribes  were 
sufftciently  under  control  to  submit  to  be 
governed  by  a  southern  judge. 

Ver.  3.— His  sons  .  .  .  took  bribei.  This 
sin  was  expressly  forbidden  in  Exod.  zxiii 
6,  8  ;  Deut.  xvi  19,  and  it  marks_  the  high 
spirit  of  the  nation  that  it  was  so  indignant 
at  justice  being  thus  perverted.  They  walked 
not  in  his  way  (singular — so  the  written 
text) ;  for  Samuel's  own  administration  of 
justice  had  been  most  upright  (ch.  xii.  4), 
nor  is  it  laid  to  his  charge  that  he  connived 
at  the  misconduct  of  his  sons.  On  the  con- 
trary, after  remonstrance  indeed,  not  for  his 
sons'  sake,  but  for  the  honour  of  the  theo- 
cracy, and  that  the  people  m^t  be  on  their 
guard  against  a  despotic  exercise  of  the  power 
with  which  they  were  about  to  intrust  a 
single  man,  he  superseded  not  them  only,  but 
also  himself.  His  conduct  in  this  trying 
conjuncture  was  most  admirable,  and  few 
commentators  have  done  justice  to  the  man, 
who,  possessed  of  what  was  virtually  kinglv 
power,  yet  gave  it  over  for  the  nation's  good 
into  the  hands  of  another. 

Vers.  4,  5.  —The  elders  of  Israol.    Here,  a« 


CH.  viii.  1 — 22.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


143 


elgewbete  (1  Sam.  zv.  SO ;  2  Sam.  v.  3  ; 
1  Kings  viii.  3,  &c.),  we  have  traces  of  a 
popular  assembly,  representing  the  Israelite 
nation,  and  composed  probably  of  the  chie& 
and  heads  of  fathers-houses.  Already  in 
Egypt  (Exod.  iii.  16,  &c.)  we  find  some 
such  body  in  existence,  and  it  seems  to 
have  lasted  throughout  the  whole  history  of 
the  nation  ;  for  it  outlived  the  monarchy, 
gained  increased  power  after  the  exile,  and 
continued  down  to  New  Testament  times. 
The  demand,  therefore,  for  a  king,  though  a 
sort  of  revolt  against  Samuel's  authority,  was 
at  least  made  in  a  constitutional  manner, 
and  came  before  him  yiith  all  the  weight  of 
n  formal  decision  on  the  part  of  the  repre- 
sentatives of  the  nation.  They  put  it  also 
in  the  form  of  a  request,  for  which  they  give 
two  reasons.  First,  the  decay  of  his  physical 
powers  —  Behold,  thou  art  old.  Wise  and 
vigorous  as  his  rule  had  been,  yet  with  in- 
creasing years  there  was  less  of  energy  ;  and 
the  events  recorded  as  having  occurred  at 
the  beginning  of  Saul's  reign  show,  that  in 
order  to  check  the  increasing  power  of  the 
Philistines,  a  leader  was  needed  who  was  at 
once  daring,  resolute,  and  skilful  in  war. 
But  there  was  a  further  reason — Thy  sons 
walk  not  In  thy  ways.  These  words  show 
that  the  elders  had  the  most  perfect  confid- 
ence in  SamueL  They  felt  that  he  would 
not  connive  at  the  wickedness  of  his  sons, 
but  would  do  what  was  right  by  the  nation. 
Thus  they  had  everything  to  hope  from 
the  father's  justice,  while  if  they  waited  till 
his  death  the  sons  might  resist  what  was 
virtually  their  deposition.  That  the  sons 
of  a  judge  possessed  considerable  power  see 
Judges  ix.-  2.  Stake  us  a  king  to  judge 
ns  Uke  all  the  nations.  7.  e.  just  as  all  the 
heathen  nations  have  a  king.  The  words 
are  those  of  Deut.  xvii.  14,  and  were  probably 
intended  to  remind  Samuel  that  the  nation 
was  only  asking  what  had  virtually  been 
promised 

Ver.  6. — Bnt  the  thing  displeased  Samuel, 
and  justly  so.  Foi",  in  the  first  place,  they 
had  determined  to  have  a  king  without 
consulting  the  will  of  God.  Granting  that 
it  would  give  them  the  security  necessary 
for  the  nation's  welfare  and  progress,  yet  so 
weighly  a  matter  ought  not  to  have  been 
decided  without  an  appeal  to  Jehovah. 
Samuel  did  make  it  a  matter  of  prayer ; 
the  elders  were  actuated  solely  by  political 
motives.  And,  secondly,  they  undervalued 
their  own  religions  privileges.  They  wanted 
a  king  such  as  the  heathen  had,  whereas 
something  far  better  and  higher  was  possible 
for  them,  namely,  a  king  who  would  be  the 
representative  of  Jehovah,  as  the  shophet 
had  hitherto  been.  The  nation's  real  need 
was  not  a  new  power,  but  the  permanent 
oigaiiiBation  of  what  np  to  this  time  had 


been  a  casual  anthority.  And  it  was  Samuel'i 
high  office  to  give  the  nation  this,  while  he 
also  changed  the  outward  form  of  prophecy, 
and  made  it  too  into  an  orderly  institution. 
A  king  to  judge  us.  7.  e.  to  govern  us,  as 
the  shophet  or  judge  had  done,  only  in  a 
more  regularly  •  constituted  manner.  And 
Samuel  prayed  unto  Jehovah.  There  had 
been  no  such  submission  to  the  will  of  God 
on  the  part  of  the  elders ;  but  deeply  as 
Samuel  must  have  been  hurt  by  this  deter- 
mination of  the  nation  to  take  the  govern  • 
ment  out  of  the  hands  of  himself  and  his  sons, 
yet  he  leaves  the  decision  to  Jehovah.  More- 
over, we  must  note  that  it  was  as  prophet 
that  he  thus  acted  as  mediator  between  the 
people  and  God  ;  and  he  gave  them  his  ser- 
vices in  this  his  highest  capacity  as  faith- 
fully when  the  question  was  one  injurious  to 
himself  as  he  had  ever  done  on  more  pleasing 
occasions. 

Ver.  7. — In  prayer  then  the  answer  came  to 
him  that  the  request  of  the  people  must  be 
granted,  however  wrongly  it  had  been  urged. 
In  itself  it  was  wrong ;  for  they  have  not 
rejected  thee,  bnt  they  have  rejected  me, 
that  I  should  not  reign  over  them.  As  we 
saw  above,  they  wanted  no  theocratic  king, 
whose  first  duty  would  be  to  maintain  the 
Mosaic  law  (Deut.  xviL  18,  19),  and  protect 
the  priest  and  prophet  in  the  discharge  of 
their  legitimate  functions ;  all  they  wanted 
was  a  soldier  who  would  put  an  end  to  their 
state  of  anarchy,  and  enable  them  to  culti- 
vate their  fields  without  the  danger  of  seeing 
the  produce  swept  off  by  marauders. 

Vers.  8,  9. ^According  to  all  the  works, 
&C.  They  showed  in  this  the  same  want  of 
respect  and  affection  for  their  own  institu- 
tions and  religious  privileges  which  bad 
marked  all  their  history  since  the  day  when 
Jehovah  brought  them  up  out  of  Egypt. 
And  therefore  Samuel  was  to  protest  solemnly 
unto  them,  and  show  them.  The  two  verbs 
do  not  mean  different  things,  bnt  the  same. 
"  To  protest "  is  to  testify,  to  bear  witness, 
and  warn  them  of  the  danger  they  were 
incurring.  And  as  they  were  asking  not 
for  the  development  and  perfecting  of  their 
own  institutions,  but  for  a  government 
modelled  upoi^the  institutions  of  the  heathen 
round  them,  Samuel  shows  what  are  the 
dangers  inherent '  in  the  establishment  of  a 
despot  such  as  the  kings  of  the  heathen 
were.  As  a  rule  the  kings  of  Judaea  did  not 
resemble  the  picture  drawn  by  Samuel,  but 
in  spite  of  many  blemishes  remained  true  to 
their  allegiance  to  Jehovah  as  the  snpreme 
Euler  of  9ie  nation,  and  confined  themselves 
within  the  limits  marked  out  for  them  liy 
the  Mosaic  law.  Now  thereforo,  at  the 
beginning  of  the  verse,  is  in  the  Hebrew 
simply  "And  now."  There  is  no  inference 
implied  in  it. 


144 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


[OH.  vin.  1 — 22 


Ver.  11. — This  will  be  the  manner  of  the 
king.  On  the  meaning  of  this  word  see  eh. 
ii.  13.  Here  also  it  signifies  not  so  much 
the  legal  right  itself,  as  the  way  in  which 
that  right  was  exercised.  His  chariots.  The 
word  is  singular,  both  here  and  at  the  end  of 
the  verse,  and  though  it  may  be  taken,  as 
in  the  A.  V.,  for  a  collective  noun,  "his 
chariotiy,"  yet  the  singular  is  better,  because 
this  verse  does  not  refer  to  war,  but  to  the 
personal  magnificence  and  grandeur  of  the 
king.  Instead  of  the  old  simplicity  in 
which  the  judges  had  lived,  he  would  have  a 
state  chariot  (see  2  Kings  ix.  21),  and  go 
forth  escorted  by  horsemen  and  runners  on 
foot.  To  be  his  horsemen.  Rather,  "upon 
his  horses."  The  whole  clause  should  be 
translated,  "  And  he  will  set  them  for  him 
{i.  e.  for  hia  Berrioe)  upon  his  chariot  and 
on  his  horses ;  and  they  will  run  before  his 
chariot." 

Ver.  12. — Captains  over  thousands,  and 
captains  over  fifties.  The  largest  and  small- 
est divisions  respectively  of  an  Israelite  army. 
However  objectionable  the  king's  personal 
state  might  be,  this  would  fall  in  with  the 
people's  wishes,  for  it  would  give  them  the 
promise  of  a  well-organised  army.  Not  so 
the  next  clause,  to  ear — i.  e.  to  plough — his 
ground.  Forced  labour  was  one  of  the  most 
unjust,  oppressive,  and  wasteful  exactions  of 
absolute  governments,  and  was  the  chief 
cause  of  the  revolt  of  the  ten  tribes  from 
Rehoboam  (comp.  1  Kings  v.  13 — 16  ;  xii. 
4).  And  yet  it  was  the  universal  rule  in 
ancient  times,  and  in  some  countries  it  has 
continued  even  to  the  present  day  to  be  the 
law  that  the  peasants  must  at  certain  seasons 
give  their  labour  unpaid  either  to  the  pro- 
prietors or  to  the  state.  Naturally,  for  a 
nation  of  agriculturists  to  have  to  leave  their 
own  fields  just  when  their  presence  at  home 
was  most  needed  to  plough  the  king's  ground 
and  reap  his  harvest  would  be  a  bitter  annoy- 
ance, because  to  the  loss  would  be  added  a 
sense  of  wrong.  How  detenninately  a  high- 
spirited  nation  like  the  Jews  did  resist  this 
injustice  we  gather  not  merely  from  the  indig- 
nation felt  against  Solomon's  levies,  but  also 
from  the  reproach  cast  in  Jehoiakim's  teeth 
by  Jeremiah,  that  "  he  used  his  neighbour's 
service  without  wages,  and 'gave  him  not 
for  his  work  "  (Jer.  xxii.  13).  To  make  his 
instruments  of  war.  Such  work  must  be 
done  ;  but  in  well-organised  states  it  is  paid 
for  by  means  of  taxes,  i.  e.  by  a  money  com- 
pensation in  place  of  personal  service.  In 
semi-barbarous  states  forced  labour  is  used, 
dttd  the  national  arsenals  furnished  at  the 
greatest  possible  expense  and  vexation  to 
those  compelled  to  labour,  and  loss  to  the 
national  resources. 

Vw.  18. — Oonfeotionaries.  Rather,  "  per- 
makeia  of  ointments  and  scents,  of 


which  Orientals  are  excessively  fond.  It  ia 
remarkable  that  Samuel  does  not  mention 
the  far  worse  use  to  which  Solomon  put  their 
daughters  (1  Kings  xL  3),  and  to  a  less  ex- 
tent David  and  some  other  kings. 

Ver.  14. — Your  fields.  The  history  of  the 
seizure  of  Naboth's  vineyard  shows  that  the 
kings  were  not  able  to  exercise  this  arbitrary 
power.  Jezebel  had  to  use  great  art  and 
falsehood  before  she  could  get  possession  ol 
the  coveted  plot  of  ground.  But  through- 
out Samuel  describes  a  despot  ruling  after 
the  fashion  of  heathen  kings  such  as  the 
people  had  desired. 

Ver.  15.— The  tenth.  I.e.  the  king  will 
cost  you  as  much  as  all  the  ordinances  of 
religion.  Still  national  security  would  be 
cheaply  purchased  at  this,  or  even  a  greater 
cost,  if  the  money  were  well  spent ;  but 
Samuel. says  that  the  king  would  lavish  it 
not  on  his  ofBcers,  but  on  his  eunuehg,  those 
miserable  creatures,  so  cruelly  wronged,  and 
generally  so  hateful,  who  ministered  to  the 
pleasures  of  Oriental  kings. 

Ver.  16. — He  will  .  .  .  put  them  to  his 
work.  Again  the  hateful  forced  service,  but 
here  not,  as  in  ver.  12,  of  themselves,  but  of 
their  households.  Instead  of  your  goodliest 
young  men  the  Septuagint  reads,  "  your  best 
oxen,"  which  requires  only  the  change  of 
one  letter,  and  is  in  agreement  with  the  rest 
of  the  verse.  Samuel  would  scarcely  place 
their  choicest  young  men  between  the  female 
slaves  and  the  asses.  But  while  the  ass  was 
used  chiefly  for  riding,  the  ox  was,  as  he 
still  continues  to  be  upon  the  Continent, 
man's  most  faithful  and  valued  friend  and 
fellow-labourer. 

Ver.  17.— His  servants.  Literally,  "his 
slaves."  Under  an  absolute  monarchy  no 
one  is  free. 

.Ver.  18. — Te  shall  cry.  In  despair  at  this 
cruel  oppression  ye  shall  appeal  to  Jehovah, 
but  in  vain.  The  king  was  given  them  at 
their  ovm  request,  •  persisted  in  even  after 
warning,  and  they  must  abide  by  their 
choice.  It  is  worth  noting  that  in  the 
northern  kingdom  a  majority  of  the  kings 
more  or  less  fulfilled  Samuel's  evil  fore- 
bodings, and  there  they  were  much  more 
completely  the  product  of  the  temper  con- 
demned by  the  prophet  than  they  were  in 
Judah.  The  ten  tribes  roughly  snapped  the 
tie  which  bound  them  to  Jehovah  ;  they  dis- 
carded the  ark  and  all  the  services  of  the 
sanctuary,  and  were  content  with  so  poor  an 
imitation  of  them  that  all  piously-disposed 
men  were  compelled  to  abandon  their  lands 
and  migrate  into  Judtea  (2  Chron.  xi.  16) ; 
and  so  the  majority  of  their  kings,  not  being 
held  in  check  by  religious  influences,  were 
tyrants.  At  Jerusalem,  on  the  contrary, 
most  of  them  were  content  to  remain  within 
the  limits  of  the  Mosaic  law,  and  were  upos 


OH.  vm.  1—22.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


14£ 


the  whole  a  series  of  men  far  snperior,  not 
merely  to  the  judges  and  the  monarchs  in 
old  time,  but  to  any  European  dynasty. 

Vera.  19,  20. — The  people  refused  to  obey — 
literally,  to  hearken  to — the  voice  of  Samuel. 
The  words  of  Samuel  were  no  doubt  formally 
considered  by  the  elders,  and  we  may  be  sure 
that  there  would  not  be  wanting  men  to  urge 
attention  and  obedience  to  his  warning  ;  but 
when  the  decision  had  to  be  made,  whether 
by  vote  or  acclamation,  the  majority  persisted 
in  their  choice,  and  for  a  reason  which  com- 
pletely justified  Samuel's  displeasure;  for 
they  say —  That  we  also  may  be  like  all 
the  nations.  Their  wish  was  not  to  develop 
and  perfect  their  own  institutions,  but  to 
revolt  from  them,  and  escape  from  the  rigour 
of  the  Mosaic  law.  It  is  remarkable  that 
their  nearest  neighbours  and  most  inveterate 
enemies,  the  Philistines,  had  no  king,  hut 
an  oligarchy  of  five  princes.  Probably  it 
had  been  argued,  in  the  assembly  of  the 
elders,  that  if  the  whole  power  of  Israel  were 
gathered  into  one  hand  it  would  be  more 
than  a  match  for  the  Philistines,  whose 
energy  must  often  have  been  diminished  by 
discords  among  its  rulers.  That  our  king 
may  judge— f.  e.  govern  (ch.  vil  17) — us,  and 
fight  our  battles.  Here  the  people  had 
reason  on  their,  side.  Both  the  internal 
administration  of  justice  and  the  defence  of 
the  country  would  be  better  managed  under 
a  permanent  and  regular  authority  than 
under  the  judges,  whose  rule  was  extempor- 
ised to  meet  difficulties,  and  had  no  inherent 
stability. 

Ver.  21. — All  the  words.  The  elders  had 
of  course  reported  to  Samuel  all  the  argu- 
ments used  in  the  assembly,  and  just  as 
previously  he  had  carried  his  own  distress  at 
the  national  discontent  with  his  government 
to  Jehovah's  footstool  in  prayer  (ver.  6),  so 


now,  in  his  mediatorial  office  as  prophet,  ha 
carries  thither  the  nation's  petition. 

Ver.  22. — Hearken  unto  their  voice.  The 
Divine  consent  is  now  given  for  the  third 
time  to  their  request  (see  vers.  7,  9).  For 
the  wiU  of  God  ever  leaves  the  will  of  man 
free,  even  when  overruling  it  to  the  canying 
out  of  some  higher  and  fore-ordained  pur. 
pose.  Everything  was  ripe  in  Israel  for  the 
change,  but  it  was  due  to  the  moderation 
and  disinterestedness  of  Samuel  that  the 
revolution  was  made  without  bloodshed  or 
armed  struggle.  Ordinary  rulers  too  often 
resist  a  popular  demand,  and  stem  back  the 
flowing  current  of  thought  till  it  breaks 
through  the  opposing  barrier,  and  sweeps 
with  resistless  violence  all  opposition  away. 
Samuel  yielded,  and  the  nation  trusted  him 
so  thoroughly  that  they  left  the  choice  of 
the  king  entirely  to  him,  pei-mitted  him  to 
settle  the  terms  and  limits  of  the  monarchy, 
or,  as  we  should  say,  to  give  the  nation  a  con- 
stitution (ch.  X.  25),  and  treated  him  through- 
out the  rest  of  his  life  with  the  deepest 
respect.  He  was  deprived  neither  of  his 
prophetic  rank  nor  of  his  judicial  functions, 
for  "  Samuel  judged  Israel  all  the  days  of 
his  life  "  (ch.  vii.  15),  i.  e.  he  remained  to 
the  last  a  co-ordinate  power  by  the  side  of  a 
king  so  self-wiUed  and  energetic  even  as 
SauL  Go  ye  every  man  unto  his  city.  Pru- 
dence forbade  a  hasty  choice.  It  would  be 
well  to  let  the  agitation  subside,  or  otherwise 
some  busy  intriguer  among  the  elders  might 
have  managed  to  get  himself  selected  by  the 
popular  voice.  We  gather  from  ch.  x.  27 
that  there  were  leading  men  who  felt  ag- 
grieved when  the  choice  fell  on  none  of 
them.  But  how  wonderful  ia  the  confidence 
reposed  in  Samuel  by  the  nation,  when  thus 
it  left  to  the  ruler  whom  virtually  it  was 
setting  aside  the  choice  of  the  person  to 
whom  he  should  cede  his  powers. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — Discontent  with  GodT s  methods.  The  facts  are— 1.  In  Samuel's  olu 
age  his  sons,  being  judges  over  Israel,  abiise  their  ofBce  by  accepting  bribes.  2.  Tliis 
fact  is  adduced  by  the  people  as  a  reason  for  asking  Samuel  to  make  them  a  king. 
3.  Samuel  in  his  grief  seeks  oounsel  of  God.  4.  Samuel  is  instructed  to  yield  to  their 
request,  while  protesting  against  it.  6.  The  conduct  of  the  people  is  declared  to  be 
an  expression  of  the  perverse  tendency  characteristic  of  their  history.  The  order  of 
government  imder  which  Israel  was  living  had  received  the  special  sanction  of  God, 
and  had,  also,  grown  naturally  out  of  their  circumstances.  Though  often  sinful  and 
foolish,  it  had  never  before  entered  into  their  minds  to  seek,  apart  from  God,  a  change 
in  the  political  settlement  inljerited  from  the  times  of  Moses.  The  deputation  which 
waited  on  Samuel,  asking  for  a  king,  was  not  the  expression  of  a  sagacious  patriotism, 
or  of  profound  concern  for  the  spiritual  interests  of  the  commonwealth,  and  ultimately 
of  the  world ;  but  of  a  restless  desire  for  what  God  would  give  in  his  own  time,  mingled 
with  a  dissatisfaction  with  the  system  which  God  then  was  sanctioning  (ch.  v.  20, 
21).  Practically,  to  Samuel,  it  meant,  We  can  suggest  and  we  demand  now  a  course 
more  agreeable  to  our  views  of  life  and  our  aspirations  than  that  you  represent 

1  BAH.  I, 


r46  I  HE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  viii.  1—22, 


Samuera  pain  was  acute  and  natural,  and  the  concession  made  to  the  discontented, 
though  apparently  a  breach  in  the  Divine  order,  was  in  keeping  with  God's  usual 
treatment  of  men. 

I.  Discontent  with  God's  methods  and  times  is  vakiouslt  shown.  Men  can 
detect  and  condemn  faults  in  others  which  they  either  do  not  see  or  condone  in  them- 
selves. It  is  possible  for  us,  in  the  light  of  history,  to  dilate  on  the  sin  and  folly  of 
Israel  while  the  same  temper  may  be  manifested  by  us  in  other  forms.  Discontent 
with  God's  methods  and  times  may  appear  in  various  relations.  1.  The  general 
government  of  the  world.  It  is  not  often  said  that  God  has  made  a  mistake  in  con- 
stituting the  moral  and  material  universe  in  such  a  way  that  so  much  sin  and  sufEering 
should  be  possible ;  hut  the  feeling  is  often  entertained  that  it  would  have  been 
well  if  some  other  course  had  been  instituted.  There  is  more  of  this  feeling  lurking 
in  some  hearts  than  is  supposed.  Men  dare  not  face  certain  of  their  mental  operations. 
How  far  the  feeling  affects  theology,  philosophical  theories,  personal  rest  in  God, 
and  fitness  for  doing  the  best  Christian  work,  demands  serious  consideration.  2.  The 
manner  and  form  in  which  revelation  has  been,  conveyed  to  man.  Many  attacks  on 
the  Bible  proceed  from  a  discontent  with  what  is  conceived  to  be  inadequate  to  the 
wants  of  the  world ;  and  in  some  this  feeling  has  generated  the  supposed  discovery 
of  reasons  for  discarding  the  book  as  a  revelation  from  God  at  all.  The  very  primi- 
tive biographical  notices ;  outlines  of  tribal  history  interblended  with  singular  per- 
sonal experiences ;  genealogies  of  uninteresting  names ;  crude  ideas  and  antique 
Dustoms  of  strange  people — all  this  in  connection  with  a  favoured  people,  and  relieved 
by  streaks  of  light  suited  to  men  of  later  times,  does  not  seem  to  he  a  mode  of 
revelation  most  likely  to  survive  the  advancing  intelligence  of  the  world.  It  is  also 
not  the  most  satisfactory  thing  for  so  precious  a  boon  as  a  revelation  to  be  given  in 
,  detached  portions,  to  be  conveyed  originally  to  men  of  one  country,  and  to  be 
characterised  by  a  series  of  supernatural  events.  Men  feel  that  God  has  imposed  a 
hard  task  on  them  to  have  to  defend  and  justify  what  seems  open  to  assault  from 
80  many  sides.  They  wish  it  had  been  his  will  to  have  given  his  light  so  unmixed 
with  an  ancient  human  history  that  the  most  keen  antagonist  would  be  compelled 
to  recognise  its  presence.  To  some  it  really  seems  as  though  the  form  and  origin 
of  the  contents  of  the  Bible  were  a  misfortune.  Of  course  this  discontent,  silent  or 
expressed,  springs  from,  an  imperfect  consideration  of  the  real  naiwre  and  purpart 
of  the  revelation  given,  as  well  as  of  the  inevitable  conditions  of  any  revelation  that 
lias  to  be  coextensive  with  the  wants  of  both  the  first  and  last  ages  of  the  world  ; 
and  that,  moreover,  has  to  be  concentrated  and  verified  in  a  Divine  person  duly 
attested  by  a  contemporary  evidence  harmonious  with  a  chain  of  antecedent  proof. 
It  would  be  useful  to  the  Chui  ch  if  some  one,  dissatisfied  with  the  way  in  which  God 
is  affirmed  to  have  made  known  his  will  to  succeeding  ages,  would  prescribe  the  right 
way.  3.  The  method  of  saving  men  by  atonement.  That  God  does  save  souls  by 
means  of  an  atonement  bearing,  in  some  way,  an  objective  relation  to  his  govern- 
ment, as  well  as  a  moral  relation  to  men's  lives,  is  so  clearly  the  natural  teaching  of 
the  Bible  that  it  can  only  be  eliminated  by  the  adoption  of  a  forced,  »M)m-natural 
interpretation  of  fact  and  statement.  The  discontent  which  some  feel  with  the 
atonement  is  the  reason  for  what  is  manifestly  a  forced  interpretation  of  language. 
Entertaining  the  crude  notion  that  the  atonement  is  a  transaction  affecting  three  dis- 
tinct beings,  forgetful  of  the  pregnant  fact  that  it  was  God  in  Christ  who,  by  sacri- 
fice, effects  redemption,  and  not  considering  well  that  all  the  pain  and  suffering, 
supposed  to  he  imposed  for  the  benefit  of  another,  abide  on  any  theory  for  the 
benefit  of  some  one,  they  prefer  a  system  in  which  pardon  is  based  on  the  merits  of  a 
moral  change  brought  on  by  a  display  of  love  in  the  shame  and  agonies  of  the  cross  I 
4.  The  means  of  perfecting  holiness  in  character.  The  long  and  tedious  process  by 
which  often  the  soul  advances  from  one  degree  of  purity  to  another  awakens  dis- 
satisfaction and  fretfulness.  Why  should  so  blessed  an  issue  as  sanctification  be 
insured  by  sometimes  loss  of  property,  friends,  and  health  ?  Is  it  not  possible  to 
secure  elevation  of  character  apart  from  tribulation?  5.  The  means  used  for  tht 
conversion  of  the  world.  There  is  not  a  more  common  form  of  discontent  than 
this.  The  Apostle  Peter  had  to  contend  with  it  when  he  reminded  his  readers  of  the 
thousand  years  being  with  God  as  one  day.     That  a  religion  demonstrably  Divine, 


n.  rm.  1—22.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  14'! 


destined  to  be  supreme,  so  entirely  conducive  to  the  temporal  as  also  spiritual  interests 
of  all  men,  should  be  slow  in  progress  and  skill  is  a  puzzle  to  many.  Indolence, 
wild  interpretations  of  prophecy,  and  latent  scepticism  are  often  but  indications  of  i 
wish  that  God  had  not-eo  ordained  the  constitution  of  things. 

II.  The  PLEA  FOB  DISCONTENT  IS  PLAUSIBLE.  The  plea  of  the  Israelites  was  that 
Samuel's  sons  were  untrustworthy — the  sources  of  justice  were  corrupt.  The  argu- 
ment, urged  seemed  to  indicate  a  love  of  purity,  concern  for  the  moral  welfare  of 
the  state,  a  fine  sense  of  national  honour,  a  real  advance  from  the  degradation 
which  had  acquiesced  in  the  vices  of  Eli's  sons,  and  an  appreciation  of  Samuel's  own 
character.  But  men  often  pay  homage  to  conscience  by  creating  delusive  arguments 
wherewith  to  set  aside  the  behests  of  conscience.  This  reference  to  the  sons  of 
Samuel  was  only  a  pretext ;  for  the  evil  could  have  been  remedied  by  demanding 
their  removal.  It  is  clear  that  the  plea  was  only  a  cover  for  a  deep  aversion,  a  pre- 
determined plan  to  get  rid  of  the  present  system,  whether  the  prophet  of  God 
approved  or  not.  Nor  is  the  discontent  of  men  with  other  of  the  methods  of  God 
without  apparent  reason.  As  in  Samuel's  time,  so  now,  men  who  cherish  or  express 
uneasiness  with  respect  to  God's  ways  in  the  government  of  the  world  and  revela- 
tion seize  hold  of  some  incident,  some  human  aspect,  some  partial  truth  that  really 
does  not  touch  the  main  issue,  and  make  it  the  cover  for  an  aversion  of  deeper  moral 
origin.  An  everlasting  universal  government  has  only  had  time  to  exhibit  ita  first 
principles,  and  yet  some  transitory  phenomenal  inequalities  are  seized  on  as  grounds  of 
dissatisfaction  with  what  must  be  of  immeasurable  range  and  ceaseless  development. 
From  scattered  incidents  of  which  the  circumstances  are  not  fully  known,  and  from 
forms  of  repreSfentation  suited  to  men  not  blessed  with  full  gospel  light,  the  discon- 
tented draw  a  plea  for  a  revelation  to  the  individual  man  apart  from  Scripture.  To 
a  plain,  unbiassed  mind  an  objective  revelation  and  an  objective  atonement  are  as 
tru]y  facts  as  was  God's  government  by  judges,  and  as  is  his  present  government  of 
the  world  in  spite  of  apparent  inequalities ;  but  earnest  desire  to  86e  the  world  blessed 
with  "  true  ideas  "  and  "  beneficent  influences  "  are  pleas  for  explaining  away  what 
is  very  clear.  The  plea  sounds  well ;  but  if  men  will  look  deeper  it  may  be  found 
to  cover  a  settled  aversion  to  submit  to  a  ruling  not  chosen  by  self.  No  revealed 
truth  is  in  moral  antagonism  with  our  tm^e  nature. 

III.  The  EFFECT    OF  THIS  DISCONTENT   ON  THE  LOTAL   IS  TO  AWAKEN  THBIB  DEEP 

SYMPATHY  WITH  GoD.  Samuel  was  deeply  wotmded,  not  by  the  allusion  to  his  sons,  but 
by  the  people's  evident  aversion  to  God's  ways  and  time.  That  any  one  should  dare  to 
suggest  a  variation  from  what  God  had  approvedwas  to  him  incomprehensible.  He  felt 
that  God's  method  and  time  must  be  wisest,  best,  safest,  because  they  were  his.  As  a  true 
man  of  God,  he  naturally  seeks  counsel  from  on  high.  In  Samuel's  displeasure  there 
was  an  element  of  surprise,  but  his  dominant  feeling  was  sympathy  with  all  that  was 
of  God.  Sympathy  with  God  is  ome  of  the  natural  fruits  of  piety.  It  was  seen  in 
Caleb  and  Joshua  when  the  people  were  averse  to  the  Divine  procedure.  Jeremiah 
knew  it  when  wishing  that  his  head  were  waters  and  his  eyes  a  fountain  of  tears. 
In  "  Not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done  "  it  received  its  highest  expression.  In  proportion 
as  it  is  strong  does  the  resistance  of  men  to  the  ways  of  God  cause  wonder,  shame, 
and  anguish.  To  such  a  soul  all  the  works  of  God  are  excellent ;  they  shine  with 
supernal  glory.  Providences  dark  and  painful  are  even  welcomed  as  parts  of  the 
Father's  blessed  discipline.  What  men  call  imperfections  are  felt  to  be  only  dim 
intimations  of  some  glorious,  loving  purpose.  "  Whatever  is  is  right,"  comes  from 
the  heart  when  the  intellect  is  baffled.  This  blessed  sympathy  with  God  I  This 
behef  which  no  argument  can  shake  I  This  glorious  optimism  resting  on  the  fact 
that  the  all-wise  and  loving  One  cannot  but  do  right  1  It  is  not  any  so-called 
Christian  that  attains  to  it.  Tet  it  is  the  truest  philosophy ;  for  it  is  rest  in  God, 
content  with  his  will.    "  Just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  King  of  saints." 

IV.  The  Divine  treatment  of  discontent  is  characteeibbd  by  wondeefot. 
PATIENCE.  No  sudden  vengeance  came  on  the  rejecters  of  God.  Consolation  is 
poured  into  the  heart  of  the  sorrowing  prophet ;  s  reference  of  their  conduct  to 
their  ineradicable  perversity  is  made,  and  they  are  to  have  their  way  under  protest 
(vera.  7 — ^9).  This  patience  is  in  keeping  with  the  record  of  God's  treatment  of 
larMl  in  fh«  seventy-eighth  Psalm.     "  He  remembered  that  they  were  but  flesh  ;  • 


148  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  viii.  1-22 

wind  that  passeth  away,  and  oometli  not  again  "  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  39).  The  same  is  seen 
itill.  As  Clirist  once  "  endured  the  contradiction  of  sinners,"  so  does  God  constantly 
suffer  men  to  raise  their  voice  against  his  appointments.  He  is  "  slow  to  anger. " 
Calmly  he  allows  men  even  to  deny  his  existence,  to  criticise  his  government,  to 
reject  the  light  of  his  revelation,  to  invent  ways  of  their  own  for  securing  future 
blessedness,  and  to  murmur  at  his  means  of  subduing  the  curse  of  sin.  In  their  folly 
men  interpret  this  patience  of  God  as  evidence  of  the  correctness  of  their  position, 
forgetting  that  "  the  day  of  the  Lord  "  is  coming,  when  men  shall  reap  the  fruit  of 
their  ways.  To  the  successors  of  the  prophet  there  is  still  consolation  in  the  assurance 
that  their  prayer  is  heard,  and  their  honour  covered  by  the  honour  of  their  God. 
Hence  the  calmness,  "the  patience  of  the  saints."  Tliey  often  can  do  little  more 
than  ''  protest "  against  the  unbelief  and  waywardness  of  the  world.  A  whole 
nation  on  one  side  and  a  Samuel  on  the  other  does  not  convert  error  into  truth  and 
folly  into  wisdom.  But  none  of  these  things  shake  the  confidence  of  the  few  who, 
in  critical  seasons,  are  in  deep  sympathy  with  God  ;  for  they  know,  by  a  varied 
experience,  his  vast  patience,  and  are  assured  that  some  day  feeble  men  will  leam  the 
lesson,  perhaps  bitterly,  that  hia  ways  are  best. 

General  lessons: — 1.  The  inconsistencies  of  men  in  office  furnish  occasion  for 
developing  the  latent  evils  of  their  fellows  (vers.  3,  4).  2.  The  deceitfulness  of  the 
heart  is  seen  in  the  eagerness  with  which  men  endeavour  to  justify  what  dare  not 
be  plainly  avowed  (ver.  5).  3.  Human  history  shows  how  utterly  incompetent  man 
is  to  form  a  correct  estimate  of  the  ways  of  God  (vers.  5,  8).  4.  It  is  possible  for 
our  theologies  to  be  framed  more  after  what  we  prefer  than  after  what,is  actually  the 
fact.  5.  When  the  Church  of  God  is  distressed  because  of  the  aversion  to  what  is 
revealed,  patience  and  prayer  should  be  combined.  6.  The  most  sore  trial  to  those 
in  deep  sympathy  with  what  Christ  has  approved  is  to  witness,  on  the  part  of  his 
professed  people,  a  desire  to  escape  his  appointments  for  something  more  congenial 
to  unsanctified  ambition.  7.  Every  heresy  and  departure  from  God's  ways  is  plausible 
to  many,  and  may  seem  to  be  uncliecked,  but  God  never  vacates  his  seat  of  authority. 

Vers.  10 — 22. — Permitted,  not  approved.  The  facts  are — 1.  Samuel  points  out  to 
the  people  that  their  desired  king  will  aggrandise  himself  at  their  expense,  and  that, 
once  entering  on  their  course,  tliere  will  be  no  deliverance.  2.  The  people,  noverthe- 
less,  decide  to  have  a  king,  and  assign  the  motive  of  their  preference.  3.  Samuel,  on 
laying  the  matter  before  God,  receives  a  command  to  make  them  a  king.  The 
question  at  issue  was  not  whether  this  or  that  form  of  government  was  intrinsically 
best,  nor  whether  at  some  time  in  the  near  future  God  might  or  might  not  cause  judge- 
ship gradually  to  develop  into  kingship  ;  but  whether,  at  this  juncture,  it  was  God's 
will  to  introduce  a  monarchy.  The'  references  in  Deut.  xvii.  14 — 20  were  probably  a 
forecast  of  the  events  now  brought  to  pass.  At  all  events,  God's  time  for  monarchy 
in  Israel  was  not  yet  come ;  the  people's  had  come.  The  historian  sets  forth  the 
bearings  and  result  of  the  controversy.  The  instance  is  nnique,  but  the  principle 
involved  is  of  frequent  exemplification  in  human  affairs. 

I.  There  abe  bphekes  of  action  in  which  God  allows  men  to  take  theib 

CHOICE  OF  the  methods  BY  WHICH   HIS  PUBPOSES  ABE  TO  BE  WBODGHT  OUT.       Israel 

was  a  nation  working  out  a  spiritual  issue.  The  day  must  come  when  in  the  "  seed 
of  Abraham  "  all  nations  shall  be  blessed.  Thus  far,  politically,  this  issue  was 
being  reached  by  a  peculiar  arrangement  with  as  much  success  as  the  perverse  spirit 
of  the  people  would  allow  to  any  system.  When  "  Samuel  told  all  the  words  of  the 
Lord  unto  the  people  that  asked  of  him  a  king  "  (ver.  10),  it  was  understood  that, 
though  they  were  not  at  liberty  to  set  aside  recognition  of  Jehovah,  the  institu- 
tions of  worship,  and  the  moral  law,  they  were  free,  if  they  so  willed,  to  adopt 
political  methods  of  their  own.  They  would  not  cease  to  be  Messianic  in  purpose, 
but  they  w*uld  work  toward  the  goal  b^  a  new  method  unusually  characterised  by 
human  frailty.  _  There  is  a  marked  distinction  in  the  accomplishment  of  Divine  pur- 
poses through  irrational  and  rational  agents.  The  one  is  a  channel  of  necessity ;  the 
other  the  free  organ  of  controllable  actions.  Every  stone  falls  because  it  must; 
•reiy  will  acts  because  it  wills.  The  marvel  and  mystery  is  that  the  eternal  Will 
■hoald  in  the  end  get  its  own  through,  or  in  spite  of,  the  free  action  of  other  wills. 


(H.  VIII.  1—22.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  14» 


Yet  BO  it  is.  Likewise  there  are  differences  in  the  ruling  of  rational  ereaturet.  la 
one  Bense  every  free  heing  can,  and  is  left  to,  take  what  course  be  pleases.  He  may 
sin  or  not  sin  ;  he  may  love  God  or  not ;  and  this,  too,  while  the  obligation  is  mo«t 
binding.  But,  nevertheless,  God  enforces  some  things  and  in  others  allows  option. 
It  is  essential  that  God  be  loved  ;  that  Christ  be  the  Medium  through  which  saving 
mercy  comes  to  all,  infant  and  adult ;  that  repentance  and  faith  be  exercised  by  all  who 
hear  the  gospel  call ;  and  that  certain  duties  to  man  be  discharged.  These  are  con- 
ditions of  safety,  purity,  and  bliss.  But  it  is  not  essential  to  the  same  degree  and  in 
the  same  sense  thi.t  men  should  pursue  their  calling  in  one  way  only.  There  is  an 
option  left  as  to  how  men  shall  obtain  and  use  their  knowledge ;  what  methods  shall 
be  followed  in  pursuit  of  life's  calling ;  what  means  taken  to  promote  spiritual  culture 
and  material  advantage ;  what  social  and  national  arrangements  may  best  subserve 
the  common  good.  Having  laid  down  the  hroad  lines  of  faith  in  Christ  and  right- 
eousness of  principle  in  all  things,  God  seems  to  have  left  a  margin  for  the  exercise 
of  our  discretion.  It  is  as  though  the  Eternal  would  thus  mark  his  estimate  of  the 
great  prerogative  of  freedom.  He  educates  the  individual  and  the  race  by  the  accu- 
mulation of  varied  experiences,  the  outgrowth  of  freedom. 

II.  Any  CHOICE  of  men,  as  to  methods  of  pursuing  their  course,  is  attended  with 

INCONVENIENCE   IN   SO   FAR  AS  IT  DEVIATES   FROM  THAT  WHICH  GoD  CLEARLY  APPEOVES. 

Samuel  declares  to  the  people  that  the  choice  of  a  monarchy  would  impose  on  tliem 
inconvenient  burdens,  and  rob  them  of  much  of  the  happiness  they  enjoyed  under 
the  form  of  government  already  approved  of  God  (vers.  11 — 18).  Personal  pomp 
and  splendour  would  mean  taxation  and  regal  aggrandisement.  The  sense,  therefore, 
of  this  warning  is  that  Israel  might  yet  be  God's  chosen  people,  subject  to  Mosaic 
law,  guided  in  great  affairs  by  prophets,  and  working  to  a  Messianic  goal;  but  the 
form  of  government  chosen  by  man  would  be  more  costly  and  hindering  than  that 
at  present  approved  by  God.  The  teaching  is  true  generally.  There  are  clear  lines 
of  conduct  laid  down  by  Providence  indicative  of  the  way  in  which  God  would  have 
us  fulfil  our  purpose  in  the  world.  The  man  of  business  will  not  realise  the  end  in 
view  in  so  far  as  his  methods  are  precisely  contrary  to  the  teachings  of  Providence. 
Statesmen  may  take  a  course  of  their  own,  heedless  of  what  God  prefers ;  their 
troubles  will  be  proportionate.  It  is  God's  method  of  developing  the  full  manhood 
of  Christian  life  that,  while  walking  humbly  with  him  in  private,  we  do  not "  forsake 
the  assembling  of  ourselves  together."  Men  who  chose  a  different  course  may  do  so, 
but  must  bear  the  consequences  of  a  dwarfed  Christianity. 

III.  Notwithstanding  a  cleab  statement  of  the  perils  of  devlatiro  from 
God's  methods,  men,  under  the  influence  of  a  masterful  passion,  wili  sometimes 
TAKE  their  own  COURSE.  In  vain  did  Samuel  warn  the  people  of  the  disapproval  of 
God,  and  the  costs  of  their  desired  monarchy;  they  refused  to  obey  his  voice,  and  said, 
"  Nay ;  but  we  will  have  a  king  to  reign  over  us  "  (ver.  19).  It  was  not  whether  God 
approved  or  not ;  it  was  not  a  question  of  promoting  righteousness  ;  it  was  not  a 
desire  to  see  the  Messianic  purposes  more  speedily  realised  ;  but  a  longing  to  be  like 
other  nations,  and  consequently  a  desire  to  be  less  in  direct  connection  with  God  as 
Buler.  The  strength  of  this  passion  is  obvious  ;  for  it  disregards  personal  loss,  the 
prophet's  aversion,  and  the  declared  disapproval  of  God.  1.  The  overpowering  influ- 
ence of  a  passion  may  be  felt  by  the  individual  Christian.  It  is  possible  for  Chris- 
tian men,  when  piety  is  at  low  ebb,  to  hanker  after  the  mode  of  life  pursued  by  the 
Christless.  The  prayer  of  Christ  that  his  people  may  "  not  be  of  the  world  "  is  some 
times  either  forgotten  or  freely  interpreted.  "  Come  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye 
s'eparate  "  may  be  admitted  as  a  general  duty,  while  its  execution  is  sadly  deficient. 
It  is  only  when  the  soul  has,  in  unguarded  hours,  come  under  the  spell  of  the  world- 
passion  that  the  clear  lessons  of  Scripture  and  of  experience  are  set  aside  for  the 
paltry  gratification  of  being  like  other  men.  2.  The  same  passion  may  lay  hold  of 
the  Church.  History  shows  that  the  Church  has  not  been  free  from  the  spell  whicn 
once  laid  hold  of  Israel..  The  simplicity  of  Christ  has  sometimes  perished  in  the 
attempt  to  reproduce  in  the  Church  the  formalities  and  pomp  of  the  Philistines. 
"  How  far  the  Church  can  tialeiy  conform  to  the  world  "  is  a  dangerous  question, 
and  should  be  substituted  by  "  How  may  the  Church  best  fashion  the  world  to  ita 
own  pure  an<?  lofty  standard  ?  " 


IM  tHE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch,  viii.  1—22 

IV.  Men  degrade  themselves  in  so  far  as  tlie  methods  they  adopt  do  no'i  har- 
monise WITH  THE  SUPREME  OBJECT  FOE  WHICH  THEY  LIVE.  The  ordinary  reader  feelg 
that  Israel  was  self -degraded  in  preferring  to  live  like  heathen  nations  when  another 
coarse  was  open.  The  ends  of  Israel's  existence  were  highly  moral ;  the  mere  love 
of  pomp  and  splendour  had  no  congruity  with  this  end.  What  had  grand  military 
and  regal  parade  to  do  with  the  righteousness  which  alone  exalts  a  nation,  and  which 
was  the  peculiar  qualification  for  advancing  Messianic  issues  ?  It  would  not  save 
them  from  the  disasters  consequent  on  loss  of  righteousness — rather  it  would  aggra- 
vate them  (ver.  18)  ;  nor  would  it  make  the  practice  of  righteousness  more  easy. 
There  is  an  intellectual  and  moral  debasement  in  choice  of  meana  for  an  end  not  conr 
ffruousvnth  it,  and  in  face  of  warning.  The  individual  Christian  and  the  Church 
profess  to  live  for  spiritual  purposes.  They  degenerate  when,  from  sheer  self-will 
and  hankering  after  the  outwardly  sensational,  they  seek  to  promote  private  or  public 
ends  pertaining  to  their  Christian  calling  by  anything  not  spiritual  in  character  and 
tendency. 

V.  The  CHOICE  OF  methods  not  approved  by  God  is  no  bar  to  the  final  realisa- 
tion OF  THE  Divine  purpose.  As  when  men  from  discontent  with  God's  provision 
sought  flesh,  he  sent  them  quails  in  abundance,  so  now  he  allows  their  freedom  and 
gives  a  king.  The  quails  and  manna  were  only  means  of  subsistence.  "The  life 
was  more  than  meat."  So  the  government  by  judges  or  kings  was  only  method  of 
training  the  pepple  for  their  ultimate  purpose  in  life.  Men  might  sicken  and  die  with 
excess  of  flesh,  but  the  nation  would  live  on.  Trouble  and  sorrow  might  arise  from 
u  change  of  form  of  government,  and  the  people  might  morally  sink  in  the  choice, 
yet  God  would  overrule  all  and  effect  his  purpose.  The  Church  may  ivjffer  much 
from,  her  perverseness,  and  comparatively  tedious  advance  will  be  made  in  the  world ; 
yet  Christ  will  at  last  subdue  all  to  himself,  albeit  his  foolish  people  have  to  learn 
many  a  bitter  lesson.  Likewise  personally  the  image  of  Christ  will  some  day  be 
more  perfect  in  the  soul,  though  late  in  life,  and  after  many  a  sorrow  induced  by  ou» 
own  self-will  in  deviating  from  his  methods  of  perfecting  character. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 3.  (Beerpiieba.) — Ignoble  sons  of  an  honouredfather.    Nearly  all  that  u 

known  of  Samuel's  household  is  here  stated.  He  had  at  least  two  sons,  Joel  (Jehovah 
is  God)  and  Abiah  (my  father  is  Jah),  whose  names  were  indicative  of  the  de- 
vout spirit  in  which  they  were  given  (1  Chron.  vi.  28:  "And  the  sons  of  Samuel, 
the  firstborn,  and  the  second  Abiah  ; "  ver.  83 :  "  Heman  a  singer,  the  son  of  Joel ;  " 
ch.  XV.  17 ;  XXV.  5 :  "  Heman,  the  king's  seer  ").  During  the  period  of  his  judgeship 
thfy  grew  to  maturity,  and  toward  its  close  he  made  them  "judges  over  Israel,"  and 
sent  them  to  administer  justice  in  Beersheba,  in  the  southern  limit  of  the  land.  His 
influence  as  judge  as  well  as  prophet  extended  "from  Dan  even  to  Beersheba''  (ch. 
iii.  20),  and  with  advancing  age  he  needed  assistance  in  his  labours.  "It  may  be 
doubted  whether  Samuel  acted  wisely  in  making  this  appointment,  especially  rf,  as 
seems  to  have  been  understood,  the  nomination  in  his  lifetime  of  his  sons  to  fulfil 
tbs  fimctions  he  had  hitherto  discharged  alone  was  an  intimation  that  he  meant  them 
tc  be  regarded  as  his  successors  in  such  government  as  he  exercised.  Nothing  of 
this  kind  had  been  done  before.  And  thus,  almost  unconsciously,  perhaps,  he  was  led 
to  give  a  kind  of  sanction  to  the  hereditary  principle  of  government  which  was  soon 
to  be  turned  against  hiinse'f  "  (Kitto).  He  acted  according  to  his  judgment  of  what 
was  best,  and  doubtleaa  with  disinterestedness.  There  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that 
he  failed  to  train  his  sons  in  the  right  way,  or  that  he  was  aware  of  their  conduct 
at  Beersheba  "and  restrained  them  not."  He  is  not,  therefore,  to  be  blamed.  No 
man  is  infallible.  The  plans  of  the  wisest  men  are  often  marred  by  the  misconduct 
of  others.     And  this  appointment  was,  in  its  result,  disastrous. 

I.  Their  advantages  were  great.  They  were  sons  of  one  of  the  most  faithful 
and  eminent  servants  of  God,  had  the  benefit  of  his  instruction  and  example  in  privaM 
and  public,  studied  perhaps  in  a  school  of  the  piophets,  were  well  acquainted  with 
the  law  held  in  honour  for  their  father's  sake,  placed  in  responsible  positions.     AU 


ciL  vra.  1—22.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  161 

these  things,  we  might  have  expected,  would  have  made  them  circumspect,  just,  and 
devout ;  and  they  should  have  done  so.  How,  then,  can  we  account  for  their  defec- 
tion ?  1.  Goodness  is  not  hereditary.  "  The  sinner  begets  a  sinner,  but  a  saint  doth 
not  beget  a  saint "  (M.  Henry).  Hereditary  relationship  exerts  a  powerful  influencs 
on  the  mind  and  disposition,  but  nothing  but  Divine  grace  can  change  the  heart 

"  Rarely  into  the  branches  of  the  tree 
Doth  human  worth  mount  up :  and  so  ordaini 
He  who  bestows  it,  that  as  his  &ee  gift 
It  may  be  called"  (Dante,  'Purg.'  vii.). 

2.  Education  is  not  omnipotent.  When  children  of  a  good  man  turn  out  badly,  it 
may  generally  be  traced  to  some  defect  of  training,  through  attention  to  other  duties, 
absence  from  home,  inconsistency  at  home,  unwise  methods,  excessive  strictness,  un- 
just partiality,  undue  indulgence,  maternal  carelessness,  intimate  association  with  evil 
companions  (in  some  cases  unknown  and  unpreventable).  We  do  not  know  enough 
of  Samuel's  household  to  say  that  it  was  wholly  free  from  such  influences.  But  the 
most  perfect  education  is  limited  in  its  power  over  character.  3.  Power  is  a  peril- 
ous trust.  It  presents  temptations  which  are  sometimes  too  strong  for  men  who 
under  other  circumstances  might  not  have  fallen.  It  is  a  severe  test,  and  a  sure 
revealer,  of  character  (Luke  xii.  45).  Power  shows  the  man.  4.  Each  man  is 
responsible  for  his  own  conduct.  He  is  endowed  with  the  power  of  choosing  or 
refusing  good  and  evil,  and  no  external  circumstances  can  fully  account  for  the 
choice  he  makes.  "  Every  man  shall  bear  his  own  burden  "  (G-al.  vi.  5).  "  As  the 
soul  of  the  father,  so  also  the  soul  of  the  son,"&c.  (Ezek.  xviii.  4). 

II.  Their  conduct  was  base.  "His  sons  walked  not  in  his  ways"  of  truth, 
integrity,  self-denial,  and  true  godliness;  but  "turned  aside"  from  them  to— 1. 
Covetousness,  or  the  undue  love  of  earthly  possessions.  "  The  love  of  money  is  a 
root  of  all  kinds  of  evil "  (1  Tim.  vi.  17 — 19).  "  Covetousness  is  idolatry  "  (Luke  xii. 
15 ;  CoL  iii.  5).  "  It  is  the  idolatry  of  the  heart,  where,  as  in  a  temple,  a  miserable 
wretch  excludes  God,  sets  up  gold  instead-  of  him,  and  places  that  confidence  in  it 
which  belongs  to  the  great  Supreme  alone."  It  was  one  of  the  necessary  qualifica- 
tions of  judges  that  they  should  be  "  men  of  truth,  hating  covetousness  "  (Exod. 
xviii.  21).  Nothing  is  more  corrupting  than  "the  narrowing  lust  of  gold."  2. 
Bribery  (Exod.  xxiii.  6,  8  ;  Deut.  xvi.  18,  19).  3.  Perversion  of  justice  (Prov.  xvii.' 
16).  4.  Their  conduct  in  all  these  things  was  so  persistent  and  flagrant  that  it  was 
known  to  "  all  the  elders  of  Israel. "  They  openly  abused  their  power  for  selfish  ends, 
trampled  on  the  law  which  they  were  appointed  to  "  magnify  and  make  honourable," 
and  wrought  against  the  purpose  which  Samuel  spent  his  life  in  efEecting. 

III.  Thbib  influence  was  pebnicious.  Not  only  did  they  bring  misery  upon 
tlieraselves,  and  occasion  bitter  sorrow  to  their  aged  father;  but  they  also — 1.  In- 
flicted gi-ievous  injury  on  those  with  reference  to  whom  they  "took  bribes  and  per- 
verted judgment."  2.  Set  a  bad  example  to  all  men  (Ps.  xii.  8).  3.  Brought  their 
higli  oifice  into  contempt.  4.  Contributed  directly  to  a  national  revolution.  How 
true  it  is  that  "  one  sinner  destroyeth  much  good  I  " — D. 

Vers.  4—22.  (Hamah.)— /jsraef*  desire/or  a  king. 

"  The  old  order  changeth,  giving  place  to  new 
And  God  fulfils  himself  in  many  ways, 
Lest  one  good  custom  should  corrupt  the  world  "  (Tennyson). 

Introductory. — The  desire  of  Israel  for  a  king,  as  expressed  by  their  elders  to 
8amuel,was  a  turning-point  in  their  history.  1.  This  desire  was  not  new.  It  existed 
long  before  (Judges  viii.  22 ;  ix.  9).  But  new  circumstances  had  arisen,— the  greater 
order  and  unity  resulting  from  the  labours  of  Samuel,  the  misconduct  of  his  sons,  the 
threatening  attitude  of  surrounding  nations, — causing  it  to  become  stronger  and  mora 
general,  and  to  issue  in  a  definite  and  fixed  determination.  The  elders  simply  gave 
expression  to  what  the  heart  of  the  people  was  set  upon.  2.  The  object  of  their 
desire  was  not  essentially  wrong.     It  had  been  foretold  that  kings  should  arise  k 


162  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ot.  vm.  1— W 

Israel  (Qen.  xvii.  6,  16 ;  xxxv.  11 ;  Num.  xiiv.  17).     Provision  had  been  made  in 

the  law  of  Moses  for  the  choice  of  a  king,  and  directions  given  concerning  the 
manner  in  which  he  should  govern  (Deut.  xvii.  15 — 20) ;  and,  more  recently,  intima- 
tions had  heen  afforded  that  the  time  for  his  election  was  at  hand  (ch.  ii.  10,  35). 
His  appointment  was  only  in  apparent  contradiction  to  the  fundamental  principle  of 
the  theocracy,  that  "  God  was  their  King,"  for  it  was  not  intended  to  supersede  the 
Divine  authority  ;  he  was  to  be  the  viceroy  or  deputy  of  Jehovah,  as  the  judges  hac' 
been ;  and  he  might  be  better  adapted  than  they  to  the  present  condition  of  the 
people.  Nevertheless,  the  transition  was  in  one  aspect  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  order 
of  things,  from  a  direct  to  a  mediate  theocracy ;  it  tended  to  set  the  invisible  Ruler 
in  the  background,  and  it  was  fraught  with  imminent  peril.  3..  The  sinfulness  of 
their  desire  consisted  in  the  sort  of  king  they  sought  and  the  spirit  they  manifested  ; 
whereby  tliey,  in  effect,  rejected  the  Lord  as  their  King.  "  If  they  had  simply  desired 
a  king  to  be  given  them  according  to  the  law  of  God  (Deut.  xvii.  16),  that  should 
govern  them  in  equity,  and  such  an  one  as  feared  God,  they  then  had  not  offended  ; 
but  now  they  do  ask  a  king  of  a  preposterous  desire  only  that  they  might  be  like 
unto  other  nations ;  yet  God,  having  purposed  to  erect  among  his  people  a  kingly 
throne,  and  to  raise  unto  them  a  king  of  whose  seed  Messiah  should  come,  took  this 
occasion  to  accomplish  his  purpose,  so  turning  their  evil  and  inordinate  desire  unto 
a  good  end,  as  God  can  convert  the  evil  thoughts  and  actions  of  men  to  serve  for  his 
own  glory  "  (Willet).  4.  Their  desire  was  fulfilled,  and  the  transition  peaceably 
effected  through  the  agency  of  Samuel,  who  yielded  to  their  request  because  he  per- 
ceived the  good  which  was  hidden  therein,  and  that  in  the  providence  of  God  the 
time  was  come  for  a  king  to  be  appointed  (ch.  ix.  16).  "  Israel  was  in  the  position 
of  a  boat  which  has  been  borne  down  in  a  swift  stream  into  the  very  suction  of  the 
rapids.  The  best  would  be  that  she  should  put  back ;  but  if  it  be  too  late  for  this, 
then  the  best  is  that  there  should  be  in  hor  a  strong  arm  and  a  steady  eye  to  keep  her 
head  straight.  And  thus  it  was  with  Israel.  She  plunged  down  the  fall  madly, 
rashly,  wickedly,  but  under  Samuel's  control  steadily  "  (Robertson).  "  He  had  to 
guide  the  difficult  transition  of  Israel's  political  organisation  from  a  Divinely-ruled 
republic  into  a  regularly-constituted  monarchy."  "  To  mediate  between  the  old  and 
the  new  was,  indeed,  the  peculiar  position  of  Samuel.  He  was  at  once  the  last  of 
the  judges,  and  the  inaugurator  of  the  first  of  the  kings.  Take  the  whole  of  the 
narrative  together — take  the  story  first  of  his  opposition,  and  then  of  his  acqui- 
escence, in  the  establishment  of  the  monarchy.  Both  together  bring  us  to  a  just 
impression  of  the  double  aspect  in  which  he  appears ;  of  the  two-sided  sympathy 
which  enabled  him  to  unite  together  the  passing  and  the  coming  epoch  "  (Stanley). 
His  calmness,  moderation,  breadth  of  view,  practical  adaptation,  and  lofty  devotion 
to  God  and  his  people  were  herein  exhibited  in  an  eminent  degree.  "  Samuel  is  one 
of  the  few  great  men  in  history  who,  in  critical  times,  by  sheer  force  of  character 
and  invincible  energy  terminate  the  previous  form  of  a  great  existing  system — at  first 
against  their  own  will,  but  afterwards,  when  convinced  of  the  necessity,  with  all  the 
force  and  eagerness  of  their  nature ;  and  who  then  initiate  a  better  form  with  the 
happiest  results,  though  amidst  much  personal  suffering  and  persecution  "  (Ewald, 
•  History ').— D. 

Vers.  4 — 22.  (Ramah.) — The  popular  desire  for  a  Jdng.  "  Make  us  a  king  to  judge 
us  like  all  the  nations"  (ver.  5).     This  narrative  teaches  us — 

I.  That  the  popdlab  desire,  ALTHonQH  it  mat  bb  plausible,  is  often  repbe- 
HENSIBLE  (vers.  4,  5).  1.  Its  alleged  grounds  were  insufficient.  (1)  The  old  age  of 
Samuel.  But  due  respect  to  him  and  gratitude  for  his  past  services  should  have 
prevented  their  desire  to  set  him  aside ;  and  the  prosperity  that  attended  his  rule 
during  many  years  should  have  led  them  to  wish  for  its  continuance  as  long  as  pos- 
sible. They  were  inconsiderate,  forgetful,  unthankful,  hasty,  and  unjust.  (2)  The 
misgovemment  of  his  sons.  But  they  might  have  been  removed  from  their  office 
without  the  office  itself  being  abolished,  it  is  better  to  try  to  mend  an  institution 
than  to  destroy  it.  (3)  To  be  like  other  nations.  But  Israel  was  designed  to  be 
unlike  them,  and  superior  to  them  (Levit.  xx.  26) ;  and  most  of  the  miseries  they  had 
luffered  arose  from  conformity  to  their  ways.     'The  wish  to  be  like  other*  is  a  fruitful 


CH.  VIII.  1—22.]  THE  FIE8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  lU 

gource  of  sin  and  woe.  The  cause  of  truth  and  righteousnesa  in  the  world  is  greatly 
damaged  when  those  who  should  be  the  guides  of  the  ignorant  and  the  wicked  become 
their  servile  followers.  "  Palestine  in  ancient  times  was  pre-eminently  a  land  of  kings. 
Every  district,  nay,  every  considerable  city,  had  its  king  and  its  court.  In  most  cases 
the  king  was  an  autocrat,  absolute  and  irresponsible,  lawgiver,  judge,  and  executor, 
the  source  of  all  honours,  of&ces,  and  emoluments,  the  commander  of  the  army,  the 
dispenser  of  favours,  the  awarder  of  punishment.  The  rights,  claims,  and  tae- 
rogatives  of  royalty  extended  to  every  person,  and  to  every  relation  of  life.  The 
king  was  the  master,  the  people  were  his  subjects,  nay,  slaves — his  property.  In  a 
better  sense  he  was  the  common  father  of  the  community,  they  his  children,  with  all 
the  kindlier  duties  and  obligations  implied  and  included  in  this  most  sacred  of  human 
relations.  Royalty  thus  constituted  and  administered  was  selected  by  Jehovah  as 
the  synonym  and  exemplar  of  his  special  relation  to  the  Hebrew  people  "  (Thomson, 
'  Bibliotheca  Sacra,'  vol.  xxx.).  (i)  The  threatening  attitude  of  the  Philistines  (cli. 
ix.  16)  and  the  Ammonites  (ch.  xii.  12),  which  was  doubtless  referred  to  in  the  inter- 
view of  the  elders  with  Samuel.  But  the  Lord  of  hosts,  who  had  hitherto  delivered 
them,  was  able  to  do  so  still ;  and  to  rely  upon  a  new  institution  for  safety  instead 
of  upon  him  was  to  lean  upon  a  broken  reed.  "  Instead  of  seeking  for  the  cause  of 
the  misfortunes  which  had  hitherto  befallen  them  in  their  own  sin  and  want  of  fidelity 
toward  Jehovah,  they  searched  for  it  in  the  faulty  constitution  of  the  nation  itself  " 
(Keil).  2.  Its  real  grounds  were  hlameviotihy.  (1)  Dissatisfaction  with  the  govern- 
ment which  had  been  Divinely  appointed  and  sanctioned.  When  the  hearts  of  men 
are  right  with  God  they  are  not  disposed  to  complain  of  his  ordinances.  (2)  Dis- 
trust of  the  presence  and  might  of  their  invisible  King.  "  God  was  not  sufficient  for 
them  without  a  creature  prop."  "  Their  demand  of  a  visible  earthly  sovereign  was  in 
disparagement  of  that  extraordinary  Providence  which  had  distinguished  them  from 
the  nations  of  the  earth,  and  taken  them  by  a  privilege  under  an  immediate  theocracy. 
Their  sin  was  founded  in  a  revolt  from  God,  in  the  abdication  of  a  perfect  trust  and 
reliance  upon  his  providential  government  in  that  method  in  which  with  respect  to 
them  he  had  ordered  it.  But  their  fault,  though  uncommon  in  its  form,  is  not  at  all 
in  its  principle.  Something  to  see  and  nothing  to  believe  is  the  wish  and  propensity 
of  more  than  the  Israelites  "  (Davison  '  on  Prophecy ').  (3)  Impatience,  presumption, 
and  self-will.  "  God  gave  them  judges,  .  •  .  and  afterwards  they  desired  a  king " 
(Acts  xiii.  20,  21).  Instead  of  first  seeking  to  know  the  will  of  God,  and  then  wait- 
ing his  time  for  a  change,  if  it  should  seem  good  in  his  sight,  they  thought  that  they 
knew  what  was  best,  took  counsel  of  their  own  hearts,  and,  having  chosen  their  course 
independently  of  him,  proceeded  forthwith  to  follow  it  up,  and  resolved  to  have  theii 
own  way.  They  were  thus  disloyal  to  their  Divine  King,  to  whose  direction  and  con- 
trol they  were  bound  to  submit.  (4)  The  love  of  worldly  pleasure,  power,  and 
glory.  They  desired  a  king  not  merely  (a)  that  he  might  judge  them  without 
interruption,  by  the  law  of  hereditary  descent;  but  also  (6)  that  "he  might  go  out 
before  them  and  fight  their  battles  "  (ver.  20)  ;  and,  still  further  (c),  that  he  miglit 
hold  a  splendid  court,  and  gratify  their  ambition  and  lust  of  shining  or  n^aking  ;■ 
boastful  display.  They  wished  to  be  thought  in  no  respect  inferior  to  the  surround- 
ing nations.  It  was  a  result  to  which  prosperity  too  often  leads.  The  worldlines 
from  which  the  misconduct  of  Samuel's  sons  proceeded  was  but  a  symptom  of  : 
widespread  evil.  "The  secret  spring  of  their  rebellion  was  the  ambition  of  thei 
leaders,  who  could  live  no  longer  without  the  splendour  of  a  regal  court  and  house- 
hold. 'Give  me'  (say  they,  as  the  prophet  Hosea  makes  them  speak,  ch.  xiii.  10; 
'  a  king  and  princes,'  where  every  one  of  them  might  shine  a  distinguished  ofScei 
of  state.  They  could  get  nothing,  when  their  affairs  led  them  to  their  judge's  pooi 
residence  in  the  schools  of  the  prophets,  but  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost  (ch.  x.  10  ; 
xix.),  whiih  a  courtier,  I  suppose,  would  not  prize  even  at  the  rate  of  Simon  Magnus 
or  think  it  worth  the  bribing  for  a  piece  of  money.  This  it  was,  and  only  this,  th  it 
made  their  demand  criminal"  (Warhurton,  'Div.  Leg.,'  Book  V.).  How  often  has 
their  sin  been  repeated  in  the  history  of  nations  1  "  All  the  tragical  wars  of  the 
Greeks  or  barbarians,  whether  civil  er  foreign,  have  flowed  from  one  fountain — ^from 
the  desire  either  of  riches,  or  of  glory,  or  of  pleasure ;  for  in  pursuit  of  these  thinga 
the  human  race  brings  on  its  own  destruction  "  (Philo  Jud.,  '  In  Decalog.'). 


IM  THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  viii.  1-22. 

IL  That  the  populab  desire  ib  not  unfrequentlt  an  occasion  of  gbeai 
TBOtTBU  TO  A  GODLY  MAN  (vers.  6 — 9).  "  The  thing  was  evil  in  the  eyes  of  Samuel." 
He  saw  that  it  was  wrong,  felt  disappointed  and  grieved,  and  was  at  first  altogether 
opposed  to  it,  and  disinclined  to  listen  to  those  by  whom  it  was  expressed,  "  because," 
says  Josephus,  "  of  his  inborn  sense  of  justice,  because  of  his  hatred  of  kings,  as  so 
far  inferior  to  the  aristocratic  form  of  government  which  conferred  a  godlike  charac- 
ter on  those  who  lived  under  it."  "  For  kings  are  many,  and  the  good  are  few  " 
(Dante).  1.  As  a  good  man  has  no  greater  joy  than  to  see  the  people  seeking  what  is 
right  and  good,  so  he  has  no  greater  sorrow  than  to  see  them  "  going  after  vain  things 
which  cannot  profit  nor  deliver ;  for  they  are  vain  "  (ch.  xii.  21).  Abraham  (Gen.  xviii. 
23),  Moses  (Exod.  xxxii.  18,  31),  Elijah  (1  Kings  xix.  10).  The  Psalmist  (Ps.  cxix. 
158),  Jeremiah  (Jer.  ix.  1),  Paul  at  Athens  (Acts  xvii.  16).  2.  The  grief  he  feels  is 
of  the  noblest  kind.  (1)  Unselfish.  Samuel  did  not  resent  or  complain  of  what  was 
said  concerning  his  old  age  or  his  sons'  misgovemment ;  and  if  he  was  not  abso- 
lutely indifferent  to  the  injustice  done  to  himself,  yet  his  trouble  arose  chiefly  from 
other  and  higher  considerations.  (2)  Patriotic.  (3)  Divine,  He  was  concerned, 
above  all  things,  for  the  honour  and  glory  of  God.  His  own  loyalty  to  him  made 
him  quick  to  resent  the  disloyalty  of  others,  and  his  sympathy  with  his  purposes 
filled  him  with  holy  jealousy  lest  they  should  be  defeated  or  in  any  way  hindered. 
He  felt  in  some  degree  as  God  himself  feels.  3.  His  resource  in  trouble  is  prayer  to 
God.  "  And  Samuel  prayed  to  the  Lord  "  (ver.  6) ;  probably  all  night,  as  on  a 
subsequent  occasion  (ch.  xv.  11).  Such  had  been  the  resource  of  his  devout  mother 
in  her  distress.  Nor  is  there  any  other  so  effectual  (Ps.  Iv.  22 ;  Phil.  iv.  6).  4.  In 
communion  with  God  he  finds  abundant  consolation  and  help.  God  takes  upon  him- 
self the  burden  of  his  servant  who  has  laboured  and  suffered  for  his  sake  (Ps.  Ixix.  7). 
"  They  have  not  rejected  thee,  but  they  have  rejected  me."  He  assures  him  that  it 
13  "no  strange  thing  that  has  happened  unto  him."  "According  to  all  the  works 
which  they  have  done,"  &c.  (ver.  8).  He  removes  his  perplexity,  tells  him  what  to 
do,  and  gives  him  strength  to  do  it.  "  Hearken  unto  their  voice,"  &c.  (ver.  9).  All 
questionings  cease  when  the  Divine  voice  speaks,  and,  with  the  morning  light, 
Samuel  goes  forth  humbly,  fearlessly,  and  cheerfully  to  deliver  his  message  to  the 
elders. 

nL  That  teb  fofulab  desibe,  when  it  ib  wbono,  should  bk  kebuked,  and  itb  evil 
ErFBOTB  DBCLABED  (vers.  10 — 18).  It  may  not  be  allowed  to  pursue  its  course  with- 
out warning  on  the  part  of  those  who  feel  that  it  is  wrong;  and  to  whom  a  Divine 
message  comes.  1.  This  message  consists  of — (1)  A  testimony  against  its  sinfulness. 
"  Hearken  unto  their  voice :  howbeit  yet  protest  solemnly  (testify)  unto  them  "  their 
sin,  and  the  displeasure  of  Heaven.  (2)  A  declaration  of  the  evils  involved  in  its 
fulfilment.  "Show  them  the  manner  (mishpai)  of  the  king  that  shall  reign  over 
them,"  t.  e.  his  regal  rights,  claims,  privileges,  and  prerogatives ;  not  what  might  be 
de  jure,  according  to  "  the  manner  of  the  kingdom  "  (ch.  x.  26 ;  Deut.  xvii.  14),  but 
would  be  de  facto,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  kings  of  the  heathen  nations  whom 
they  wished  to  resemble.  We  have  here  a  picture  of  "  the  dark  side  of  the  institu- 
tion "  in  Contrast  with  the  theocracy : — (a)  Its  ruling  motive — personal  aggrandise- 
ment and  indulgence.  "  He  will  take  for  himself,  his  chariots,  his  horses,"  &c. ,  whilst 
for  your  welfare  he  will  care  nothing.  (6)  Its  arbitrary  and  oppressive  character. 
"He  will  take  your  sons"  to  be  his  personal  attendants  (ver.  11)  for  military  and 
agricultural  service  (ver.  12),  your  daughters  for  domestic  service  (ver.  13),  your 
land  to  give  to  his  attendants  (ver.  14),  a  tenth  of  your  com  and  wine  to  reward  his 
oflScers  (imposing  heavy  taxation — ver.  16),  your  servants  and  cattle  "  to  put  them 
to  his  work  "  (ver.  16),  and  a  tenth  of  your  sheep ;  "  a  great  retinue,  a  great  table,  a 
standing  army,  great  favourites,  great  revenues  "  (M.  Henry)  ;  and  you  yourselves 
will  lose  your  political  and  social  liberty,  and  become  his  slaves  (ver.  17).  (c)  Its 
helpless  and  hopeless  misery  (ver.  18) — brought  upon  yourselves,  causing  you  to  cry 
out  to  God  for  help,  "  and  the  Lord  will  not  hear  you  in  that  day."  "  The  yoke  once 
assumed  you  must  bear  for  ever"  (1  Kings  xii.  4).  2.  The  message  must  be 
declared  faithfully  and  fully,  whether  men  will  bear  or  forbear.  "  And  Samuel  told 
all  the  words  of  the  Lord  to  the  people"  (ver.  10).  3.  The purpote  of  such  declara- 
tion being  to  lead  them  to  consideration  and  repentance,  and,  if  they  still  persist,  to 


OH.  VIII   1—22.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  168 

throw  the  reBponsibility  for  the  result  upon  themselves  alone.  The  watchman  who 
warns  the  wicked,  even  if  they  turn  not  from  their  way,  "  bath  delivered  his  soul " 
(Ezek.  zxxiii.  9) ;  and  the  faithful  minister  is  "  unto  God  a  sweet  savour  of  Christ,  in 
them  that  are  saved,  and  in  them  that  perish  "  (2  Cor.  ii.  16). 

IV.  That  thb  fofulab  desire  is  sometimes  effectdallt  oobbeoted  bt  bbiro 
GRATIFIED  (vers.  19 — 22).  1.  In  spite  of  every  admonition,  men  can  and  do  persist 
in  their  sinful  desire.  "Nay;  but  we  will  have  a  king  overus."  Their  self-will 
appears  more  plainly  than  before.  Expostulation  only  makes  it  stronger.  They 
will  have  their  way.  And  God,  who  coerces  not  whom  he  has  endowed  with  moral 
freedom,  permits  them  to  do  so.  2.  By  their  persistency  they  even  obtain  of  him  the 
fulfilment  of  their  request.  "Make  them  a  king,"  is  his  final  response  to  Samuel, 
who  "  rehearsed  the  words  in  his  ears,"  and  now  dismisses  them  "  every  man  unto  his 
city,"  to  await  the  speedy  accomplishment  of  their  desire.  The  evil  which  would 
have  resulted  from  its  refusal  is  thus  averted.  The  principle  of  the  theocracy  is 
preserved.  Jehovah  continues  to  rule  over  Israel ;  and  they  recognise  his  authority 
in  BO  far,  at  least,  as  to  leave  the  selection  and  appointment  of  a  king  in  his  hands. 
His  sovereign  will  encircles  and  controls  their  purposes.  But  he  does  not,  by  grant- 
ing their  request,  sanction  their  sin.  On  the  contrary — 3.  In  its  fulfilment  he  inflicts 
upon  them  a  just  chastisement,  and  teaches  tljcra,  by  the  experience  of  its  legitimate 
results,  the  folly  of  their  devices.  Their  first  king  is  a  man  after  their  own  heart, 
reflects  their  sin,  and  brings  overwhelming  calamity  on  himself  and  them.  "  I  gave 
thee  a  king  in  mine  anger"  (Hosea  xiii.  11 ;  Ps.  cvi.  15).  "God,  when  he  is  asked 
for  aught  amiss,  showeth  displeasure  when  he  giveth,  hath  mercy  when  he  giveth 
not.  The  devil  was  heard  in  asking  to  enter  the  swine,  the  apostle  was  not  heard 
when  he  prayed  that  the  messenger  of  Satan  might  depart  from  him."  4.  He  pre- 
pares them  thereby  to  receive  as  their  ruler  "  a  man  after  his  own  heart "  (oh.  xiii.  14), 
who  shall  conduct  them  to  power  and  honour,  and  foreshadow  him  who  is  higher 
than  the  kings  of  the  earth.  How  wonderfully  are  the  Divine  purposes  fulfilled  in 
and  through  the  errors  and  sins  of  men  I  "  In  a  very  remarkable  sense  the  vox  populi 
was  the  vox  Dei,  even  when  the  two  voices  seemed  most  utterly  out  of  harmony. . .  . 
The  Jews  were  asking  for  heavy  punishment,  without  which  the  evil  which  was  in 
them  could  not  have  been  brought  to  light  or  cured.  But  they  were  asking  also  for 
something  besides  punishment,  for  that  in  which  lay  the  seeds  of  a  higher  blessing. 
Beneath  this  dark  counterfeit  image  was  hidden  the  image  of  a  true  King  reigning 
in  righteousness ;  the  assertor  of  truth,  order,  unity  in  the  land  ;  the  Helper  of  the 
poor,  who  would  not  judge  after  the  sight  of  his  eyes,  nor  reprove  after  the  hearing 
of  his  ears ;  but  would  smite  the  earth  with  the  rod  of  his  month,  and  with  the 
breath  of  his  lips  would  slay  the  wicked  "  (Maurice). — D. 

Ver.  6. — The  benefit  of  prayer.    "And  Samuel  prayed  unto  the  Lord."    The 

blessings  obtained  in  answer  to  prayer  are  real  and  manifold.  Some  of  them  are 
outwalk  and  material — daily  bread,  health,  safety,  life.  God  is  "in  all,  above  all, 
and  through  all,"  the  personal  and  free  Ruler  of  the  universe,  and  able  to  grant  our 
petitions  for  temporal  good  in  harmony  with  the  established  order  of  nature.  The 
mind  and  will  of  man  can  produce  changes  in  the  material  world  without  disturbing 
that  order;  much  more  can  the  eternal  mind  and  will  do  the  same.  Other  blessings 
are  inward  and  spiritual — wisdom,  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy.  The  "  Father  of 
spirits  "  has  access  to  the  human  spirit,  interpenetrates  it  as  light  the  atmosphere, 
holds  communion  with  it,  and  disposes  it  to  holiness.  S)iiritual  blessings  are  incom- 
parably more  valuable  than  materiaL  What  we  are  determines  our  relation  to 
surrounding  objects.  And  beneficial  changes  wrought  within  are  followed  by 
similar  changes  in  the  world  without.  "In  prayer  we  make  the  nearest  approaches 
unto  God,  and  lie  open  to  the  influences  of  Heaven.  Tlien  it  is  that  the  Sun  of  right- 
eousness doth  visit  us  with  his  directest  rays,  and  dissipateth  oar  darkness,  and 
imprinteth  his  image  on  our  souls  "  (Scougal). 

**  Speak  to  him,  then,  for  he  hears,  and  spirit  with  spirit  can  meet. 
Olosar  i*  he  than  breathing,  aod  nearer  than  hands  and  feet "  fTennyao>\. 


166  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [OH.  Tin.  1—22. 

In  illuBtration  of  the  Rpiritusl  benefit  of  prayer  let  at  consider  how  Samuel,  who 
"  prayed  unto  the  Lord '  in  his  trouble,  and  "  rehearsed  all  the  words  of  the  people 
in  the  earn  of  the  Lord  "  (ver.  21),  was  comforted  and  helped  in  time  of  need.  What 
a  different  man  he  was  when  he  came  fortii  from  communion  with  his  Abnighty 
Friend  to  speak  to  the  elders  of  Israel  from  what  he  was  when  he  went  from  them, 
"  displeased  "  (ver.  6)  and  distressed,  to  pour  out  his  heart  before  the  Lord  I  "  What 
profit  shall  we  have  if  we  pray  unto  him?  "  1.  Belief  ioT  a  burdened  heart.  It  is 
often  a  great  relief  to  tell  our  trouble  to  an  earthly  friend ;  much  more  is  it  to  pour  it 
forth  into  the  bosom  of  God.  "  No  other  God  but  the  God  of  the  Bible  is  heart  to 
heart"  (Niebuhr).  "They  went  and  told  Jesus"  (Matt.  xiv.  12).  2.  Sympathy 
under  bitter  disappointment.  Samuel  seemed  to  have  "  laboured  in  vain  and  spent 
his  strength  for  nought."  But  God  sanctioned  his  work,  identified^  himself  with  hiro, 
shared  his  disappointment,  and  took  his  burden  on  himself.  In  rejecting  his  faithful 
servants  men  reject  the  Lord.  "  Why  persecutest  thou  me  ?  "  (Acts  ix.  6).  He 
sympathises  with  them  (Heb.  iv.  5) ;  and  one  smile  of  his  more  than  compensates 
for  apparent  failure  and  the  frowns  of  the  whole  world.  "  By  degrees  two  thoughts 
calmed  him.  The  first  was  the  feeling  of  identification  with  God's  cause.  The 
other  element  of  consolation  was  the  Divine  sympathy.  Atheism  and  revolution 
here,  as  elsewhere,  went  hand  in  hand.  We  do  not  know  how  this  sentence  was 
impressed  by  the  infinite  mind  on  Samuel's  mind ;  all  we  know  is,  he  had  a  con- 
viction that  God  was  a  fellow-sufferer"  (Robertson).  3.  Gfuidance  in  great  per- 
plexity. The  will  of  the  Lord,  it  may  be,  is  at  first  hidden  or  obscure,  but  in  fellow- 
ship with  him  the  mists  and  clouds  that  prevent  our  seeing  it  are  cleared  away,  the 
sun  shines  forth,  and  our  way  is  made  plain.  We  see  "  the  light  of  this  world  " 
(John  xi.  9).  "  The  vocation  of  man  is  the  sun  in  the  heavens  of  his  life."  "  The 
secret  of  the  Lord  "  (the  counsel  or  advice,  such  as  a  man  gives  to  his  friend)  "  is 
with  them  that  fear  him  "  (Ps.  xxv.  14).  God  tells  his  secrets  only  to  his  friends. 
"The  meek  will  he  guide  in  judgment:  the  meek  will  he  teach  his  way  "  (Ps.  xxv.  9). 
"  He  will  guide  you  into  all  the  truth  "  (John  xvi.  13).  4.  Submission  to  the 
supreme  will.  That  will  is  always  wisest  and  best ;  it  cannot  be  altered  or  made  to 
bend  to  ours  ;  and  one  of  the  chief  benefits  of  prayer  is  that  thereby  we  receive  grace 
which  disposes  us  to  accept  humbly  and  cheerfully  what  at  first  appears  evil  in  our 
sight.  We  are  made  of  one  mind  with  God.  6.  Strength  for  painful  duty.  It  may 
be  to  "protest  solemnly'"  (ver.  9)  against  the  course  resolved  upon  by  others,  to  alter 
our  own  course  and  expose  ourselves  to  the  charge  of  inconsistency,  to  face  oppo- 
sition, danger,  and  death.  But  God  never  appoints  us  a  duty  without  giving  us 
strength  to  perform  it.  "  Habitual  prayer  constantly  confers  decision  on  the  wavei^ 
ing,  and  energy  on  the  listless,  and  calmness  on  the  excitable,  and  disinterestedness 
on  the  selfish  (Liddon).  6.  Composure  amidst  general  excitement.  Whilst  the 
elders  clamour,  "  Nay  ;  but  we  will  have  a  king  over  us,"  Samuel  is  unmoved.  He 
calmly  listens  to  their  decision,  takes  it  back  to  God  in  secret  prayer,  and  then  comes 
forth  and  says,  "Go  ye  every  man  to  his  own  city."  "Thou  wilt  keep  him  in 
perfect  peace,  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  thee  :  because  he  trusteth  in  thee  "  (Isa.  xxvi. 
3).  Hurricanes  revolve  around  a  centre  of  perfect  calm.  Outside  the  charmed 
circle  the  tempest  may  rage  furiously ;  within  it  all  is  peace.  Such  is  the  heart 
and  mind  kept  (garrisoned)  by  the  peace  of  God  (Phil.  iv.  7).  7.  Confidence  in  a 
glorious  future.  "  The  Lord  will  not  forsake  his  people  for  his  great  name's  sake  " 
(ch.  xii.  22).  He  works  out  his  purposes  by  unexpected  methods,  overrules  human 
perversity,  and  makes  the  wrath  of  man  to  praise  him  (Ps.  Ixxvi.  10).  "  What  will 
the  end  be  ?  "  it  was  said  at  a  time  of  great  and  general  anxiety  to  an  eminent 
servant  of  God  (Dr.  A.  Clarke),  who  replied,  with  a  beaming  countenance.  "  Glory  to 
God  in  the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace,  good-will  toward  men." — D. 

Ver.  22. — The  unvdse  demand  granted.  The  government  by  judges  fell  into  dis- 
credit. Samuel,  indeed,  was  without  reproach  ;  hut  when  advancing  age  made  the 
burden  of  public  affairs  too  heavy  for  him,  his  sons,  to  whom  he  naturally  delegated 
his  authority,  proved  unrighteous  rulers.  They  do  not  seem  to  have  been  licentious, 
like  the  sons  of  Eli,  but  they  were  covetous,  and  corrupted  the  fountains  of  justice  by 
taking  bribes.    What  a  persistent  thing  sin  is  1    How  it  repeats  itself  I    How  hard  it 


at.  nn.  1—22.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  W 

fa  to  eradicate  it  I  Samnel's  lifelong  example  of  integrity  was  lost  npon  his  Rons. 
The  terrible  fate  of  Eli's  family  was  lost  on  them  too.  To  the  dignity  of  justice,  to 
the  honour  of  truth,  they  were  indifferent  for  filthy  lucre's  sake.  Then  the  elders  of 
Isriiel  iisked  Samuel  to  set  a  king  over  them. 

I.  Tbb  ihpbofbistt  or  the  bequest.  1.  It  followed  a  bad  precedent.  The 
experiment  had  been  tried  about  150  years  before.  The  people  asked  Gideon  to  be 
their  hereditary  prince,  and  that  hero  declined  the  proposal,  as  inconsistent  with  a  pure 
theocracy.  After  his  death  Abimelech  was  king  for  three  years ;  but  his  career  began 
in  cruelty,  ended  soon  in  disaster  and  death,  and  no  one  from  that  time  had  sought  the 
royal  dignity.  2.  It  proceeded  on  a  wrong  principle.  The  desire  to  be  as  the  other 
nations  round  about  was  in  flat  contradiction  to  the  revealed  purpose  of  God  that 
Israel  should  be  separate  as  a  people  unto  him.  The  wish  to  have  a  king  to  lead 
them  out  to  battle  betrayed  a  thirst  for  war  unworthy  of  a  holy  nation,  and  a  mistrust 
of  the  Lord's  power  to  defend  them.  Here,  indeed,  is  the  point  in  which  they  departed 
from  the  permissive  law  regarding  a  king  recorded  in  the  seventeenth  chapter  of 
Deuteronomy.  A  regal  government  was  not  to  he  reckoned  inconsistent  with  the 
theocracy,  provided  the  king  was  not  a  foreigner,  and  was  chosen  by  Jehovah,  whose 
vicegerent  he  should  be.  The  elders  asked  for  a  king  not  after  the  mind  of  the 
Lord,  but  after  the  pattern  of  the  heathen  round  about. 

II.  Reasons  of  the  Divine  consent.  1.  A  headstrong  people  must  lesm  by 
experience.  The  elders  and  people  of  Israel  were  warned  of  the  risk  they  ran.  A 
king  such  as  they  desired  would  restrain  their  ancient  liberties,  and  subordinate  all 
their  rights  and  interests  to  the  maintenance  of  his  court  and  army.  They  heard 
Samuel's  warning,  and  persisted  in  their  demand.  So  the  Lord  bade  his  servant 
make  them  a  king.  If  men  will  not  take  advice,  let  them  have  their  way.  Wisdom 
seldom  comes  to  wilful  men  but  through  sharp  lessons  of  the  results  of  folly.  2. 
The  way  must  be  prepared  for  the  king  and  the  kingdom  that  God  would  choose. 
It  is  important  to  remember  that  Divine  purposes  are  accomplished  on  earth  not  by 
direct  fiats  of  authority  or  exertions  of  power,  but  through  long  and  complex  processes 
of  human  action  and  counteraction,  by  the  corrections  of  experience,  the  smart  of 
suffering,  and  the  recoil  from  danger.  It  was  God's  design  to  constitute  Israel  into 
a  kingdom  under  a  sure  covenant — a  kingdom  which  should  furnish  the  basis  for 
glowing  prophetic  visions  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ ;  but  this  design  was  not  to  be 
falfilled  abruptly,  or  by  a  sudden  assertion  of  the  Divine  will.  The  way  was  pre- 
pared by  the  failure  of  all  other  devices  for  holding  together  the  Hebrew  people. 
First  the  government  by  judges  lost  credit ;  then  the  kingdom  as  set  up  by  popular 
desire  failed;  so  that  the  tribes,  seeing  the  ruin  of  their  own  devices,  might  be 
ready  to  receive  the  kingdom  as  God  would  have  it,  and  the  man  whom  he  would 
choose  to  "feed  Jacob  his  people  and  Israel  his  inheritance." 

III.  Illitstbations  of  the  same  process.  1.  Men  have  set  up  their  own  devices 
in  the  administration  of  the  Church  ;  and  with  what  result  ?  They  have  not  been 
content  with  an  unseen  Lord  and  King.  The  early  patriarchates  may  be  described 
as  a  government  by  judges ;  but  men  were  not  content  therewith,  and  Latin  Christianity 
set  up  an  ecclesiastical  and  spiritual  supremacy  on  earth,  a  Saul-like  kingship  at 
Rome.  Those  parts  of  the  Western  Church  which  broke  away  from  this  doomed 
kingdom  at  the  Reformation,  for  the  most  part  gave  power  to  secular  princes  in 
exchange  for  their  protection.  All  such  arrangements  are  temporary  devices;  but 
they  are  witnesses  and  preludes  to  something  higher  and  more  Divine.  They  prepare 
the  way  for  the  reign  of  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  broken,  confused  reign  of  Saul  prepared 
for  the  strong  kingdom  of  David.  2.  Inward  Christian  experience  can  tell  a  similar 
tale.  What  plans  have  to  be  tried  and  found  wanting,  what  thrones  of  confusion  in 
the  heart  to  be  subverted,  before  the  Lord  alone  is  exalted  I  We  are  permitted  to 
have  our  own  way  that  we  may  learn  how  small  our  wisdom  is,  how  vain  are  our 
devices.  We  exalt  our  own  righteousness,  our  o^vTl  will,  our  own  religious  con- 
fidence. It  is  our  Saul ;  and  the  issue  is  confusion  and  disorder,  till  we  renounce  our 
pride  and  vainglory,  and  receive  the  Son  of  David,  Jehovah's  true  Anointed,  to  reign 
over  and  rule  in  us.  Self-religion  starts  thus — "Nay;  but  we  will  have  a  king." 
The  religion  which  is  taught  of  God  says,  "  Blessed  be  the  king  that  cometh  in  the 
n«me  of  the  Lord  I  ' — F. 


168 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[CH.  a.  1—87 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  IX. 


Seleotion  of  Saul  as  kino  by  the 

VOICE  OF  PKOPHKCY.      GeNEALOOT  OF  SaUL 

(vera.  1—27).  Ver.  1. — A  man  .  .  .  whose 
name  was  Kish.  The  genealogy  of  Saul  is 
rendered  obscure  by  the  Hebrew  custom  of 
abbreviating  such  records  by  the  omission 
of  names.  The  family  documents  were  no 
doubt  kept  in  full,  but  when  transcribed,  as 
here  and  in  the  First  Book  of  Chronicles, 
only  a  summary  is  given,  and  as  the  omitted 
links  are  not  always  the  same,  great  difficulty 
is  necessarily  the  result.  The  most  satis- 
factory genealogy  is  that  given  by  Schaflf  from 
a  comparison  of  Gen.  xlvi.  21 ;  1  Sam.  ix.  1 ; 
xiv.  51 ;  1  Chron.  vii  6—8  ;  viii.  29—33  ; 
ix.  35—39,  and  is  as  follows:  1.  Benjamin; 
2.  Becher ;  3.  Aphiah,  perhaps  same  as 
Abiah  ;  4.  Bechorath  ;  5.  Zeror,  or  Zur  ; 
6.  Abiel ;  7.  Ner  ;  8.  Kish ;  9.  SauL  Very 
many  links,  however,  are  omitted,  among 
whom  must  be  placed  Matri,  mentioned  in 
1  Sam.  X.  21 ;  and  Jehiel,  mentioned  in 
1  Chron.  ix.  35  (and  see  ibid.  viii.  29).  He 
is  described  as  the  first  settler  and  colonise* 
of  Gibeon,  and  as  husband  of  Maachah,  a 
daughter  or  granddaughter  of  Caleb.  The 
spelling  of  his  name  with  an  'ain  forbids  our 
confounding  him  with  Abiel,  as  is  done  by 
Schafif  and  most  commentators,  and  whom, 
apparently,  he  preceded  by  many  generations. 
In  the  two  places  referred  to  above  a  large 
family  of  sons  is  ascribed  to  him ;  but  as,  first 
of  all,  the  lists  do  not  agree,  as,  moreover, 
they  are  said  to  dwell  with  their  brethren  in 
JerussJem  (1  Chron.  viii.  32),  and  as  Ner, 
the  father  of  Kish,  is  mentioned  in  the 
second  list,  it  is  pretty  certain  that  we  are 
not  to  regard  them  as  his  actual  children, 
but  as  the  leading  names  among  his  pos- 
terity. The  fearful  cruelty  recorded  in 
Judges  XX.  48  may  well  account  for  the 
hopeless  entanglement  of  Benjamite  genea- 
logies. An  ancestor  of  Saul  must,  of  course, 
have  been  among  the  600  who  escaped  to 
the  rock  Rimmon,  but  he  could  have  saved 
only  his  own  life.  A  mighty  man  of  power. 
Really,  ' '  of  wealth. "  Saul,  like  David  after- 
wards, was  sprung  from  an  afBuent  family, 
whose  landed  property  was  situated  at  Gibeah, 
about  four  miles  north  of  Jerusalem,  after- 
wards known  as  Gibeah  of  SauL 

Ver.  2. — He  had  a  son,  whose  name  was 
Saul.  I.  e.  asked,  a  name  usually  given  to 
a  firstborn  son.  A  choice  young  man.  This 
is  a  double  translation  of  the  Hebrew  word, 
and  consequently  one  half  or  other  must  be 
wrong.  It  may  either  be  a  participle,  elect 
or  choice,  and  is  so  rendered  by  the  Syriac 
wid  Vulgate ;  or  an  adjective,  young,  the 


rendering  of  the  Chaldee,  and  virtnally  of  the 
Septuagint,  which  gives  well-ffrotim.  This 
is  the  preferable  translation ;  for  the  word 
constantly  occurs  coupled  with  virgin  (Deut. 
xxxil  25 ;  Isa.  Ixii  5,  &c),  for  one  in  the 
full  flower  of  manhood.  Saul  could  not, 
therefore,  have  been  the  runner  of  ch.  v.  12, 
though,  as  we  read  that  Jonathan  his  son  was 
a  grovm  man  two  or  three  years  afterwards 
(ch.  xiiL  2),  he  must  have  been  at  least 
thirty-five  years  of  age,  after  making  allow- 
ance for  the  early  period  at  which  the  Jews 
married.  His  noble  appearance  and  gigantic 
stature  were  well  fitted  to  impress  and  over- 
awe a  semi-barbarous  people,  who  were  better 
able  to  form  an  estimate  of  his  physical 
qualities  than  of  the  high  mental  and  moral 
gifts  possessed  by  Samuel. 

Ver.  8. — The  asses  of  Kish  .  .  .  were  lost. 
So  strangely  is  the  trivial  ever  united  with 
events  most  solemn  and  weighty,  that  Saul 
set  out  upon  this  journey,  in  which  he  was 
to  find  a  kingdom,  with  no  other  object  than 
to  look  for  some  lost  asses — Hebrew,  "she- 
asses.  "  As  used  for  riding  (Judges  x.  4),  the 
ass  was  valuable,  and  as  uiese  were  probably 
kept  for  breeding,  they  were  allowed  more 
liberty  than  the  males,  and  so  strayed  away. 

Ver.  4. — Mount  Ephraim.  Though  Gibeah, 
Saul's  home,  was  in  Benjamin,  it  was  situ- 
ated on  this  long  mountain  range  (ch.  LI). 
The  land  of  Shalisha.  I.  e.  Three-land,  and 
probably,  therefore,  the  region  round  Ba.ii- 
shalisha.  It  takes  its  name  from  the  three 
valleys  which  there  converge  in  the  great 
Wady  Kurawa.  The  land  of  Shalim.  /.  e. 
of  jackals ;  probably  the  same  as  the  land 
of  Shual,  also  =  jackal-land  (ch.  xiiL  17). 
The  very  name  shows  that  it  was  a  wild, 
uninhabited  region.  The  derivation  hollow- 
land  is  untenable. 

Ver.  _5. — The  land  of  Zuph.  See  on  cL  I 
1.  This  Levite  ancestor  of  Samuel  had  pro- 
bably occupied  and  colonised  this  distoict 
after  the  disasters  recorded  in  the  last  chap- 
ters of  the  Book  of  Judges,  lest  my  father, 
&c  A  mark  of  good  feeling  on  Saul's  part, 
and  a  proof  of  the  affectionate  terms  on  which 
Kish  and  his  family  lived, 

Ver.  6. — In  this  city.  Probably  Rama- 
thaim-zophim,  i.  e.  Ramah,  Samuel's  dwell- 
ing-place and  property.  Confessedly,  how- 
ever, Saul's  route  hither  and  thither  in 
search  of  lost  cattle  is  very  obscure,  and  it  is 
difficult  to  reconcile  this  identification  with 
the  statement  in  ch.  x.  2,  that  Rachel's 
sepulchre  lay  on  the  route  between  this 
city  and  Gibeah  of  Sanl.  Nevertheless, 
Ramah  was  certainly  in  the  land  of  Zuph, 
whence  too  it  took  its  longer  name  (see  on 
ch.  L  1) ;  and  it  ts  reniarfcable  that  Jeremiak 


CH.  IX  t— 27.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


189 


(oh.  xxxL  15)  describes  Eachel's  weeping  as 
being  heard  in  Ramah.  It  seems  extraor- 
dinary that  Saul  should  have  known  nothing 
of  Israel*  chief  ruler,  and  that  his  servant 
was  acquainted  with  him  only  in  his  lower 
capacity  us  a  person  to  be  consulted  in  pri- 
vate difliculties.  He  describes  him,  never- 
theless, aa  an  honourable  man,  or,  more  liter- 
ally, an  honoured  man,  one  held  in  honour. 

Ver.  7.— 'rhe  bread  is  spent  in  our  vessels. 
In  the  East  a  great  man  is  always  approached 
with  a  prssent,  and  offerings  of  food  were  no 
doubt  the  most  usual  gifts  (ch.  xvi.  20). 
Those  made  to  the  false  prophets  are  con- 
temptuously described  in  Ezek.  xiii.  19  as 
"handfiik  of  barley  and  pieces  of  bread." 
A  present.  The  word  is  rare,  and  apparently 
is  the  technical  name  for  a  fee  of  this  kind, 
half  payment  and  half  gift. 

Ver.  8. — Ihe  fourth  part  Of  a  shekel. 
Apparently  the  shekel,  roughly  stamped,  was 
divided  into  four  quarters  by  a  cross,  and 
broken  when  needei  What  was  its  propor- 
tionate value  in  Samuel's  days  we  cannot  tell, 
for  silver  was  rare  ;  but  in  size  it  would  be 
somewhat  bigger  than  a  sixpence,  and  would 
be  a  very  large  fee,  while  the  bread  would  have 
been  a  small  one.  It  very  well  marks  the 
eagerness  of  the  servant  that  he  is  ready  to 
part  with  the  considerable  sum  of  money  in 
his  possession  in  order  to  consult  the  seer. 
The  whole  conversation  is  given  in  a  very 
lively  and  natural  manner. 

Ver.  9. — Beforetime,  &c.  This  verse  is 
evidently  a  gloss,  written  originally  by  some 
later  hand  in  the  margin,  in  order  to  explain 
the  word  used  for  seer  in  vers.  11,  18,  19. 
Inserted  here  in  the  text  it  interrupts  the 
narrative,  and  is  itself  somewhat  incompre- 
hensible. The  Septuagint  offers  a  very  pro- 
bable reading,  namely,  "for  the  people  in 
old  time  used  to  caU  the  prophet  a  seer,"  i.  e. 
it  was  a  word  used  chiefly  by  the  common 
people.  Prophet,  nahi,  is  really  the  older 
and  established  word  from  the  berfnning  of 
the  Old  Testament  to  the  end.  The  word 
roeh,  used  in  this  place  for  seer,  is  compara- 
tively rare,  as  a  popular  word  would  be  in 
written  compositions.  It  refers  to  that  which 
is  seen  by  the  ordinary  sight,  to  waking  vision 
(see  on  ch.  iiL  1,  10),  whereas  the  other 
word  for  seer,  chozeh,  refers  to  ecstatic  vision. 
Roeh  is  nsed  by  Isaiah,  ch.  xxx.  10,  ap- 
parently In  much  the  same  sense  as  here,  of 
those  whom  the  people  consulted  in  their 
difilculties,  and  they  might  be  true  prophets 
as  Samuel  was,  or  mere  pretenders  to  occult 
powers.  The  present  narrative  makes  it 
plain  that  roih  was  used  in  a  good  sense  in 
Samuel's  days ;  but  gradually  it  became  de- 
graded, and  wUle  ehozeh  became  the  respect- 
ful word  for  a  prophet,  ro^h  became  the  con- 
trary. Another  conclusion  also  follows.  We 
bare  wen  that  there  are  various  indications 


that  the  Books  of  Samuel  in  their  present 
state  are  later  than  hia  days.  Here,  on  the 
contrary,  we  have  a  narrative  couched  in  tlie 
very  language  of  his  times  ;  for  the  vmter  of 
the  gloss  contained  in  this  verse  was  dis- 
pleased at  Samuel  being  called  a  roeh,  but 
did  not  dare  to  alter  it,  though  taking  care 
to  note  that  it  was  equivalent  in  those  day» 
to  calling  him  a  nab^. 

Vers.  11,  12. — As  they  went  up.  Ramah' 
was  situated  on  a,  double  hill,  whence  its 
name  Ramathaim  (ch.  i.  1).  As,  then,  they 
go  up  the  ascent — so  the  Hebrew,  literally 
—  they  meet  maidens  on  the  way  to  the 
well,  and  ask  them.  Is  the  seer — the  roeh — 
here  1  They  answer,  Yes ;  behold,  he  it 
before  you.  /.  e.  they  are  to  go  straight- 
forward, and  farther  on  in  the  town  they 
wUl  find  him.  He  came  to-day  to  the  city. 
As  Saul's  servant  knew  that  this  city  was 
Samuel's  abode,  the  words  must  mean  that 
he .  had  just  returned  from  visiting  one  ol 
those  places,  probably,  to  which  he  was  in 
the  habit  of  going  as  judge.  From  ch.  xvL 
2  we  learn  that  Samuel  went  occasionally 
even  to  distant  places  to  perform  priestly 
duties.  In  the  high  place.  Hebrew,  Bamah. 
Samuel,  we  read,  had  built  an  altar  at  Ramah 
(ch.  vii.  17),  and  probably  the  present  sacri- 
fice was  to  be  offered  upon  it.  Such  altars, 
and  the  worship  of  the  true  God  upon  high 
places,  were  at  this  time  recognised  as  right, 
and  were,  in  fact,  in  accordance  with,  and 
were  even  the  remains  of,  the  old  patriarchal 
religion.  But  gradually  they  were  condemned, 
partly  because  of  the  gi'owing  sanctity  of  the 
temple,  but  chiefly  because  of  the  tendency 
of  religious  rites  celebrated  in  such  places  to 
degenerate  into  nature-worship,  and  orgies 
such  as  the  heathen  were  in  the  habit  of 
holding  on  the  tops  of  mountains  and  bills. 
We  thus  find  in  the  Bible  an  illustration  of 
the  principle  that  rites  and  ceremonies  (as 
not  being  of  the  essentials  of  religion)  may 
be  changed,  or  even  abolished,  if  they  are 
abused,  or  lead  on  to  evil  consequences. 

Ver.  13. — As  soon  as  .  .  .  straightway. 
This  is  too  forcible  a  rendering  of  the  Hebrew 
particles,  and  makes  the  talk  of  these  water- 
carriers  even  more  garrulous  than  it  is  in  the 
original.  The  latter  word  should  be  omitted, 
as  they  simply  say  that  on  entering  the  ci  ly 
Saul  and  his  servant  would  easily  find  Samuul ; 
for  he  would  not  go  up  to  the  feast  till,  all 
was  ready,  nor  would  the  people  begin  till 
he  had  arrived,  because  it  was  his  office  to 
bless  the  sacrificial  banquet.  The  pious 
custom  of  asking  a  blessing  on  meals,  our 
Lord's  "giving  of  thanks,"  is  inherited  by 
us  from  the  Jews. 

Ver.  14. — When  they  were  come  into. 
More  correctly,  "  As  they  wore  going  into 
the  city."  This  agrees  with  what  is  said  in 
yer.   18,  that  Saul  and  Samuel  met  in  the 


I«0 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[CH.  IX.  1—27. 


fateway.     As  Ramah  occupied  two  Mils,  the 
lamah  would  be  on  the  summit  of  one,  while 
the  city  prohaWy  nestled  between  them. 

Ver.  15. — Now  Jehovah  had  told  Samuel  in 
his  ear.  Literally,"  had  uncovered  hisear," 
as  in  Ruth  iv.  4  ;  2  Sam.  viL  27.  The  phrase 
is  taken  from  the  pushing  aside  of  the  head- 
dress in  order  to  whisper,  and  therefore  means 
■  that  Jehovah  had  secretly  told  Samuel. 

Ver.  16-. — That  he  may  save  my  people 
out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philistines.  Though 
Samuel  had  lightened  the  yoke  of  the  Pliilis- 
tiues  by  his  victory  at  Mizpah,  yet  he  had 
by  no  means  altogether  broken  their  power. 
It  is  so  constantly  the  habit  of  the  historical 
books  of  the  Bible  to  include  the  distant  and 
ultimate  results  of  an  act  in  their  account  of 
it,  that  we  must  not  conclude  that  what  is 
said  in  ch.  vii.  13 — 15  was  the  immediate 
consequence  of  Samuel's  victory.  Especially, 
when  it  said  that  "the  hand  of  Jehovah 
was  against  the  Philistines  all  the  days  of 
Samuel,"  it  is  plain  that  Saul's  successful 
wars  are  included  in  the  writer's  summary  of 
events,  inasmuch  as  Samuel's  life  was  pro- 
longed until  nearly  the  close  of  that  monarch's 
reign.  The  words  further  show  that  Saul's 
office  was  essentially  military,  though  this  is 
too  much  emphasised  in  the  A.  v.,  which 
readers  by  captain  a  word  which  really  means 
prince,  chief.  Saul,  as  a  Benjamite,  belonged 
to  the  bravest  and  most  warlike  tribe  of 
Israel,  and 'one  whose  country  was  the  seat 
of  perpetual  combat  with  the  Philistines. 
Their  ory  is  come  unto  me.  Plainly,  there- 
fore, Israel  was  again  suffering  from  Philistine 
domination. 

Ver.  17. — Jehovah  said  unto  him.  Liter- 
ally, "Jehovah  answered  him."  When  Samuel 
saw  the  young  stranger,  struck  by  his  tower- 
ing height,  he  wondered  within  himself  whe- 
ther this  were  the  destined  hero  who  was 
to  win  freedom  for  Israel.  The  afSrmation, 
therefore,  came  in  answer  to  the  question 
asked  by  his  heart;  The  same  shall  reign 
over  my  people.  More  literally,  the  margin, 
"  restrain  in,"  i.  e,  coerce,  control.  The  A. 
v.,  preferring  as  usual  a  general  to  an  exact 
rendering,  loses  this  plain  indication  that 
Siiul's  would  be  a  strict  and  stern  rule. 

Ver.  18.— In  the  gate.  The  same  prepo- 
.siLion  is  used  here  as  that  translated  "into 
llio  city"  in  ver.  14.  The  contradiction 
which  many  commentators  suppose  that  they 
find  between  the  two  verses  arises  from  their 
not  remembering  that  prepositior.s  constantly 
lose  their  original  meanmg.  Literally  the 
preposition  means  in  the  middle,  but  its 
common  meaning  is  simply  within.  So  with 
ns  immediately  has  lost  all  reference  to  the 
middle,  though  derived  from  that  word,  and 
signifies  directly,  at  once.  Saul,  then,  and 
his  servant  were  just  going  (it  is  a  present 
participle),  within  the  city  when  they  meet 


Samuel  coming  out,  and  accost  him  in  the 
very  portal. 

Vers.  19,  20.  —  Go  up  before  me.  Ad- 
dressed in  the  singular  to  Saul,  to  whom,  as 
the  future  king,  Samuel  pays  every  mark  oi 
honour.  The  next  words,  Ye  shall  eat,  in- 
clude Saul's  servant.  I  will  tell  thee  all, 
&c.  Intended  not  merely  to  set  Saul's  mind 
at  rest,  but  also  to  prepare  him  for  the  great 
news  he  was  to  hear.  So,  too,  the  infonna- 
tion  that  the  asses  were  found,  given  to  him 
before  he  had  even  hinted  at  the  object  ol 
his  visit,  would  convince  him  of  the  reality 
of  Samuel's  prophetic  powers.  On  whom 
is  all  the  desire  of  Israeli  Rather,  "To 
whom  belongs  all  that  is  desirable  in  Israel? 
Is  it  not  for  thee,  and  for  thy  father's 
house  ? "  The  words  were  intended  to  indi- 
cate to  Saul,  though  in  an  obscure  manner, 
that  the  supreme  power  in  Israel  would  be 
his.  Why  trouble  about  she-asses  ?  They 
might  be  beautiful,  and  a  valuable  property 
for  a  husbandman ;  but  he  was  about  to 
become  a  king,  to  whom  would  belong  every- 
thing that  was  best  and  most  precious. 

Ver.  21. — Wherefore  then  speakest  thou 
10  to  me  1  Though  Samuel's  words  contained 
the  promise  of  supreme  power, — for  to  whom 
less  than  a  king  could  all  that  was  desirable 
in  Israel  belong ! — yet  Saiil  probably  regarded 
them  as  a  high-Hown  compliment,  such  as 
Orientals  love  to  use,  and  gave  a  modest  and 
proper  answer.  Benjamin,  already  the  small- 
est tribe,  had  been  so  crushed  that  its  power 
must  have  been  very  small,  and  Saul's  house, 
though  opulent,  was  not  a  leading  one  ;  how 
then  could  one  of  its  members  expect  so  high 
a  dignity?  For  families  of  the  tribe  of 
Benjamin  the  Hebrew  has  "tribes,"  pro- 
bably owing  to  some  confusion  with  the 
words  "  tribes  of  Israel "  just  before. 

Vers.  22,  23. — Into  the  parlour.  Strictly 
the  cell  or  room  attached  to  the  chapel  of 
the  hmh  place,  now  used  as  the  guest-cham- 
ber, wherein  the  thirty  chief  men,  who  came 
as  invited  guests,  were  to  dine.  The  rest  of 
the  people  would  be  in  the  open  air.  There 
Samuel  not  only  placed  Saul  in  the  seat  of 
honour,  but  also  his  servant,  as  representing 
the  king's  officers  of  state,  and  commanded 
the  cook  to  set  before  him  a  portion  that 
had  been  reserved.  This  was  the  shoulder  ; 
but  whether  it  was  the  left  shoulder,  ol 
which  the  laity  might  eat,  or  the  right 
shoulder,  which  was  sacred,  as  belonging  to 
the  priest  (Levit.  viL  32),  is  not  mentioned. 
If  the  latter,  it  was  Samuel's  own  share,  and 
he  may  by  his  prophetic  authority  have 
assigned  it  to  Sam,  in  token  that  the  priest* 
hood  would  be  subject  to  the  royal  power. 
Be  this,  however,  as  it  may,  it  was  the  por- 
tion of  honour,  and  it  seems  that  Samuel, 
on  receiving  intimation  the  previous  day 
of  Saul's  visit  (ver    Id),   had  given  orden 


OH.  n.  1—27.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


161 


that  it  should  he  carefally  reserved  for  him 
{■vex.  24).  He  now  orders  it  to  be  set_  before 
Sanl,  with  that  whioh  was  upon  it,  i.  e.  all 
the  flesh  and  the  fat  not  appointed  to  be 
burnt  upon  the  altar. 

Ver.  24,  — And  Samuel  said.  Samuel's 
name  is  not  given  in  the  Hebrew,  and 
though  inserted  by  the  Septuagint  and  Vul- 
gate, it  is  so  only  by  a  manifest  error.  The 
Syriac  and  Chaldee,  like  the  Hebrew,  make 
the  cook  the  speaker.  The  right  translation 
is,  "And  the  cook  lifted  up  the  shoulder 
with  that  which  was  upon  it,  and  set  it 
before  Saul,  and  said,  '  Behold,  that  whioh 
hath  been  reserved  is  set  (a  participle,  and 
not  the  imperative)  before  thee ;  eat,  for  it 
hath  been  kept  for  thee  unto  the  appointed 
time  of  which  he  {i.  e.  Samuel)  spake,  saying, 
I  have  invited  the  people.' "  The  word  irana- 
lated  in  the  A.  V.  since  I  said  is  one  which 
means  saying,  and  nothing  else ;  and  as 
what  goes  before  contains  no  verb  to  which 
saying  can  refer,  it  is  plain  that  there  is  an 
ellipse.  But  if  the  cook  be  the  speaker,  the 
meaning  is  plain,  as  follows  : — When  on  the 
previous  day  the  revelation  was  made  to 
Samuel  that  Israel's  future  king  would  pre- 
sent himself  on  the  morrow,  the  prophet  at 
once  made  preparations  to  receive  him  with 
due  solemnity,  and  for  this  purpose  arranged 
a  sacrifice,  and  invited  thirty  of  the  chief 
citizens  of  Kamah  to  assemble  at  the  high 
place,  and  sit  at  the  banquet  with  him.  And 
then  it  was,  when  telling  the  cook  of  his 
invitation,  that  he  gave  orders  that  the  por- 
tion of  honour  should  be  carefully  reserved, 
to  be  set  at  the  fitting  time  before  the  stranger. 
The  chat  of  the  cook  is  entirely  after  the 
manner  of  ancient  times,  and  would  show 
Saul  how  completely  his  coming  had  been 
foreseen  and  provided  for. 

Ver.  26. — When  the  feast  was  over  they 


went  down  from  the  high  place,  and  having 
entered  the  city,  proceeded  to  Samuel's  dwell, 
ing,  where  he  communed  with  Sanl  upon  the 
top  of  the  house.  The  Septuagint  has  a 
very' probable  reading,  namely,  "And  they 
spread  a  bed  for  Saul  upon  the  roof,  and  he 
lay  down  ; "  but  the  Syriac  and  Chaldee  agree 
with  the  Hebrew.  Without  communicating 
to  Saul  that  he  was  to  be  king,  which  was 
not  revealed  to  him  till  the  next  day  (ch.  z. 
1),  Samuel  might  be  anxious  to  impress  on 
Saul's  mind  the  great  principles  of  the  theo- 
cratic government,  and  also  the  nature  of 
the  remedies  necessary  for  Israel's  recovery 
from  its  present  misery. 

Vers.  26,  27. — It  came  to  pass  about  th« 
spring  of  the  day.  This  is  not  a  separate 
act  from  they  arose  early ;  for  the  A.  V. 
is  wrong  in  translating  the  next  clause, 
"  Samuel  Called  Saul  to  the  top  of  the  house." 
Saul  had  slept  there,  and,-  wearied  out  with 
his  long  wanderings  and  the  excitement  of 
the  previous  day,  was  fast  asleep  when  Samuel 
came  to  him.  The  Hebrew  is,  "And  they 
rose  early ;  for  at  the  spring  of  the  day 
Samuel  called  to  Saul  upon  the  house-top, 
saying,"  &c.  And  no  sooner  had  Saul  risen 
than  they  started  upon  his  journey  home, 
and  as  soon  as  they  had  left  the  city,  at  some 
fitting  spot,  Samuel  bade  the  servant  go 
forward,  and  as  soon  as  he  and  Saul  were 
alone  he  spake  unto  him  the  word  of  God. 
And  by  that  Divine  word  he  whc  had  left 
his  father's  house  in  search  of  lost  asses 
was  summoned  to  a  post  which,  if  one  of  the 
greatest  dignity,  was  full  also  of  danger,  and 
burdened  with  solemn  responsibility.  And 
while  on  the  human  side  Saul  proved  not 
unworthy  of  a  royal  crown,  in  his  relation 
towards  God  he  failed,  because  he  let  self-. 
will  and  earthly  policy  prevail  in  hia  heart 
over  obedience  and  trust  in  God. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 10. — Divine  consideration.    The  facts  ar&— 1.  Saul  the  son  o£  Kish,  a 

wealthy  Benjamite,  and  remarkable  for  stature  and  goodliness,  seeks  liis  father's  asses. 
2.  Not  finding  them,  he  fears  lest  his  father  should  be  anxious  about  his  own  safety, 
and  suggests  a  return  home.  3.  His  servant  advises  a  recourse  to  a  distinguished 
man  of  God  then  in  those  parts.  4.  Obtaining  a  small  present,  Saul  resolves  to  con- 
sult the  man  of  God  concerning  the  lost  asses.  A  great  crisis  has  conio  in  which  the 
dangerous  elements  at  work  in  Israel's  heart  might  lead  to  much  mischief.  The  chief 
motive  for  desiring  a  king  being  a  craving  for  outward  display,  and  a  corresponding 
distrust  and  dislike  of  God's  more  unseen  and  immediate  direction  of  national  afiEairs, 
it  was  evidently  possible  for  steps  to  be  taken  which  would  ruin  Israel's  prosperity. 
The  narrative  relates  to  us  a  series  of  Divinely-governed  events,  apparently  trivial, 
which  prevented  that  calamity  and  insured  the  national  safety. 

I.  God's  begclation  of  imperfect  desires  and  dangebods  aspibations.  There  is 
no  harm  in  desire  for  monarchy  per  se  ;  but  the  form  it  assumed  in  this  instance  was 
defective,  and  it  revealed  a  moral  tendency  which,  if  fed  by  appropriate  nourishment, 
would  lead  to  a  frustration  of  Israel's  true  work  in  the  world.  The  saving  feature  in 
their  conduct  was  their  deference  to  Samuel.    The  instruction  conveyed  to  him  to 

1  BAM.  K 


169  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  ix.  1—27. 

select  a  king  was  consistent  with  the  fact  that  God  was  displeased  with  their  request 
(ch.  viii.  7  ;  cf.  Hosea  xiii.  11).  The  solution  of  the  apparent  discrepancy  lies  in  the 
cirouiristance  that  God  does  not  leave  his  people  to  the  full  bent  of  their  own  heart. 
He  mercifully  regarded  their  condition,  and  governed  their  tendencies  in  such  a  way  as 
to  make  the  best  of  a  bad  case.  This  is  true,jnoTe  oilesB,  of  all  men  not  yet fudicially 
abandoned.  There  is  a  force  of  evil  in  men  enough  to  destroy  them  speedily  but  for 
(he  restraining  power  of  God.  The  mental  operations  of  sinners  are  governed  by  an 
unseen  hand,  and  often  directed  to  their  advantage,  when,  otherwise,  evil  would  ensue. 
There  have  been  ages  in  the  history  of  the  Church  when  conspicuously  unhallowed 
desires  and  worldly  aspirations  have  not  been  left  to  work  ruir ,  but  /lave  been 
chastened,  controlled,  directed  to  objects  better  than  they,  left  to  themselves,  would 
have  chosen.  The  age  of  Constantine  would  have  been  more  calamitous  for  religion 
had  not  the  Head  of  the  Church  governed  rising  tendencies  and  provided  moderating 
influences. 

II.  God'b  cabe  in  meeting  man's  weakness.  Not  any  man  would  suit  Israel  as 
king  at  that  time.  There  were  conditions  in  the  state  of  the  people  which  needed  to 
be  wisely  met.  The  people  were  impressible  by  the  outward  physical  aspect  of  things ; 
they  required  a  leader  of  social  position  to  command  respect ;  and  their  own  hankering 
after  likeness  to  other  nations  rendered  it  important  that  their  king  should  have  some 
moral  character ;  at  the  same  time,  being  their  choice,  he  must  be  a  representative  of 
the  weaknesses  and  wisdom  jf  the  age.  Hence  the  care  of  God  in  directing  Samuel  to 
Saul,  a  man  of  commanding  appearance  (ver.  2),  of  wealthy  family  (vers.  1 — 3),  of 
quiet,  plodding,  God-fearing  disposition, — as  seen  in  occupation,  in  his  concern  for  his 
father,  and  in  his  deference  to  the  prophet, — and  yet  of  no  deep,  intelligent  piety.  This 
Divine  care  is  no  novelty  in  history.  Litis  constant — coextensive  with  the  history 
of  the  race.  Even  fallen  Adam  was  cared  for  in  temporal  things.  The  order  of 
Providence,  the  adaptation  of  his  Word  to  varying  exigencies  of  life,  the  appoint- 
ments in  his  Church  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  are  only  some  instances  of  a  care 
that  never  faileth.  2.  It  is  secret.  Israel  little  knew,  while  those  asses  were  wander- 
ing from  home,  that  their  God  was  caring  so  wisely  and  tenderly  for  them.  Silent  as 
the  light  is  the  voice  that  orders  our  path  ;  more  subtle  than  either  is  the  hand  that 
guards  our  spirit.  By  daj'  and  night  his  hand  leads,  even  to  the  uttermost  parts  of  the 
earth.  3.  It  is  beyond  all  desert.  Even  when  Israel  was  in  spirit  rejecting  him  he 
cared  for  them.  "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up  ?  "  is  the  feeling  of  the  Father's  heart. 
He  rewards  us  "  not  according  to  our  iniquities."  The  daily  mercies  of  God  are  more 
than  can  be  numbered,  and  they  come  because  he  delighteth  in  mercy,  not  because 
we  earn  them  by  obedience  and  love. 

III.  God's  leading  by  unknown  ways.  While  restraining  and  regulating  Israel's 
tendencies,  an  unseen  hand  is  leading  the  son  of  Kish  by  a  way  he  knew  not.  In  the 
straying  of  asses  and  in  the  following  their  track  we  first  see  natural  events ;  but 
behind  and  in  them  all  we  soon  learn  to  see  God  gently  leading  Saul  from  a  quiet, 
rural  life  to  undertake  a  great  and  honourable  responsibility.  It  is  not  strange  for 
God  to  lead  by  unknown  paths  those  whom  he  chooses  for  his  service.  Abraham  did 
not  know  the  full  meaning  of  the  secret  imptilse  to  leave  Ur  of  the  Chaldees.  Joseph's 
imprisonment  was  not  man's  sole  doing.  Egyptians  in  the  court  of  Pharaoh  saw 
not  the  hand  guiding  Moses  into  a  knowledge  of  their  legislation  and  their  learn- 
ing. Likewise  is  it  true  in  the  bringing  of  men  to  a  knowledge  of  Christ.  Many  a 
Bimple  circumstance  has  brought  a  wanderer  to  a  greater  than  Samuel.  And  in  the 
Christian  life  we  are  led  by  circuitous,  untrodden  paths  to  duties,  privileges,  joys, 
and  eternal  rest.  God  is  Guide  and  Counsellor — by  monitions  of  conscience,  by  word 
of  truth,  by  voice  of  friends,  by  barred  pathways  of  life,  by  yearnings  created 
within,  by  events  great  and  smalt 

General  lessons  : — 1.  Let  us  have  faith  in  God's  mastery  over  all  that  is  in  man.  2. 
Let  us  believe  that  he  will  provide  for  his  people  suitably  to  their  need.  3.  Let  us 
keep  our  heart  and  eye  open  to  the  guidance  of  the  unseen  Power,  and  not  despise 
events  that  seem  trifling  in  themselves. 

Vers.  11 — 17. — Man's  accidents  God's  ordinations.  The  facts  are — 1.  On  entering 
the  city  Saul  inquires  for  the  seer,  and  is  informed  that  he  is  present  for  a  special 


CH.  IX.  1—27  1  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  163 

religioiM  service.  2.  Following  the  directions  given,  lie  meets  Samuel  ascending  to 
the  high  place.  3.  Samuel  is  already  instructed  by  God  to  expect  during  the  day 
the  man  whom  he  is  to  anoint  as  king.  4.  On  seeing  Saul,  an  intimation  is  given 
from  God  that  he  is  the  chosen  man.  In  some  respects  this  narrative  of  events  re- 
semble* what  is  occurring  every  day  in  every  land,  for  we  have  here  a  set  of  inde- 
pendent actions  converging  on  a  common  result.  No  single  meeting  of  men  occurs 
in  society  without  a  variety  of  acts  and  movements  having  directly  or  indirectly 
preceded  it  as  links  in  the  chain  of  causation.  But  the  speciality  in  this  instance 
is  the  information  that  the  meeting  of  Saul  and  Samuel  was  pre-ordained  of  God, 
Hence  the  incident  is  an  illustration  of  the  double  side  of  what  to  men  may  appear 
to  be  only  ordinary  human  occurrences.  An  uninformed  person  would  have  said 
that  it  was  accidental  that  the  asses  went  astray,  and  that  maidens  directed  Saul  to 
their  city,  where  Samuel  happened  to  be.  To  Saul  it  so  appeared  ;  but,  guided  by  the 
inspired  narrative,  we  know  that  the  "  accident "  was  "  fore-ordained  "  without  de- 
stroying its  really  accidental  character.  We  may  notice  what  light  the  record  before 
us  throws  on  tlie  general  question  of  special  providences. 

I.  We  SEE  HERB  THE  FREE  ACTION  OF  MANY  INDEPENDENT  WILLS.      In  80  far  aS  aSSes 

exercise  will,  those  were  free  in  straying  from  home  on  that  day.  The  action  of  Kish 
in  selecting  Saul  rather  than  any  one  else  to  seek  them  was  quite  his  own.  The  readiness 
of  Saul  to  obey  his  father  and  not  find  a  substitute  in  the  toil  was  unconstrained. 
The  mental  and  emotional  antecedents  of  the  citizens  prompting  their  will  Jo  arrange 
for  Samuel  to  visit  their  city  were  natural,  and  operated  on  wills  perfectly  inde- 
pendent. The  suggestion  of  the  servant  that  Saul  should  not  return,  but  go  to  this  very 
city,  arose  spontaneously  ;  and  Saul's  concern  for  his  father  was  relieved  by  consider- 
ations which  he  freely  )delded  to.  The  action  of  Samuel,  amidst  his  many  public 
engagements,  was  free  in  deciding  to  offer  sacrifice,  and,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  not 
exclusively  connected  with  an  expectation  of  meeting  the  coming  king  in  that  par- 
ticular place.  In  addition  to  all  these  free  and  independent  acts,  there  were  events 
which  tended  to  turn  the  free  acts  in  the  one  direction.  Lack  of  pasture  in  certain 
places  may  have  influenced  the  asses  to  take  the  course  they  did.  The  distance  to  be 
traversed  was  just  such  as  to  bring  Saul  to  the  vicinity  of  Samuel  where  persons  were 
at  hand  to  answer  his  questions.  The  difficulty  of  approaching  the  prophet  with  a 
proper  token  of  respect  was  overcome  by  the  casual  possession  of  a  small  coin. 
This  analysis  of  fad  accords  with  whai  may  he  affirmed  of  thousands  of  incidents 
every  day.  Independent  lines  of  force  converge  on  one  point  and  issue  in  an  his- 
torical resultant.  In  no  case  recorded  in  Scripture  does  any  supreme  power  take 
away  freedom  of  action. 

II.  The  FREE  ACTION  OF  MANY  IS  ATTENDED  BY  THE  UNRECOGNISED  ACTION  OF  GOD. 

In  the  instance  before  us  this  is  obvious,  for  it  was  ordained  that  Samuel  should  meet 
with  Saul  on  that  very  day,  though  they  were  so  far  apart  (vers.  15,  16).  Whether 
it  was  "  chance  "  that  took  Saul  to  that  city  or  some  influence  exerted  on  him  is 
easily  answered  by  the  fact  that  it  was  God's  purpose  for  Samuel  to  see  and  anoint 
him.  God's  fore-ordination  does  not  wait  on  "  chance."  The  same  reasoning  would 
show  that  even  the  course  taken  by  the  asses,  though  free,  was  not  without  God's 
action.  The  inspiration  of  Samuel's  conduct  is  a  primary  fact  of  the  prophetic 
oflice.  It  is  possible  to  start  difficulties  in  relation  to  this  subject ;  but  they  are  diffi- 
culties of  ignorance,  not  of  knowledge,  and  therefore  lose  much  of  their  force.  We 
do  not  even  know  what  the  free  act  of  will  is,  though  we  know  the  fact.  We  know  that 
our  actions  are  free,  and  yet  that  we  are  influenced  by  others.  The  point  of  junction 
between  the  external  influence  and  the  free  act  of  our  will  has  never  been  detected  ; 
therefore,  any  dif&culties  which  men  raise  against  these  narratives  in  the  Bible  lie 
equally  against  all  interaction  of  free  natures.  The  Scripture  doctrine  is  that  God 
does  act  on  man  without  destroying  his  freedom.  God  is  not  a  laterU  energy.  He 
assures  us  that  he  is  a  real  Power,  working  in  some  "  mightily  to  will  and  to  do,"  and 
striving  with  others.  The  highest  government  is  only  possible  on  this  supposition. 
The  possibility  of  what  are  called  special  providences  resolves  itself  into  the  fret 
action  of  a  supreme  Spirit  on  created  spirits,  so  as  to  secure  their  free  and  independent 
action,  and  at  the  same  time  cause  that  action  to  converge  on  given  points.  Wee'ren 
can  do  that  in  some  degree  with  children  and  feebler  natures.    Why  do  men  wish  to 

v2 


164  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  n.  1—27 

banish  the  eternal  energy  from  all  participation  in  human  affairs  y  Do  not  these 
events  with  their  issue  stand  out  as  a  microcosm  of  the  great  converging  lines 
which  in  the  far-distant  future  are  to  issue  in  one  glorious  resultant — the  realisation 
of  a  holy  will  through  the  free  and  independent  action  of  treated  wills  ? 

III.  The  RECOGNITION  OF  God's  ACTION  COMES  OUT  IN  THE  RESULT.  The  Divine 
action  is  silent,  unobserved,  often  unknown  while  in  process.  Samuel  saw  it  as  a 
reality  when  Saul  stood  before  him.  The  story  of  the  asses  and  of  the  search  then 
had  another  meaning.  Men  see  not  one  half  of  the  realities  of  life.  The  true,  real 
world  is  the  unseen.  The  great  transactions  are  wrought  in  the  inner  man.  We  are 
often  led  by  a  hand  we  do  not  see,  and  drawn  on  by  a  sweet  influence  we  cannot 
define.  Only  the  more  spiritual,  saintly  souls  discern  God.  But  as  Samuel  saw  what 
God  had  been  doing,  so  we  at  last  come  to  see  what  God  hath  wrought.  That  will  be 
a  wondrous  recognition  of  the  all-working  Spirit  when  a  vast  redeemed  race  shall,  in 
review  of  life's  chequered  course,  sing  the  new  song,  and  exclaim  with  deep  signifi- 
cance, "  Not  unto  us,  0  Lord,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name  give  glory." 

IV.  The  Divine  reason  for  the  exercise  of  this  silent  power.  The  compassion 
of  God  for  his  wayward  people  (ver.  16)  was  the  spring  of  the  particular  direction 
he  gave  on  this  day  to  the  course  of  Saul  and  Samuel.  Every  small  series  of  events 
affecting  individuals  and  families  is,  so  far  as  relates  to  the  action  of  God  in  them, 
governed  by  some  Divine  reason.  Though  trouble  be  brought  on,  the  reason  is  still 
one  of  mercy.  The  retributions  of  Providence  are  in  mercy  to  the  universe  he 
governs.  And  it  may  certainly  be  said  of  the  sum-total  of  events,  that  when  the 
great  result  shall  be  attained,  it  will  be  known  then,  if  not  before,  that  all  was  the 
expression  of  a  compassion  which  sought  to  save  the  erring  world  from  its  own 
miseries. 

General  lessons : — 1.  The  perfect  government  of  God  is  secured  by  his  mastery  of 
every  detail  in  the  action  and  willing  of  his  creatures.  2.  There  is  consolation  for 
his  people  in  the  fact  that  he  directeth  the  spirit  of  man,  and  can  subdue  all  things  to 
himself.  3.  It  is  blessed  to  go  forth  daily  with  the  assurance  that  God  works  with 
US,  in  us,  and  for  us,  and  will  therefore  perfect  that  which  concerneth  us. 

Vers.  18 — 24. — Shadows  of  coming  events.  The  facts  are — 1.  Saul,  on  accosting 
Samuel,  is  invited  to  stay  with  him,  is  assured  of  the  safety  of  the  asses,  and  is  caused 
to  know  that  great  honour  is  in  store  for  him.  2.  Saul,  taken  by  surprise,  desires  to 
have  further  explanations  of  the  language  used.  3.  Samuel  entertains  Saul  with  all 
the  honours  due  to  a  distinguished  guest.  The  position  of  Samuel  was  one  of  rela- 
tive advantage,  for  Saul  was  ignorant  of  the  Divine  intent,  while  he  knew  the  pur- 
pose of  God.  The  course  taken  by  Samuel  was  as  follows : — First  he  intimated  to 
Saul  that  it  would  be  well  to  accept  his  proffered  hospitality,  as  he  had  a  communi- 
cation to  make  which  would  draw  out  his  interest  (ver.  19).  Then  he  relieves  his 
care  about  bis  father's  property,  and  awakens  more  curiosity  by  the  further  intima- 
tion that  the  choice  things  of  Israel  were  in  reserve  for  him  and  his  father's  house. 
To  prevent  hasty  explanations,  he  next  induces  him  to  take  his  place  in  an  entertain- 
ment as  chief  guest ;  thus  by  a  significant  act  preparing  him  and  the  people  for  some- 
thing more  definite.  And  with  all  the  kindliness  and  courtesy  due  to  distinction, 
he  threw  a  gleam  of  light  on  the  strange  proceeding  by  reminding  him  that  though 
his  presence  there  seemed  accidental,  it  was  not  quite  so,  as  he  was  the  person  for 
whom  the  dish  of  honour  had  been  reserved  (ver.  24).  Thus  was  the  nomination 
of  Saul  as  the  king  shadowed  forth.  In  all  this  the  prophet  acted  in  his  official  capacity 
as  representative  of  God.  May  we  not  see  here  how  God  prepares  us  for  disclosures 
of  his  will  ? 

I.  The  FULL  truth  God  woniD  havb  us  know  ib  broken  up  and  madb  clbar  bt 
DKGREBS.  The  prophet  here  was  slightly  opening  the  veil  before  the  eyes  of  Saul ; 
he  was  qualifying  his  sight  for  dazzling  splendour.  And  that  is  just  what  all  the 
prophets  of  God  have  done  and  are  doing  for  us.  They  intimate  to  us  that  there  are 
great  truths  in  reserve,  and  so  speak  to  us  by  the  way  as  to  indicate  in  dim  oatline 
what  some  day  will  stand  out  in  eternal  clearness.  The  figures,  the  types,  the  aUn- 
sions  to  the  "  unspeakable,"  the  remmcers  that  we  are  but  disciples,  cMHren — all  are 
foresbadowinjre  of  great  realities  on  which  the  mind  will  in  future  gaze.    "  We  know 


OH.  IX.  1—27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  165 

in  part. "  It  is  true  the  Bible  is  all  we  need  for  salvation,  and  contains  more  spiritaal 
trutk  than  elsewhere  to  be  found  ;  but  in  one  sense  it  is  to  men  a  treasure,  and  wa 
are  only  fitted  to  receive  out  of  it  a  dim  intimation  of  the  truth,  as  Saul  was  fitted 
only  to  receive  from  the  mind  of  the  prophet  a  portion  of  what  was  there  for  him. 
The  procest  by  which  God's  truth  was  given  to  the  world — by  allusion,  dim  prophecy, 
type,  historical  examples  foreshadowing  the  Christ,  till  at  last  the  full  announcement 
came — is  another  illustration  of  the  gentleness  and  wisdom  wherewith  God  has 
"  spoken  "  to  men. 

II.  The  FULL  HONOURS  QoD  HAS  IN  BESERVB  FOB  HIS  PEOPLE  ARE  QRADtJALLY  REVEALED. 
Saul  wondered  what  distinction  was  awaiting  him.  He  felt  unworthy  of  such  lan- 
guage as  that  used  by  the  prophet.,  His  wonder  was  not  satisfied  at  once.  Men  have 
been  known  to  die  under  the  sudden  declarations  of  bliss  awaiting  them.  Equally  so 
God  has  in  reserve  for  all  who  are  one  with  Christ  a  crown,  a  glory,  an  honour,  which 
though  we  know  by  name,  we  know  not  in  reality.  "  We  know  not  what  we  shall 
be."  There  is  a  joy  and  glory  unspeakable.  There  are  things  which  an  apostle 
could  not  utter.  Future  realities  are  only  dimly  shadowed  forth  by  earthly  words 
and  sj^nbols.     A  full  vision  of  coming  honours  might  paralyse  the  strongest  frame. 

General  lessons : — 1.  Deep  interest  in  the  welfare  of  the  Church  of  God  will  sup- 
press all  feelings  of  personal  jealousy.  2.  A  good  man  will  enter  heartily  into  new 
methods  recognised  by  God,  even  though  at  first  they  were  distressing  to  his  own 
heart.  3.  The  qualities  of  gentleness  and  courtesy  towards  God's  servants  have  the 
highest  sanction,  and  do  much  to  facilitate  private  and  public  business.  4.  The  keen- 
est sense  of  unworthiness  is  that  experienced  when  God  confers  on  us  the  choice 
honours  and  treasures  of  his  kingdom.  6.  The  transition  to  the  full  glory  of _  the 
future  will  be  natural  and  easy  in  so  far  as  we  avail  ourselves  of  the  shadowings 
forth  of  the  reality  contained  in  God's  word. 

Vers.  25 — 27. — Interest  in  public  chairs.  The  facts  are — 1.  After  the  paUio  inti- 
mation of  Saul's  coming  distinction  Samuel  converses  with  him  in  private.  2.  On 
sending  him  away  on  the  next  day  Samuel  will  have  no  one  present  at  the  moment 
of  partmg.  Saul  is  passive.  Samuel  is  still  the  most  important.  As  yet  all  hfid 
been  public.  Enough  had  been  said  to  call  up  from  Saul's  heart  feelings  and  aspira- 
tions which  in  his  quiet  life  had  lain  dormant  (ver.  19).  He  now  felt  that  God  had 
something  for  him  to  do  in  Israel,  and  his  heart  revealed  sentiments  answering  to  the 
shadowed  honour.  It  was  fit,  therefore,  to  commence  privately  on  topics  connected 
with  the  condition  and  prospects  of  Israel.  The  invitation  to  the  privacy  of  the 
house-top  for  this  purpose  was  thus  in  keeping  with  Samuel's  wise  procedure,  and  a 
good  illustration  of  his  deep  interest  in  the  public  welfare.  The  most  probable  ex- 
planation of  the  conduct  of  Samuel  certainly  is,  that  his  concern  for  the  welfare  of  the 
nation  and  of  the  coming  king  irresistibly  prompted  him  to  converse  on  the  wants 
of  the  age,  and  the  responsibilities  of  Saul's  new  position  as  a  chosen  servant. 

I.  It  is  THE  DDTY  OF  A  BELIOIOUS  MAN,  AND  IN  EEEPINQ  WITH  HIS  CHARACTER 
AND  FBOFESSION,  TO  TAKB  A  DEEP  INTEBEBT  IN  PUBLIC   AFFAIRS.      SamUCl's  interest 

in  affairs  was,  it  is  true,  ofScial,  as  head  of  the  state,  but  the  official  acts  had  their 
root  in  a  deep  personal  longing  for  the  prosperity  of  Israel.  "  Pray  for  the  peace  of 
Jerusalem."  "  They  shall  prosper  that  love  thee,"  was  the  feeling  which  every  true 
descendant  of  Abraham  was  supposed  to  entertain.  The  best  days  of  Israel's  history 
show  that  the  pious  were  proud  of  their  country,  its  institutions,  its  rulers,  its  laws,  . 
and  the  order  and  purity  of  its  administration.  1.  The  state  claims  our  interest. 
(1)  The  law  of  benevolence  supports  this  claim.  Every  man  in  the  state  is  our  neigh- 
bour ;  his  comfort  and  peace  and  safety  depend  on  the  administration  of  affairs  ;  we 
can  only  reach  the  individuals  by  doing  our  part  to  render  affairs  useful  to  all.  (2) 
Tho  pnneipla  of  religion  are  applicable  to  state  affairs.  Faith  in  Christ  and  repent- 
ance toward  God  are  not  the  whole  of  practical  religion,  though  they  *re  the  spring 
and  support  of  many  other  feelings  and  principles.  Righteousness,  purity,  supreme 
regard  for  the  Unseen,  kindliness  and  generosity,  unselfishness  and  truth,  can  find 
expression  in  laws,  in  commercial  arrangements,  and  in  foreign  and  domestic  policy. 
Loyalty  to  these  religious  principles  requires  that  we  see  that  they  are  recognised 
eTvywhera.    (S)  The  adaptation  qf  GhrUtianity  to  the  entire  life  of  man  ta  one  oi 


160  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  ix.  1—27. 


the  most  commanding  evidences  of  its  Divine  character.  It  professes  to  make  all 
thingB  new.  It  forma  the  true,  perfect  manhood.  A  religion  which  is  seen  practically 
to  enter  into  every  sphere  of  human  activity,  as  the  conserving  "  salt,"  carries  with 
it  the  proof  that  it  comes  from  the  Creator  of  man  and  of  society.  He,  then,  who 
loves  his  Christianity,  and  would  advance  its  conquests,  must  show  by  his  interest  in 
the  State  that  it  is  "  profitable  unto  all  things,"  even  to  public  afEairs.  (4)  The  great 
calamities  hrowght  on  communities  have  resulted  from  the  predominance  m  state  affair* 
of  irreligious  principles.  When  "  rulers  of  Sodom,"  men  of  godless  lives,  are  left  to 
have  charge  of  affairSj  when  the  holy  and  conscientious  leave  their  country's  busi- 
ness to  persons  with  whom  they  would  not  leave  their  own  private  affairs,  disaster 
has  come,  and  will  ever  come.  There  can  be  nothing  in  such  a  line  of  conduct  a1 
variance  with  Christian  character  or  profession.  The  enforcement  of  righteousness 
all  over  the  world  must  be  right.  To  love  Christ  supremely,  and  to  labour  that  souls 
may  be  converted  to  him,  is  no  more  inconsistent  with  promoting  righteousness  in 
state  affairs,  and  watching  its  progress  there  with  keen  interest,  than  with  seeing  that 
our  private  business  is  honestly  transacted. 

II.  Emergencies  will  arise  when  interest  in  public  affaibs  may  find  distinct 
EXPRESSION.  The  emergency  which  developed  Samuel's  deep  interest  did  not  create 
it.  There  ia  a  fountain  of  strong  feeling  and  righteous  thought  in  a  truly  good 
man's  nature.  Crises  in  a  people's  history  bring  out  the  latent  feeling,  and  shape  it 
into  word  or  deed.  There  should  not  be  a  day  on  which  a  Christian  does  not  bear 
all  the  interests  of  his  country  on  his  heart,  and  give  them  some  direct  or  indirect 
support.  But  in  the  changes  of  human  affairs,  and  in  the  incessant  struggle  between 
the  good  and  evil  forces  of  society,  there  arise  now  and  then  opportunities  for  every 
righteous  man  to  do  his  best  towards  securing  a  righteousness  in  the  State. 

III.  The    MANNER    in  WHICH   INTEREST   IS   SHOWN    WILL   DEPEND    ON   POSITION  AND 

OPPORTUNITIES.  Samuel  showed  his  interest  by  discussing  with  Saul  the  general 
question  of  the  people's  welfare,  and  by  fitting  his  mind  for  coming  responsibilities. 
Every  Christian  can  express  his  interest  intelligently,  faithfully,  kindly,  and  prayer- 
fully by  seizing  the  opportunities  appropriate  to  his  situation  in  life.  But  prayer  for 
kings  and  rulers,  personal  observance  of  the  course  of  events,  acquaintance  with  the 
real  needs  of  the  country,  encouragement  of  a  sound,  righteous,  political  literature, 
support  to  men  of  tested  character,  exercise  of  powers  conferred  by  law,  infusion 
into  controversies  of  a  generous,  truth-loving  spirit — these  are  means  within  reach  of 
most,  and  cannot  but  issue  in  blessing  to  all.  The  interest  thus  due  to  public  state 
affairs  is  also  due  by  the  phristian  to  the  general  affairs  of  the  Church  of  God. 
livery  one  should  bear  on  his  heart  the  welfare  of  the  body  of  Christ,  and  do  all  he 
can  to  heal  its  wounds,  cleanse  its  spirit,  and  insure  its  highest  happiness  and  pros- 
perity. Do  men  sufBciently  identify  their  personal  religious  interests  with  those  of 
the  one  Church  ?  Is  the  oneness  of  the  body  of  Christ  properly  appreciated  ?  Do 
our  prayers  and  tears  flow  forth  as  they  ought  for  the  kingdom  of  God  f 

General  considerations: — 1.  The  causes  of  so  little  interest  in  public  affairs  by 
many  Christian  people.  2.  How  Christian  people  can  manifest  a  proper  interest 
apart  from  the  painful  contentions  to  which  they  are  perhaps  constitutionally  un- 
fitted. 3.  The  degree  of  sympathy  due  to  good  men  who  from  sense  of  duty  enter 
into  the  perils  and  annoyances  of  public  life,  and  how  it  can  oe  expressed.  4.  The 
question  of  how  much  of  national  trouble,  sorrow,  and  poverty  is  connected  with 
neglect  on  the  part  of  the  morally  powerful  sections  of  society.  6.  How  far 
Christian  men  are  really  making  love  of  righteousness  and  truth  and  peace  superior 
to  social  customs  and  party  ties. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTH0B8. 

Vers.  1—25.  (Gibeah,  Ramah.)— TA«  Mng  desired  by  the  people.  1.  The  chmee 
of  the_  first  king  of  Israel  was  made  by  Samuel,  prophet  and  judge,  as  the  highest 
authority  under  God  in  the  nation ;  and"  it  was  afterwards  confirmed  by  lot,  wherein 
the  Divine  will  was  openly  expressed  (ch.  x.  21).  "The  histgry  of  the  world  cannot 
pzodoM  another  instance  in  which  a  public  determinanon  was  formed  to  appoint  a 


CH.  IX.  1—27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  169 

king,  and  yet  no  one  proposed  either  himself  or  any  other  person  to  be  king,  but 
referred  the  determination  entirely  to  God  "  (Scott).  2.  In  making  choice  of  Saul, 
Samuel  believed  that  he  would  be  acceptable  to  the  people,  and  fulfil  the  purpose  for 
which  they  had  desired  a  king,  in  saving  them  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philistines 
(ch.  ix.  17)  and  the  children  of  Ammon  (ch.  xii.  12);  and  he  appears  to  have 
expected  that  he  would  be  faithful  to  the  principle  of  the  theocracy,  and  rule  in 
obedience  to  the  Divine  will.  He  did  all  that  lay  in  his  power  that  this  expectation 
might  be  realised  ;  he  entertained  a  strong  afEection  for  Saul  j  and  it  was  only  when 
the  latter  proved  utterly  unfaithful  to  his  trust  that  he  reluctantly  and  sorrowfully 
abandoned  him  to  his  fate.  3.  His  choice  was  directed  by  a  higher  wisdom  than  his 
own,  which  saw  the  end  from  the  beginning.  Whilst  the  Divine  King  of  Israel 
sanctioned  what  was  good  in  their  desire,  he  fulfilled  it  in  such  a  manner  as  to  con- 
vince them  of  what  was  evil  in  it,  and  to  accomplish  far-reaching  purposes  which  the 
irophet  himself  did  not  foresee. 

"  The  ken  yonr  world  is  gifted  with  descends 
In  the  everlasting  justice  as  low  down 
Aa  eye  doth  in  the  sea,  which  though  it  mark 
The  bottom  from  the  shore,  in  the  wide  main 
Discerns  it  not ;  and,  nevertheless,  it  is. 
But  hidden  by  its  deepness  "  (Dante,  '  Furg.'). 

'  Saul  is  not  selected  by  them,  but  given  to  them;  whom  they  adopt  and  embrace 
they  know  not  why ;  and  who,  whether  or  not  he  is  able  to  g^ide  and  govern  them, 
proves  to  be  a  faithful  representative  of  their  own  state  of  mind,  a  very  type  and 
embodiment  of  that  character  and  those  habits  of  mind  which  they  themselves  are 
exhibiting  "  (Maurice).  "  The  theocratic  principle  was  more  fully  developed  in  the 
reaction  than  could  have  happened  had  the  king  been  truly  pious,  so  that  we  may  say 
that  Saul  was  chosen  by  God,  because  in  his  omniscience  he  foresaw  that  he  would 
not  turn  to  him  with  his  whole  heart.  Saul  and  David  are  in  necessary  connection. 
On  the  threshhold  of  royalty  God  first  shows  in  Saul  what  the  king  of  Israel  is  with- 
out him ;  then  in  David  what  the  king  is  with  him.  Both  are  types  or  representatives. 
The  events  which  befell  them  are  actual  prophecies,  which  first  of  all  passed  into 
fulfilment  in  the  history  of  the  Israelitish  monarchy,  and  then  through  the  whole 
history  of  the  world  "  (Hengstenberg).  The  following  chapters  record  the  develop- 
ment of  the  successive  stages  of  the  Divine  method  according  to  which  the  popular 
desire  was  gratified  and  corrected.    The  man  destined  for  king  was — 

I.  Fitted  by  peculiar  qualifications  (vers.  1,  2).  Notice — 1.  His  family 
relationship.  He  was  the  son  of  Kish,  of  the  family  of  Matri  (ch.  x.  21),  of  the 
tribe  of  Benjamin ;  his  cousin  (or  perhaps  uncle — 1  Chron.  viii.  33)  being  Abner, 
afterwards  "  the  captain  of  his  host "  (ch.  xiv.  51)  ;  his  name — Saul  =  asked — being 
"an  omen  of  his  history."  Kish  was  a  man  of  wealth  and  good  social  position,  a 
fact  which  would  gain  for  his  son  general  respect ;  he  appears  to  have  been  an 
affectionate  father  (ver.  6 ;  ch.  x.  2)  ;  and  he  resided  at  Gibeah  (ch.  x.  26),  "  a  hill," 
formerly  a  place  of  notorious  jjrofligacy  (Judges  xix.),  and  subsequently  the  seat  of 
Saul's  government,  but  was  buried  at  Zelah  (2  Sam.  xxi.  14).  Of  him  nothing  more 
is  known.  Benjamin  was  the  smallest  of  the  tribes  of  Israel  (ver.  21),  but  the  most 
warlike  of  them  (Gen.  xlix.  27).  The  selection  of  a  king  from  it,  therefore,  would 
not  be  likely  to  excite  the  jealousy  of  the  other  tribes,  whilst  he  would  doubtless 
prove  an  able  leader  of  their  armies.  There  was  in  Saul  "  the  strange  union  of 
fierceness  and  ^f  gentleness  which  run,  as  hereditary  qualities  do  often  run,  through 
the  whole  history  of  that  frontier  clan "  (Stanley).  2.  His  personal  appearance. 
He  was  in  the  prime  of  manhood,  and  of  lofty  stature  and  great  warlike  beauty  (ver.  2 ; 
ch.  X.  23,24).  "  Great  stress  is  laid  upon  this,  because  his  distinguished  stature,  with 
the  impression  of  bodily  prowess  which  it  conveyed,  helped  much  to  recommend  him 
to  the  choice  of  the  people.  When,  after  a  long  peace,  there  was  no  man  of  distin- 
guished renown  among  them,  and  when  in  battle  much  less  depended  upon  the  mili- 
tary skill  than  upon  the  bodily  prowess  of  the  chief  in  single  combats,  or  in  the 
partial  actions  with  which  most  battles  commenced  it  was  natural  enough  that  the 
people  should  take  pride  in  the  gigannc  proportions  of  their  leader,  as  calculated 


168  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  ix.  1—27. 

io  strike  terror  into  the  enemy  and  to  inspire  confidence  in  his  followers ;  besideg 
that,  it  was  no  mean  advantage  that  the  crest  of  the  leader  should,  from  his  tallness, 
be  seen  from  afar  by  the  people  "  (Kitto).  3.  Eia  menial  and  moral  characteristics. 
He  was  possessed  of  little  mental  culture.  He  had  not  been  instructed  in  the  schools 
of  the  prophets  (oh.  x.  11).  His  life  had  been  spent  in  retired,  rustic  occupation,  in 
which  he  was  so  absorbed  that  he  was  less  acquainted  with  the  political  and  religious 
movements  of  his  time  than  his  own  servant  (ver.  6).  He  was  obedient  to  his 
father  (ver.  4),  tenderly  concerned  about  his  feelings  (ver.  5),  persevering  in  labour, 
and  ready  to  take  advice  even  from  one  beneath  him  (ver.  10).  He  exhibited  a 
courteous,  modest,  and  humble  bearing  (ver.  21 ;  ch.  x.  21).  He  was,  in  his  earliei 
career,  capable  of  prudent  reserve  (ch.  x.  16,  27)  ;  patriotic,  zealous,  fearless,  ener- 
getic (ch.  xi.  6),  resolute,  and  magnanimous  (ch.  xi.  13) ;  and  he  had  a  strong  sense 
of  the  value  of  religion  and  religious  institutions.  But  underneath  these  qualities 
there  lay  others  of  a  different  nature,  which  his  subsequent  course  revealed,  viz., 
waywardness,  rash  and  fiery  impulses,  impatience,  the  love  of  display,  pride  and 
self-will,  and  morbid  tendencies  to  distrust  and  jealousy ;  and  instead  of  overcoming 
them  by  the  aid  of  Di'dne  grace,  he  yielded  to  them,  until  they  gained  the  entire 
mastery  over  him,  choked  the  good  seed  which  was  sown  ih  his  heart  (Matt.  xiii.  22), 
and  caused  his  ruin.  God  sees  the  latent  as  well  as  the  manifest  dispositions  of  men, 
and  adapts  his  dealings  toward  them  accordingly. 

II.  GuiDBD  BY  SPECIAL  PBOVIDENCE  (vers.  3—14).  These  veises  furnish  a  practi- 
cal commentary  on  what  was  said  by  Hannah  concerning  the  operations  of  Provi- 
dence (ch.  ii.  7,  8).  In  leaving  his  home  in  Gibeah,  at  the  direction  of  his  father,  in 
search  of  the  lost  asses,  travelling  through  the  hill  country  of  Ephraim,  the  land  of 
Shalisha,  of  Shalim,  and  of  the  Benjamites,  to  the  land  of  Zuph  (ch.  i.  1),  and  going 
in  search  of  the  "  seer  "  (roeh),  Saul  acted  freely,  and  according  to  his  best  judgment ; 
but  his  three  days'  journey  and  all  connected  with  it — his  lack  of  success,  his  desire  to 
return,  his  servant's  advice,  his  destitution  of  food,  his  servant's  possession  of  a  coui 
for  a  present,  his  meeting  with  "young  maidens  going  out  to  draw  water,"  hit 
presence  in  the  city  at  a  certain  time — were  ordered  by  God  to  the  attainment  of  an 
end  of  which  he  had  no  conception.  "  All  these  incidents  and  wanderings  were  only 
preparations  and  mediate  causes  by  which  God  accomplished  his  design  concerning 
Saul."  His  providence — 1.  Often  makes  insignificant  events  productive  of  important 
results.  It  is  truly  astonishing  how  the  very  greatest  things  depend  upon  events 
which  are  generally  regarded  at  the  time  of  their  occurrence  as  of  little  account.  Of 
this  the  lives  of  individuals  and  the  history  of  nations  afEord  innumerable  illustrations. 
"What  is  it  that  we  dare  call  insignificant?  The  least  of  all  things  maybe  as  a 
seed  cast  into  the  seed-field  of  time,  to  grow  there  and  bear  fruits,  which  shall  be 
multiplying  when  time  shall  be  no  more.  We  cannot  always  trace  the  connections 
of  things ;  we  do  not  ponder  those  we  can  trace,  or  we  should  tremble  to  call  any- 
thing beneath  the  notice  of  God.  It  has  been  eloquently  said  that  where  we  iee  a 
trifle  hovering  unconnected  in  space,  higher  spirits  can  discern  its  fibres  stretching 
through  the  whole  expanse  of  the  system  of  the  world,  and  hanging  on  the  remotest 
limits  of  the  future  and  the  past "  (Kitto,  '  Cyc.  of  Bib.  Lit.,'  first  ed.,  Art.  'Provi- 
dence ; '  Knapp's  '  Theology ').  2.  Makes  acadental  circumstances  subservient  to  a 
pre-arranged  plan.  "The  thread  of  every  life  is  entangled  with  other  threads 
beyond  aU  reach  of  calculation.  Those  unforeseen  accidents  which  so  often  control 
the  lot  of  men  constitute  a  superstratum  in  the  system  of  human  affairs,  wherein, 
peculiarly,  the  Divine  providence  holds  empire  for  the  accomplishment  of  its  special 
purposes.  It  is  from  this  hidden  and  inexhaustible  mine  of  chances — chances,  as  we 
must  call  them — that  the  Governor  of  the  world  draws,  with  unfathomable  skill,  tie 
materials  of  his  dispensations  towards  each  individual  of  mankind  "  (Isaac  Taylor, 
'  Nat.  Hist,  of  Enthusiasm ').  3_.  Overrules  human  plans,  in  harmony  with  human 
freedom,  for  the  fulfilment  of  Divine  purposes  (Prov.  xvi.  .9,  33). 

in.  Indicated  by  Divine  revelation  (vers.  16 — 26).  Such  revelation — 1.  Was 
primarily  and  directly  given  to  one  who  lived  in  closest  fellowship  with  God. 
Samuel  was  like  the  lofty  mountain  peak,  which  catches  the  rays  of  the  morning  sun 
long  ere  they  reach  the  valleys  below.  On  the  day  before  Saul  came  to  the  city  (of 
Bf  mah),  the  prophet,  ever  watching  and  listening  for  the  indieationa  of  the  Divine 


OH.  IX.  1—27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  16* 

will  concerning  the  future  king,  was  fully  instructed  therein  by  '*the  word  of  the 
Lord  "  (ch.  iii.  21),  which  contained  (1)  a  promise  of  sending  him  (ver.  16),  (2)  a 
direction  to  anoint  him,  (3)  a  statement  of  the  purpose  of  his  appointment,  and  (4) 
an  expression  of  commiseration  for  the  need  of  the  people.  Nothwithstanding  they 
had  rejected  God,  he  had  not  rejected  them,  but  still  calls  them  "my  people,"  and  in 
wrath  remembers  mercy.  The  long-sufEering  of  God  toward  transgressors  should 
teach  his  servants  forbearance,  and  incite  them  to  renewed  eCorta  for  their  welfare. 
It  appears  to  have  been  after  Samuel  had  received  the  Divine  message  that  he  invited 
the  people  (perhaps  the  elders  who  had  formerly  waited  upon  him)  to  a  sacrificial 
feast,  and  arranged  for  the  worthy  entertainment  of  his  chief  guest  (ver.  24).  The 
displeasure  which  he  previously  felt  at  their  request  (oh.  viii.  6)  has  now  given  place 
to  disinterested  and  earnest  desire  for  its  fulfilment.  2.  Harmonised  with,  and  was 
coinfirmed  by,  the  operations  of  Providence.  Samuel  is  expecting  the  fulfilment  of 
the  promise  given  to  him,  and  already  is  on  the  way  from  his  own  house  in  the  city  to 
ofEer  sacrifice  on  the  height  (the  loftier  of  the  two  hills  on  which  Bamah  was  situated), 
when  he  sees  the  towering  form  of  Saul,  a  stranger  to  the  place,  who  has  come  up 
into  the  midst  of  the  city  according  to  the  direction  of  the  maidens  at  the  foot  of 
the  hill,  and  the  inner  voice  with  which  he  is  so  familiar  says  to  him,  "  Behold  the 
man,"  Ac.  (ver.  17).  There  is  nothing  in  the  simple  dress  of  the  prophet  to  indicate 
his  dignity ;  and  as  he  passes  onward  Saul  "  draws  near  to  him  in  the  gate,"  and  in 
reply  to  his  inquiry  concerning  the  seer's  residence,  receives  the  answer,  "  I  am  the 
seer."  Seldom  has  the  meeting  of  two  persons  shown  more  clearly  the  co-operation 
of  the  revealed  word  with  the  guiding  providence  of  God  or  the  unity  of  the  purpose 
by  which  both  are  pervaded,  or  been  followed  by  more  momentous  results.  3.  And 
its  communication  rec[uired  a  gradual  preparaiion  on  the  part  of  him  to  whom  it 
chiefly  pertained,  in  order  that  it  might  be  received  aright.  This  Samuel  sought  to 
effect — (1)  By  awakening  in  Saul  new  and  elevated  thoughts  and  hopes  (vers.  19, 20) ; 
directing  him  to  go  up  before  him,  as  a  mark  of  respect,  inviting  him  to  be  his 
guest,  telling  him  that  he  would  "  reveal  to  him  his  innermost  thoughts,"  setting  his 
mind  at  rest  from  lower  cares,  and  assuring  him  of  the  highest  dignity.  "  For  whom 
is  every  desirable  thing  in  Israel  ? "  (ver.  20).  (2)  By  giving  him  honour  in  the 
presence  of  others  (vers.  22 — 24) ;  appointing  to  him  the  chief  place  among  his  thirty 
guests,  appropriating  to  him  the  best  portion  of  the  meal,  and  intimating  that  the 
hoBoqr  had  been  reserved  for  him  in  foreknowledge  of  his  arrival.  (3)  By  holding 
confidential  and  prolonged  conversation  with  him  (ver.  25),  pertaining  "  not  to  the 
royal  dignity,  but  surely  to  the  deep  religious  and  political  decline  of  the  people  of 
God,  the  opposition  of  the  heathen,  the  causes  of  the  impotency  to  oppose  these 
enemies,  the  necessity  of  a  religious  change  in  the  people,  and  of  a  leader  thoroughly 
obedient  to  the  Lord  "  (0.  von  Gerlach).  In  this  manner  Saul  was  prepared  for  the  mora 
definite  indication  given  on  the  following  morning.  A  gradual  preparation  of  a 
somewhat  similar  kind  is  often  needed  by  men  when  about  to  receive  a  Divine 
commission. — D. 

Ver.  9.  (Bamah.) — Perplexity.    "  Peradventure  he  can  show  ns  our  way."    Here 

is  a  picture  of  a  young  man  perplexed  about  his  way.     Consider — 

I.  The  object  of  his  pebplexity.  It  is  a  common  thing  for  a  young  man  to  be 
uncertain  and  anxious  with  reference  to — 1.  The  ordinary  business  of  life.  He 
knows  not,  it  may  be,  the  particular  vocation  for  which  he  is  most  fitted,  or  which 
affords  the  best  prospect  of  success.     Leaving  his  father's  house, 

"  The  world  is  all  before  him,  where  to  choose 
Hia  place  of  rest,  and  Providence  his  guide." 

But  he  is  donbtfnl  whither  to  direct  his  steps.  He  meets  with  disappointment  in  his 
endeavours.  "  The  bread  is  spent "  (ver.  7),  and  he  has  no  money  in  his  pnise. 
Under  such  circumstances  many  a  one  has  first  awoke  to  a  sense  of  his  dependence 
on  God,  and  his  need  of  his  guidance,  or  has  sought  him  with  a  fervour  he  has  never 
displayed  before.  His  loneliness  and  distress  have  bean  the  occasion  of  spiritual 
thought  and  high  resolve  (Gen.  xxviii.  16,  20;  Luke  xv.  18).  2.  The  eMef  ptirpote 
of  life.    As  each  vocation  has  ita  proper  end,  so  has  life  generally.    It  is  something 


no  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMDEL.  [ch.  a.  1—27. 


higLer  than  the  finding  of  strayed  asses,  the  recovery  of  lost  property,  or  "  buying 
and  selling  and  getting  gain."  Even  the  dullest  soul  has  often  a  feeling  that  it  was 
made  for  a  nobler  end  than  the  gratification  of  bodily  appetites,  or  the  supply  of 
earthly  needs.  But  "  what  is  the  chief  end  of  man  ?  "  Alas,  how  many  know  not 
what  it  is,  nor  the  means  of  attaining  it ;  miss  their  way,  and  wander  on  "  in  endless 
mazes  lost  I  "  .3.  The  true  Guide  of  life.  Who  shall  tell  thee  "all  that  is  in  thine 
heart"  (ver.  19)— declare  its  aspirations,  and  direct  them  to  their  goal?  Where  is 
he  to  be  found,  and  by  what  means  may  his  favour  be  obtained?  Books  and 
teachers  abt  und,  and  to  them  the  young  man  naturally  turns  for  instruction  ;  but  how 
often  do  they  leave  him  in  greater  perplexity  than  ever.  "  Where  shall  wisdom  be 
found  ?  "  (Job  zxviii.  12).  "  To  whom  should  we  go  ?  "  "  We  must  wait  patiently 
[said  Socrates]  until  some  one,  either  a  god  or  some  inspired  man,  teach  us  our  moral 
and  religious  duties,  and,  as  Pallas  in  Homer  did  to  Diomede,  remove  the  darkness 
from  our  eyes  "  (Plato).  "  I  know  that  Messias  cometh,  which  is  called  Christ : 
when  he  is  come,  he  will  tell  us  all  things  "  ( Jolm  iv.  25).  "  Sir,  we  would  see 
Jesus"  (John  xii.  21). 

II.  The  method  of  his  proceduee.  The  courae  which  it  behoves  him  to  take  is 
that  of — 1.  Diligent  inquiry  concerning  the  object  of  his  desire.  It  exists,  and  a 
firm  belief  in  its  existence  is  the  first  condition  of  such  inquiry.  There  may  be 
healthy  doubt  about  its  nature,  but  absolute  scepticism  is  destruction.  Inquiry  is 
the  way  to  truth.  It  must  be  pursued  with  quenchless  zeal  and  ceaseless  perseverance. 
And  if  so  pursued  it  will  not  be  vain  (Prov.  ii.  4,  5).  2.  Beady  reception  of  light, 
from  whatever  quarter  it  may  come.  Truth  often  comes  from  unexpected  sources. 
The  true  inquirer  is  reverent  and  humble,  and  willing  to  receive  information  from  the 
most  despised  (vers.  10,  11). 

"  Seize  upon  truth,  where'er  tis  found, 
Amongst  your  Mends,  amongst  your  foei, 
On  Christian  or  on  heathen  ground ; 
The  flower's  Divine,  where'er  it  growi.'' 

3.  Faithfully  acting  up  to  the  lig/U  he  possesses.  "Well  said;  come,  let  ns  go." 
Inquiry  alone  is  insufficient.  The  duty  that  lies  plainly  and  immediately  before  u.'' 
must  be  performed. 

III.  The  sncGESs  of  his  endeavgub.  1.  Heis  brought  face  to  face  with  the  best 
Guide.  "  I  am  the  seer  "  (ver.  19).  The  best  service  that  men  and  books,  including 
the  Scriptures  themselves  (John  v.  39,  40),  can  render  is  to  bring  us  into  direct 
communion  with  the  Prophet  of  Nazareth,  "  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life."  Our 
perplexity  ends  only  when  he  manifests  himself  to  us  and  says,  "  I  that  speak  mito 
thee  am  he."     "  Master,  where  dwellest  thou  ?     Come  and  see  "  (John  i.  38). 

"  And  what  delights  can  equal  those 
That  stir  the  spirit's  inner  deeps, 
When  one  that  loves,  but  knows  not,  reaps 
A  truth  from  one  that  loves  and  knows  t  "  (Tennyson), 

2.  He  rises  into  a  higher  region  of  thought  and  feeling,  and  receives  all  the  direction 
that  he  really  needs.  His  anxiety  about  earthly  affairs  is  relieved  (Matt.  vi.  32). 
The  true  purpose  of  life  is  shown  him  (Matt.  vi.  33).  He  has  "  an  unction  from  the 
Holy  One,  and  knows  al'  things"  (1  John  ii.  20).  "  He  is  "turned  into  another  man," 
and  "  God  is  with  him  "  (ch.  x.  6, '?).  3.  He  attains  great  honour  and  power.  Saul  is 
not  the  only  one  who  has  gone  forth  in  the  performance  of  lowly  duty  and  found  a 
kingdom,  or  to  whom  a  temporary  loss  has  been  an  occasion  of  permanent  and 
invaluable  gain.  "  Be  thou  faithful  unto  death,  and  I  will  give  thee  a  crown  of 
li£e.»-D. 

(a  baceambntal  addbbss.) 

Ver.  13.  (Ramah.)— O'wwf*  at  a  sacred  f east.— '^  For  the  people  will  not  eat  until  he 
come,  because  he  doth  bless  the  sacrifice ;  and  afterwards  they  eat  that  be  bidden." 
This  language  refers  to  a  fea«t  provided  on  the  high  place  of  the  city  where  Samuel 
dwelt.     1.  It  was  a  sacrificial  feast.     The  victim  (a  thank  ofEering)  havuig  been 


OH.  IX.  1—27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  171 

slain,  and  its  blood  sprinkled  about  tbe  altar,  a  portion  of  it  was  burnt  in  the  lacred 
fire,  and  the  rest  reserved  for  food.  "  The  thank  or  praise  ofEering  was  the  expres- 
rion  of  the  worshipper's  feelings  of  adoring  gratitude  on  account  of  having  received 
some  spontaneous  tokens  of  the  Lord's  goodness.  This  was  the  highest  form  (of  the 
peace  ofEering),  as  here  the  grace  of  God  shone  prominently  forth"  (Fairbaim, 
'  Typology ') .  2.  It  was  attended  by  numerous  guests — thirty  persons — distinguished 
in  some  way  from  others,  and  specially  invited  b^ Samuel.  "The  participation  by 
the  ofEerer  and  his  friends — ^this  family  feast  upon  the  sacrifice — may  be  regarded 
as  the  most  distinctive  characteristic  of  the  peace  offering.  It  der.oted  that  the 
offerer  was  admitted  to  a  state  of  near  fellowship  and  enjoyment  with  God,  shared 
part  and  part  with  Jehovah  and  his  priests,  had  a  standing  in  his  house  and  a  seat 
at  his  table.  It  was,  therefore,  the  symbol  of  established  friendship  with  God,  and 
near  commur.ion  with  him  in  the  blessings  of  his  kingdom ;  and  was  associated  in 
the  minds  of  the  worshippers  with  feelings  of  peculiar  joy  and  gladness  "  (Fairbairn). 
3.  It  required  the  presence  of  Samuel  himself  in  order  that  the  guests  might  properly 
partake  thereof.  "  The  blessing  of  the  sacrifice  must  mean  the  asking  of  a  blessing 
upon  the  food  before  the  meal.  This  was  done  at  every  common  meal,  and  much 
more  at  a  solemn  festival  like  this.  The  present,  however,  is  the  only  recorded 
example  of  the  custom"  (Kitto).  "It  refers  to  the  thanksgiving  and  prayer  offered 
before  the  sacrificial  meal"  (Keil).  Now  this  feast  may  be  regarded  as  a  fore- 
shadowing of  the  Lord's  Supper.  A  greater  than  Samuel  is  the  Master  of  the  feast 
(Matt.  xxvi.  18 ;  John  xiii.  13,  14).  Our  Lord  has  provided  it  by  the  sacrifice  of 
nimself  —  of  which  the  ancient  sacrifices  were  a  type,  and  the  Holy  Supper  is  a 
memorial.     And  he  himself  comes  to  preside  at  his  own  table.     As  his  guests — 

I.  We  await  his  presence.  "The  people  will  not  eat  until  he  come  "'  His  pre- 
sence is — 1.  Necessary  to  the  feast.  The  bread  and  wine  are  not  simply  memorials, 
they  are  also  symbols ;  and  in  order  to  partake  of  them  aright  we  must  "  discern  the 
Lord's  body."  "Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing."  2.  Promised  by  himself. 
"There  am  I  in  the  midst  of  them"  (Matt,  xviii.  20).  "I  will  see  you  again,  and 
your  heart  shall  rejoice  "  (John  xvi.  22).  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway  "  (Matt,  zxviii. 
20).  The  sacred  ordinance  itself  is  a  permanent  assurance  of  his  presence.  8. 
Realised  in  the  heart.  We  look  not  for  his  real  presence  in  the  material  emblems, 
but  in  the  believing  heart.  "  I  in  them  "  (John  xvii.  26 ;  xiv.  21 ;  Ephes.  iii.  17).  In 
a  different  spirit  from  that  in  which  the  words  were  originally  spoken,  we  ask, 
"  What  think  ye,  that  he  will  not  come  to  the  feast  ?  "  (John  xi.  56).  We  await  his 
coming  with  reverence  and  humility,  contrition,  and  faith,  and  ardent  desire.  0  that 
he  may  appear  to  each  of  us,  saying,  "Peace  be  unto  you,"  and  be  "known  in 
breaking  of  bread."  "  Blessed  are  they  that  wait  for  him "  (Isa.  xxx.  8 ;  John 
XX.  29). 

II.  We  desire  his  blessing.  "  He  doth  bless  the  sacrifice,"  and  in  doing  so  he 
also  doth  bless  his  guests.  1.  As  of  old,  when  he  often  gave  thanks  before  the  meal 
(Matt.  xiv.  19  i  XV.  36 ;  Mark  xiv.  22  ;  Luke  xxiv.  30 ;  John  vi.  23  ;  1  Cor.  xi.  24). 
2.  As  the  ever-living  Intercessor,  representing  his  people,  and  rendering  their  prayers 
and  praises  acceptable  to  God.  "I  will  declare  thy  name  unto  my  brethren,  in  the 
midst  of  the  Church  will  I  sing  praises  unto  tiiee  "  (Heb.  ii.  12).  3.  As  when  he 
went  away,  still  stretching  forth  his  hands  in  benediction  toward  his  disciples,  and 
enabling  them  to  be  "continually  praising  and  blessing  God"  (Luke  xxiv.  51 — 53). 
"  Stretch  forth,  0  Lord,  in  blessing  toward  as  thy  hands,  that  were  nailed  for  our 
redemption  to  the  bitter  cross  1 " 

III.  We  partake  op  his  provision.  "And  afterwards  they  eat  that  be  bidden." 
We  do  not  merely  look  upon  the  emblems  of  his  body  and  blood,  but  we  eat  and 
drink,  and  thereby  signify — 1.  Our  participation  in  the  benefits  of  his  death — ^for- 
giveness, peace,  and  righteousness.  2.  Our  fellowship  with  liim  in  his  sufferings 
and  death,  his  spirit  and  life,  his  strength  and  joy  (John  vi.  63).  "  And  truly  oui 
fellowship  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  Jesus  Christ"  (1  John  i.  3).  3.  And 
our  miion  and  communion  with  each  other,  through  fellowship  with  him,  in  love  and 
gladness.  "  For  we  being  many  are  one  bread,  and  one  body  "  (1  Cor.  x.  17).  Let 
us,  then,  "  rejoice  before  the  Lord."  The  cup  is  "  a  cup  of  blessing  "  (thanksgiving). 
The  service  is  intended  to  be  a  service  of  joy — ^joy  in  the  Lord ;  in  the  contemplation 


m  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh,  nc.  1— 2T. 

of  his  glorious  character,  in  the  reception  of  his  raanifold  benefits,  and  in  the  antIol< 
pation  of  "  the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamh." — D. 

Vers.  26,  27 ;  ch.  x.  1 — 8.  (Eamah.)  —  Saul  primattly  anointed  hmg.  "  And 
Samuel  took  a  vial  of  oil,  and  poured  it  upon  his  head."  There  is  in  the  life  of  almost 
e*ery  man  some  day  beyond  all  others,  the  events  of  which  serve  to  determine  his 
future  course.  Such  a  day  was  that  which  is  here  described  in  the  life  of  Saul.  On 
the  preceding  day  he  had  been  guided  by  Providence  to  Samuel,  and  led  by  means 
of  his  conversation  to  entertain  exalted  expectations  concerning  his  future  destiny. 
"  And  when  they  were  come  down  from  the  high  place  into  the  city,  Samnel  com- 
muned with  Saul  upon  the  top  of  the  house"  (ver.  26).  "And  a  bed  was  spread 
for  Saul  on  the  roof,  and  he  lay  down"  (LXX.,  Vulg.).  "The  roofs  in  Judasa  were 
flat,  with  a  parapet  around  them.  To  be  lodged  there  was  considered  an  honour. 
In  fine  weather  it  was  not  unusual  to  sleep  in  the  open  air,  but  the  place  might  occa- 
sionally be  covered  with  a  tent"  (Geddes).  Strange  thoughts  must  have  passed 
through  his  mind  as  he  rested  there  under  the  silent  stars.  He  rose  early  to  prepare 
for  his  journey,  and  watched  the  morning  dawn  over  the  distant  hills,  ushering  in  the 
most  eventful  day  of  his  life.  Then  the  voice  of  Samuel  called  to  him  from  below, 
saying,  "Arise,  and  I  will  send  thee  away."  The  prophet  accompanied  him,  as  a 
mark  of  respect,  along  the  street,  toward  the  end  of  the  city  (Ramah).  But  before 
parting  from  him  he  directed  him  to  send  his  servant  forward,  that  he  might  com- 
municate to  him  alone  "  the  word  of  God."    And  in  this  private  interview  Saul  was — 

I.  Appointed  to  the  highest  dignity  (ver.  1).  1.  By  a  rite  of  consecration. 
"Taking  a  vial,  he  anointed  Saul,  thus  placing  the  institution  of  royalty  on  the  same 
footing  as  that  of  the  sanctuary  and  the  priesthood  (Ezod.  xxx.  33 ;  Levit.  viii.  10), 
as  appointed  and  consecrated  by  God  and  to  God,  and  intended  to  be  the  medium  for 
receiving  and  transmitting  blessing  to  the  people  "  (Edersheim).  "  Anointing  with 
oil  was  a  symbol  of  endowment  with  the  Spirit  of  God ;  as  the  oil  itself,  by  virtue  of 
the  strength  which  it  gives  to  the  vital  spirits,  was  a  symbol  of  the  Spirit  of  God  as 
the  principle  of  Divine  and  spiritual  power  "  (Keil).  "  Two  very  good  reasons  they 
(the  Jews)  render  why  God  did  command  the  use  of  such  anointing  oil  as  in  respect 
of  the  action.  First,  that  it  did  signify  the  Divine  election  of  that  person  and 
designation  to  that  office ;  from  whence  it  was  necessary  that  it  should  be  performed 
by  a  prophet  who  understood  the  will  of  God.  Secondly,  that  by  it  the  person 
anointed  might  be  made  fit  to  receive  the  Divine  influx."  "  In  respect  to  the  mattei 
they  give  two  reasons  why  it  was  oil,  and  not  any  other  liquor.  First,  because,  o1 
all  other,  it  signifies  the  greatest  glory  and  excellency.  Secondly,  they  tell  us  thai 
oil  continueth  uncorrupted  longer  than  any  other  liquor.  And,  indeed,  it  hath  beer 
observed  to  preserve  not  only  itself  but  other  things  from  corruption  ;  hence  the} 
conclude  it  fit  their  kings  and  priests,  whose  succession  was  to  continue  for  ever. 
should  be  anointed  with  oil,  the  most  proper  emblem  of  eternity.  Beside,  thej 
observe  that  simple  oil  without  any  mixture  was  sufiicient  for  the  candlestick;  biii 
that  which  was  designed  for  unction  must  be  compounded  with  principal  spicep, 
which  signify  a  good  name,  always  to  be  acquired  by  those  in  places  of  greatetl 
dignity  by  the  most  laudable  and  honourable  actions  "  ('  Pearson  on  the  Creed,'  Arl . 
ii.).  2.  Accompanied  with  an  act  of  homage.  "And  kissed  him."  The  kiss  wnt- 
given  on  the  month,  the  hand,  the  feet,  or  the  garment,  and  was  a  token  of  friend 
ship,  afEection,  and,  in  the  case  of  princes,  of  reverence  and  homage  (1  Kings  xviii. 
19;  Ps.  ii.  12;  Hosea  xiii.  3).  3.  And  with  a  statement  of  its  significance.  "I^ 
it  not  ?  "  &c.  "  Hath  not  the  Lord  anointed  thee  to  be  ruler  over  his  people,  ovei 
Israel  ?  And  thou  shalt  rule  over  the  people  of  the  Lord,  and  thou  shalt  save  them 
out  of  the  hand  of  their  enemies  "  (LXX.).  His  appointment  was  of  God,  and  the 
purpose  of  it  was  the  deliverance  of  his  people.  The  manner  in  which  he  received 
it  shows  the  change  which  had  already  taken  place  'in  his  feelings  (ch.  ix.  21). 
When  God  has  work  for  a  man  to  do,  he  has  power  to  dispose  and  prepare  him  tc 
do  it. 

II.  AssuBED  OF  confibmatobt  SIGNS  (vers.  2—6).  The  ersnts  which  Samuel 
predicted  wsie  proofs  of  the  Divine  interposition,  means  of  Saul's  further  preparation, 
and  emblems  or  his  future  dignity  and  power.     1.  First  sign — luB  royalty  was  an 


CH.  IX.  1—27.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  173 


appointment  made  by  God.  By  it  he  would  be  convinced  that  it  was  not  made  by 
Samuel  merely,  but  by  G-od,  who  fulfilled  his  words  (ch.  ix.  20) ;  at  the  Bame  time 
he  would  be  taught  to  leave  lower  cares,  and  aspire  after  the. highest  things.  "In- 
wardly free,  and  consecrated  to  the  Lord  alone,  he  is  to  pursue  his  way  upward." 
2.  Second  sign — his  royalty  was  an  honour  shared  with  God,  and  held  in  subordin- 
ation to  him  (vers.  3,  4).  A  part  of  the  offerings  that  were  about  to  be  presented 
before  Jehovah  in  Bethel  would  be  presented  to  Saul,  but  only  a  part  of  them ;  the 
greater  portion  would  be  given  to  Jehovah  as  a  sign  of  the  supreme  homage  due  to 
the  invisible  King  of  Israel,  while  he  was  to  accept  the  leaser  portion  as  a  sign  of  his 
subordinate  position  under  him.  "  That  this  surprising  prelude  to  all  future  royal 
gifts  is  taken  from  bread  of  offering  points  to  the  fact  that  in  future  some  of  the 
wealth  of  the  land,  which  has  hitherto  gone  undivided  to  the  sanctuary,  will  go  to  the 
king"  (EwaldJ.  God  commands  us  to  "honour  the  king"  (1  Pet.  ii.  17),  but  the 
honour  which  is  due  to  himself  may  not  be  usurped  by  man  (Matt.  xxii.  21 ;  Acts 
xii.  23).  3.  Third  sign  —  his  royalty  was  an  endowment  dependent  upon  God, 
and  effectually  administered  only  through  his  grace.  Coming  to  the  hill  (Gibeah) 
of  God,  near  the  city  (Gibeah,  his  home),  where  there  stood  a  garrison  of  the  Philis- 
tines (or  perhaps  a  pillar  erected  by  them  as  a  sign  of  their  authority),  which  could 
hardly  fail  to  impress  upon  him  with  great  force  the  main  purpose  for  which  he  had 
been  appointed  king,  he  would  meet  a  band  of  prophets  descending  from  the  high 
place  (of  sacrifice),  playing  instruments  of  music  and  prophesying  (speaking  and 
singing  in  ecstatic  utterances  the  praises  of  Jehovah,  declaring  his  greatness,  and  his 
victory  over  his  adversaries),  and — (1)  He  would  be  imbued  with  a  Divine  power. 
"The  Spirit  of  Jehovah  will  come  upon  thee."  (2)  He  would  catch  the  spirit  of 
the  prophets,  and  join  them  in  their  ecstatic  utterances.  "  Thou  wilt  prophesy  with 
them."  (3)  He  would  undergo  a  surprising  transformation.  "  And  will  be  turned 
into  another  man."  When  he  had  turned  his  back  to  go  from  Samuel,  "  God  gave 
him  another  heart "  (ver.  9),  but  the  prediction  of  the  prophet  was  more  completely 
fulfilled  afterwards  (ver.  10).  The  fulfilment  of  these  predictions  shows  that  appar- 
ently accidental  events  are  clearly  foreseen  by  God,  human  affairs  are  under  his 
direction  and  control,  and  "  the  king's  heart  is  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord,  as  the  rivers 
of  water :  he  turneth  it  whithersoever  he  will "  (Prov.  xxi.  1),  and  that  "  the  teach- 
ings of  Providence  unite  with  the  teachings  of  revelation  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
show  men  their  duty  and  their  destiny." 

m.  Admonished  of  futcbb  dtjtt  (vers.  7,  8).  In  relation  to — 1.  Gvrcumstances. 
"  Do  thou  what  thy  hand  findeth,"  i.  e.  what  circumstances  indicate  to  be  thy  duty. 
His  own  judgment  would  have  to  be  exercised,  but  he  would  not  be  left  to  it  alone. 
2.  God.  "  For  God  is  with  thee,"  to  observe,  direct,  and  aid  thee.  The  firm  belief 
in  his  presence  is  a  mighty  preservative  from  the  neglect  of  duty,  and  a  powerful 
incentive  and  encouragement  to  its  performance.  3.  The  prophet,  through  whom  he 
would  receive  "the  word  of  God,"  in  obedience  to  which  he  was  bound  always  to 
act  "  Gilgal,  on  the  south-western  bank  of  the  Jordan,  was  then,  from  all  indica- 
tions, one  of  the  most  holy  places  in  Israel,  and  the  true  centre  of  the  whole  people  ; 
it  had  a  like  importance  before,  and  much  more  then,  because  the  Philistine  control 
reached  so  far  eastward  that  the  middle  point  of  the  kingdom  must  have  been  pressed 
back  to  the  bank  of  the  Jordan.  There  the  people  must  have  assembled  for  all 
general  political  questions,  and  thence,  after  offering  and  consecration,  have  marched 
forth  armed  to  war "  (Ewald).  Thither  he  was  to  gather  the  people ;  not,  indeed, 
immediately,  but  when  .circumstances  indicated  that  it  was  the  proper  time  to  pre- 
pare for  war  with  the  Philistines,  which  was  the  main  object  of  his  appointment. 
Samuel  promised  to  meet  him  there,  offer  burnt  offerings  (dedicatory)  and  peace 
offerings  (eucharistic),  and  tell  him  what  to  do ;  and  directed  him  to  wait  seven  days, 
and  to  do  nothing  without  him.  The  direction  was  explicit,  it  set  a  limit  to  hia 
authority,  and  its  neglect  was  the  first  step  in  his  disobedience  (ch.  xiii.  13).  When 
God  places  men  in  positions  of  authority,  he  teaches  them  the  obligations  which  they 
iBTolve ;  and  if  they  fail  it  is  not  from  want  of  knowing  them. — D. 

Ver.  17. — The  man,  yet  not  the  man.  I.  Thr  sanction  given  bt  thb  Lord  to 
Baul'b  elevation.     Instances  may  easily  he  adduced  in  which  the  writers  of  the 


174  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  ix.  1—27. 

Old  Testament  ascribed  to  the  Lord  directly  what  was  only  indirectly  recognised  oi 
permitted  by  him;  but  in  the  present  case  there  is  obviously  more  than  Divine 
allowance.  Jehovah  pointed  out  Saul  to  the  prophet  Samuel,  and  commanded  that 
he  should  be  anointed  captain,  or  king.  We  account  for  this  on  that  principle  of 
Divine  government  which  allows  to  men  that  which  they  most  wish  for,  in  order  that 
they  may  learn  wisdom  from  the  result.  The  people  of  Israel  had  not  asked  the 
Lord  for  such  a  king  as  he  might  see  fit  to  choose  and  appoint.  They  had  asked  the 
prophet  for  a  warlike  chief  like  the  kings  of  the  nations  and  tribes  around  them,  and 
the  Lord  saw  meet  to  let  them  have  what  they  desired ;  the  young  giant  Saul  was 
jjBt  the  style  of  man  they  sought,  cast  in  the  very  mould  they  admired,  and 
one  that  would  teach  them  some  painful  lessons  through  experience.  Therefore, 
though  the  Lord  foresaw  the  disappointing  career  of  Saul,  he  authorised  Samuel  to 
anoint  him  privately,  and  afterwards  sanctioned  his  public  selection  and  elevation 
'0  the  royal  dignity.  Here  was  a  leader  to  suit  the  fancy  of  the  people — strong. 
Impetuous,  valiant.  Let  them  have  Saul  for  their  king.  Such  is  Hie  way  of  the 
Lord  to  this  day,  and  in  individual  as  well  as  national  life.  He  admonishes  and 
corrects  us  by  letting  us  have  our  own  way  and  be  filled  with  our  own  devices.  We 
are  apt  to  complain  in  our  disappointment  at  the  result,  that  God  himself  sanctioned 
our  course.  No.  We  did  not  ask  him  to  show  us  his  way,  that  we  might  do  his 
will ;  but  took  our  own  way,  did  our  own  pleasure ;  and  he  allowed,  nay,  facilitated 
our  desire.  Let  the  issue  teach  us  to  he  more  wary  and  more  humble  in  time  to  come. 
II.  Early  prognosticb  of  Sadl's  pailcbe.  1.  The  manner  of  his  entrance  on 
the  page  of  history.  How  different  from  the  first  mention  of  David,  faithfully  keep- 
ing the  sheep  before  he  was  anointed  to  be  the  royal  shepherd  of  Israel,  is  the  first 
appearance  of  the  son  of  Kish  in  search  of  his  father's  stray  asses,  and  visiting  the 
venerable  prophet  Samuel  with  no  higher  thought  in  his  mind  than  to  learn,  if  pos- 
sible, where  those  asses  were !  He  did  not  even  know  Samuel  by  sight,  though  he 
lived  but  at  a  short  distance.  He  seems  to  have  been  an  unreflecting  rustic  youth, 
with  none  of  those  premonitions  of  greatness  which  come  early  to  the  wise,  and  tend 
to  give  them  seriousness  of  purpose  and  elevation  of  aim.  2.  Indications  of  a  fitful 
mind.  We  read  nothing  of  Saul's  bearing  before  Samuel  when  informed  of  the 
destiny  before  him.  Probably  he  was  stunned  with  surprise.  But  so  soon  as  he  left 
the  prophet  new  currents  of  thought  and  feeling  began  to  flow  through  his  heart. 
A  mood  of  mind  fell  on  him  more  grave  and  earnest  than  had  appeared  in  him  before. 
The  Old  Testament  way  of  saying  it  is,  that  "  God  gave  him  another  heart ;  "  for  the 
change  which  passes  on  a  man  under  the  consciousness  of  a  high  vocation  suddenly 
received  is  none  the  less  of  God  than  it  is  evidently  bom  of  the  occasion.  He  sees 
things  in  a  new  light,  feels  new  responsibilities ;  new  springs  of  feeling  and  new 
capacities  of  speech  and  action  reveal  themselves  in  him.  But  Saul  took  every 
influence  by  fits  and  starts.  He  quickly  gained,  and  as  quickly  lost.  There  was  in 
him  no  steady  growth  of  conviction  or  principle.  When  he  fell  in  with  men  of 
religious  fervour  he  was  fervent  too  When  he  met  the  prophets  chanting  Jehovah's 
praise  he  caught  their  rapture,  and,  joining  their  procession,  lifted  up  his  voice  also  ii^. 
the  sacred  song.  But  it  was  a  mere  fit  of  piety.  Of  course  Saul  had  been  educated 
in  the  religion  of  his  fathers,  and  in  that  sense  knew  the  God  of  Israel ;  but  it  seenis 
evident,  from  the  surprise  occasioned  by  his  appearance  among  the  prophets,  that  he 
had  never  shown  any  zeal  for  the  glory  and  worship  of  Jehovah ;  and  the  sudden 
ecstasy  at  Gibeah,  having  no  foundation  of  spiritual  principle,  came  to  nought.  Alas  I 
men  may  sing  spiritual  songs  with  emotion  who  have  no  enduring  spiritual  life. 
Men  may  catch  the  infection  of  religious  enthusiasm,  yet  have  no  moral  health  or 
soundness.  Men's  faces  may  glow  with  a  fine  ardour,  and  yet  soon  after  he  dark- 
ened by  wicked  passion.  Pulses  of  high  feeling  and  moods  of  noble  desire  may 
visit  minds  that  yet  are  never  moved  by  Divine  grace,  and  therefore  are  liable  to  be 
mastered,  after  all,  by  evil  temper  and  base  envjr.  Occasional  impulses  ate  not 
lufBcient.     "T*  must  be  bom  again." — V. 


OH.  X.  1—16.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


17a 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  X. 


SATTL  AUOtNTEB  TO  BE  KINO,  AND  SIGNS 
OITEN  HIM  CONVINCmO  HIM  OF  THK  TKUTH 

or  HIS  APPOINTMENT  (vers.  1 — 16).  Ver.  1. 
— A  vial  of  oil.  Hebrew,  "  the  vial  of  oil," 
because  it  was  that  same  holy  oil  with  wMch 
the  priests  were  anointed  (Exod.  xxix.  7). 
Throughout  Holy  Scripture  the  office  of  king 
appears  as  one  most  sacred,  and  it  is  the 
king,  and  not  the  priest,  who  is  especially 
called  Messiah,  Jehovah's  anointed  (eh.  ii. 
10,  35 ;  xii.  3,  5 ;  xvi  6,  &o.),  because  he 
represented  the  authority  and  power  of  God. 
And  kissed  him.  /.  e.  did  homage  to  him, 
and  gave  him  the  symbol  and  token  of  alle- 
giance (see  Ps.  ii.  12).  Is  it  not?  ...  A 
strong  affirmation  often  takes  the  form  of  a 
question,  especially  when,  as  probably  was 
the  ease  here,  surprise  is  manifested.  Saul, 
on  whom  the  occurrences  of  the  previous 
day  must  have  come  as  strange  and  unin- 
telligible marvels,  was  no  doubt  still  more 
embarrassed  when  one  so  old  and  venerable, 
both  in  person  and  office,  as  Samuel  solemnly 
consecrated  him  to  be  Israel's  prince  "(see 
ch.  ix.  16),  and  gave  him  the  kiss  "of  fealty 
and  allegiance.  Samuel,  therefore,  answers 
Saul's  inquiring  looks  with  this  question, 
and,  further,  gives  him  three  signs  to  quiet 
his  doubts,  and  convince  him  that  his  ap- 
pointment is  from  God. 

Ver.  2. — The  first  sign— Thou  shalt  find 
two  man  by  Eachel's  sepulchre.  In  Jer. 
xxxi.  15  (quoted  in  Matt.  ii.  18)  Rachel's 
sepulchre  is  connected  with  Ramah,  but 
in  Gen.  xxxv.  19  it  is  placed  near  Bethle- 
hem. The  whole  of  the  geography  of  Pnul's 
wanderings  is  very  obscure,  but  Wilson 
('Lands  of  the  Bible,'  t  401)  places  Zelzah 
at  Beit-iala,  to  the  west  of  Bethlehem,  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  Kabbet  Rahil,  or 
Tomb  of  Rachel.  Though  both  are  now  in 
the  tribe  of  Judah,  yet  by  a  slight  rectifi- 
cation of  the  frontier,  in  conformity  with 
Josh,  xviii.  11 — 28,  Mzah  would  be  on  the 
border  of  Benjamin,  and  there  may  have 
been  local  reasons  for  Saul  and  his  companion 
not  taking  the  most  direct  route  for  Gibeah. 
The  news  given  by  these  men,  that  the  asses 
were  found,  would  set  Saul's  mind  at  rest, 
and,  freed  from  lower  cares,  he  would  te 
"able  to  give  his  thoughti.entirely  to  prepara- 
tion for  the  higher  duties  that  were  before 
him.  For  an  interesting  note  upon  the 
journey  of  Saul  home  see 'Wilson,  ii.  86. 

Ver.  8. — The  second  sign  was  to  be  the 
piesenting  of  an  offering  to  him  out  of  their 
sacrificial  gifts  by  three  men  going  on  a 
pilgrimage  to  BetheL  He  would  meet  them 
not  in  the  plain  of  Tabor,  but  at  the  oak, 


elon,  of  Tabor.  Many  attempt  to  etnnect 
this  elon-Tabor -with  the  allon,  or  oak,  under 
which  Deborah,  Rachel's  nurse,  was  buried 
(Gen.  xxxv.  8),  and  suppose  that  Tabor  is  s 
corruption  of  the  name  Deborah.  This  ii 
scarcely  possible,  and  it  is  better  to  acknow- 
ledge that  we  know  nothing  of  the  site  of 
this  tree,  except  that  it  was  on  the  road  to 
BetheL  This  was  one  of  the  places  which 
Samuel  used  to  visit  as  judge  (ch.  vii.  16) ; 
but  these  men  were  on  a  pilgrimage  thither 
because  since  the  days  of  Jacob  it  had  been 
a  sacred  spot,  and  a  chief  seat  of  the  old 
patriarchal  worship,  for  which  see  oh.  ix.  12. 

Ver.  4.  — These  pilgrims  would  salute 
Saul,  i.  e.  give  him  the  usual  friendly  greet- 
ing of  travellers,  and  would  then  present  to 
him,  a  stranger,  two  loaves  of  the  bread 
intended  for  their  offering  at  Bethel.  By  so 
doing,  in  the  first  place,  they  acknowledged 
him  as  their  lord  (see  ch.  ix.  7  ;  xvi.  20), 
and,  secondly,  they  indicated  that  the  king 
would  henceforth  share  with  the  sanctuary 
the  offerings  of  the  people.  And  Saul  was 
to  receive  of  their  hands  the  present,  as 
being  now  his  due,  for  by  anointing  him 
Samuel  had  designated  him  as  king. 

Ver.  5. — The  third  sign  was  to  be  his 
taking  part  with  the  pro)ihets  in  their  re- 
ligious exercises  in  the  hill  of  God — really 
Gibeah,  his  own  home.  Gibeah  is  strictly 
a  rounded  hill,  while  Ramah  is  a  height. 
This  Gibeah  ha-Elohim  was  probably  that 
part  of  the  hill  on  which  the  "  high  place  " 
was  situated,  and  which  was  evidently  out- 
side the  city  ;  for  Saul,  on  his  route  home- 
ward, met  tiie  troop  of  prophets  descending 
from  it.  For  "Gibeah  of  Saul"  see  ch.  ix. 
1  ;  but,  as  Conder  remarks,  this  name  was 
given  to  a  district  as  well  as  to  a  town,  inas- 
much as  Ramah  is  described  as  situated 
within  it— ch.  xxii.  6  ('  Tent  Work,'  ii.  111). 
The  garrison  of  the  Philistines  was  probably 
on  some  height  in  this  district,  and,  coupled 
with  the  mention  of  similar  military  posts 
elsewhere  (ch.  xiii.  3 ;  xiv.  4),  shows  that 
most  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  was  subject  to 
that  nation,  and  disarmed  (ch.  xiii.  19) ;  but 
probably,  as  long  as  the  tribute  was  paid,  its 
internal  administration  was  not  interfered 
with  A  company  of  the  prophets.  At 
Gibeah  Samuel  had  established  one  of  his 
"schools  of  the  prophets,"  by  means  of 
which  he  did  so  mvich  to  elevate  the  whole 
mental  and  moral  state  of  the  Israelites. 
The  word  rendered  company  literally  means 
a  cord  or  line,  and  so  a  hand  of  people. 
These  prophets  were  descending  from  the 
Bamah  (see  on  ch.  ix.  12),  where  they  had 
been  engaged  in  some  religious  exercise,  and 
were    chanting   a  psalm  or   hymn   to   the 


176 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL 


[CH,  X.  1 — 16 


irnisio  of  various  instruments.  Music  was 
one  of  the  great  means  employed  by  Samuel 
in  training  his  young  men ;  and  not  only  is 
its  effect  at  all  times  elevating  and  refining, 
but  in  semi-barbarous  times,  united,  as  it  is 
sure  to  be,  with  poetry,  it  is  the  chief  edu- 
cational lever  for  raising  men's  minds,  and 
giving  them  a  taste  for  culture  and  intel- 
lectual pleasures.  The  musical  instruments 
mentioned  are  the  psaltery,  Hebrew,  nebel,  a 
sort  of  harp  with  ten  strings  stretched  across 
a  triangle,  the  longest  string  being  at  its  base, 
and  the  shortest  towards  its  apex  ;  the  tab- 
ret,  Hebrew  toph,  a  tambourine  struck  by 
the  hand  ;  the  pipe,  Hebrew,  chalil,  i.  e. 
"  bored  "  or  "  pierced,"  so  called  from  the 
holes  bored  in  it  to  make  the  notes,  and 
being  probably  a  sort  of  flute  ;  and,  lastly, 
the  harp,  Hebrew,  cinnor,  a  sort  of  guitar, 
chiefly  used  for  accompanying  the  voice,  and 
sometimes  played  with  the  fingers,  and  some- 
times with  a  plectrum  or  quill.  There  is  no- 
thing to  indicate  that  there  was  only  one  of 
each  of  these  instruments,  so  that  the  articles 
would  be  better  omitted.  No  doubt  every 
prophet  was  playing  some  one  or  other  of 
them.  And  they  shall  prophesy.  The  conju- 
gation used  here  is  not  that  employed  for  the 
prediction  of  future  events,  but  means,  liter- 
ally, and  "  they  will  be  acting  the  prophet," 
the  right  word  for  men  who  were  in  training 
for  the  prophetic  office  (see  'Prophecy  a 
Preparation  for  Christ,'  2na  ed.  p.  50).  They 
were  really  engaged  in  chanting  God's 
praises  with  fervour,  and  this  was  no  doubt 
one  of  the  methods  employed  by  Samuel  to 
refiie  and  spiritualise  their  minds.  Years 
afterwards  David  was  thus  educated,  and 
learned  at  one  of  Samuel's  schools  that  skill 
in  metre  and  psalmody  which,  added  to  his 
natural  gifts,  made  him  "the  sweet  singer  of 
Israel."  For  prophesying  in  the  sense  of 
plajdng  instruments  of  -music  see  1  Chron. 
XXV.  1 — 3,  and  in  the  sense  of  chanting, 
1  Kings  xviii.  29. 

Ver.  6. — The  spirit  of  Jehovah  will  come 
upon  thee.  The  Hebrew  means,  will  come 
mightily  upon  thee,  will  come  upon  thee 
so  as  to  overpower  thee.  And  thou  shalt 
prophesy.  Shalt  act  as  a  prophet  (see  above). 
Albeit  untrained,  thou  shalt  be  carried  away 
liy  religious  fervour,  and  join  in  their  singing 
and  psalmody.  And  he  turned  into  another 
man.  New  thoughts,  new  emotions  shall 
take  possession  of  thee,  and  in  addition  to 
tlie  bodily  strength  for  which  hitherto  thou 
hast  been  famous,  thou  shalt  be  filled  with 
mental  power,  making  thee  eager  for  action, 
ind  capable  of  taking  the  lead  among  all 
men,  and  in  all  emergencies.  We  have  an 
instance  of  this  enlarged  capacity  in  the 
"isiour  with  which  Saul  acted  against  the 
\mmonite8. 

Ver.    7.   -Do    m    occasion   serve  thee. 


Literally,  "  do  for  thyself  as  thy  hand  shall 
find,"  i.  e.  follow  the  ead  of  circumstances, 
and  do  thy  best.  This  is  the  flood-time  of 
thy  fortunes ;  press  onward,  and  the  kingdom 
is  thine  own,  for  God  is  with  thee,  and 
success  is  sure. 

Ver.  8. — Thou  shalt  go  down  before  me  to 
Gil^al.  We  find  in  ch.  xiii.  8 — 13  a  meeting 
at  Gilgal  so  exactly  parallel  to  what  is  ar- 
ranged here  that  we  cannot  help  looking 
upon  this,  again,  as  a  sort  of  sign  to  be  ful- 
filled at  a  later  period.  It  is  no  argument 
against  it  that  Gilgal  was  the  place  where  in 
the  mean  while  Saul  was  solemnly  inaugurated 
king ;  for  he  was  appointed  m  order  that 
he  might  deliver  Israel  from  the  Philistines 
(eh.  ix.  16),  and  we  may  feel  sure  that  this 
grand  purpose  would  form  the  subject  of  con- 
versation between  the  prophet  and  the  sol- 
dier, either  on  the  house-top  or  the  next 
morning.  In  this  conversation  Gilgal  would 
be  selected  as  the  place  where  Saul  would  as- 
semble Israel  for  the  war  of  independence  (so 
Rashi  and  other  Jewish  interpreters) ;  and  so 
great  an  enterprise  must  necessarily  be  begun 
with  religious  rites,  and  Saul  was  to  wait  a 
full  week  for  the  prophet's  coming,  both  to 
try  his  faith,  which  ought  to  have  been  con- 
firmed by  the  fulfilment  of  the  three  ap- 
pointed signs,  and  in  order  that  the  war 
might  be  undertaken  under  the  same  holy 
auspices  as  his  own  election  to  the  kingdom. 
The  two  years'  interval,  were  it  really  so 
long,  would  give  time  for  Saul's  character 
to  develop  under  the  forcing  influences  of 
royalty,  and  it  would  then  be  proved,  when 
he  felt  himself  every  inch  a  king,  whether 
he  was  stiU  as  amenable  to  the  Divine  au- 
thority as  when  he  was  first  summoned  from 
obscurity  to  mount  a  kingly  throne.  But, 
really,  the  words  in  ch.  xiii.  1  do  not  justify 
this  conclusion,  and  most  probably  the  occur- 
rences mentioned  in  that  chapter  followed 
immediately  upon  Saul's  confirmation  ae 
king. 

Ver.  9. — God  gave  him  another  heart. 
The  Hebrew  is  remarkable:  "When  he 
turned  his  shoulder  to  go  from  Samuel,  God 
also  turned  for  him  another  heart,"  i.  e.  God 
turned  him  round  by  giving  him  a  changed 
heart.  He  grew  internally  up  to  the  level 
of  his  changed  circumstances.  No  longer 
had  he  the  feelings  of  a  husbandman,  con- 
cerned only  about  com  and  cattle ;  he  had 
become  a  statesman,  a  general,  and  a  prince. 
No  man  could  have  gone  through  such 
marvellous  events,  and  experienced  such 
varied  emotions,  without  a  vast  inward 
change.  But  it  daight  have  been  only  to 
vanity  and  self-complacency.  Saul's  change 
was  into  a  hero. 

Vers.  10,  11.— To  the  hill.  Hebrew,  "  to 
Gibeah,"  his  home.  He  prophesied.  Took 
part  in  prophetic  exercises  (see  on  ver.  6^ 


CH.  X.  1—16.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


171 


On  seeing  this,  the  people  of  Giheah,  who 
knew  him  leforetime, — Hebrew,  "  from 
yesterday  and  the  day  before,"  bnt  equiva- 
lent to  our  phrase  "  for  years," — asked  in 
surprise,  What  is  this  that  is  come  unto  the 
son  of  Eish  1  What  makes  him  thus  act  in 
a  manner  unlike  all  our  long  past  experience 
of  him  ?  Is  Saul  also  among  the  prophets  1 
From  this  question  two  things  are  evident ; 
the  first,  that  the  schools  founded  by  Samuel 
already  held  a  high  place  in  the  estimation 
of  the  Israelites  ;  the  second,  that  Saul  had 
not  shared  in  that  education  which  so  raised 
the  prophets  as  a  class  above  the  mass  of  the 
people.  Probably  also  Saul's  character  was 
not  such  as  would  have  made  him  care  for 
education.  A  young  man  who,  while  living 
in  his  neighbourhood,  knew  so  little  about 
Samuel  (ch.  ix.  6),  could  not  have  had  a 
very  inquiring  or  intellectual  frame  of  mind. 
Of  course  Samuel  could  not,  by  gathering 
young  men  together,  and  giving  them  the 
best  education  the  times  afl'orded,  gain 
for  them  also  the  highest  and  rarest  of 
gifts,  that  of  direct  inspiration.  Even  when 
Elisha,  the  friend  and  attendant  upon  Elijah, 
asked  his  master  for  an  elder  son's  portion  of 
_the  Divine  spirit,  Elijah  told  him  that  he 
'  had  asked  a  hard  thing  (2  Kings  it  10). 
The  disparity  then  that  the  people  remarked 
between  Saul  and  the  prophets  was  that 
between  a  rich  young  farmer's  son,  who  had 
been  brought  up  at  home,  and  cared  only 
for  rustic  things,  and  these  young  colle- 
gians, who  were  enjoying  a  carefm  educa- 
tion (comp.  John  vii.  15).  How  good  that 
education  was  is  proved  by  the  fact  that 
at  David's  court  all  posts  which  required 
literary  skill  were  held  by  prophets.  No 
man  could  found  schools  of  inspired  men  ; 
but  Samuel  founded  great  educational  insti- 
tutions, which  ended  by  making  the  Israelites 
a  highly-trained  and  literary  people.  Saul's 
prophesying  was  not  the  result  of  training, 
but  came  to  him  by  a  Divine  influence, 
rousing  the  slumbering  enthusiasm  of  an 
energetic  but  iitful  nature. 

Ver.  12. -One  of  the  same  place— t.  e. 
Gibeah — answered  and  said,  But  who  is  their 
father  1  The  Septuagint,  Syriac,  and  Vul- 
gate read,  But  who  is  his  father?  But  this 
would  be  a  foolish  reply  to  the  question, 
"  What  has  happened  to  the  son  of  Kish  ?" 
The  meaning  rather  must  be,  You  ask  about 
the  son  of  Kish  ;  but  what  has  birth  to  do 
with  prophecy  ?    None  of  these  young  men 


hare  inherited  these  gifts,  and  if  Sanl  can 
take  part  in  their  prophesying!,  why  ahonld 
he  not }  Eish,  his  father,  is  no  worse  than 
theirs.  Is  Sanl  also  among  the  prophets  1 
Under  vSiy  different  circumstances  Saul  once 
again  took  part  in  the  exercises  of  these 
youthfnl  prophets  (ch.  xix.  24),  and  evi- 
dently on  both  occasions  with  such  skill  and 
success  as  prove  the  readiness  of  his  genius  ; 
and  so  struck  were  the  people  at  the  strange 
power  which  he  thus  evinced,  that  their  ex- 
pression of  wonder  became  fixed  in  the 
national  mind  as  a  proverb.  Saul  was  a 
man  of  great  natural  ability,  and  yet  not 
the  sort  of  person  whom  the  people  expected 
would  be  made  king.  He  probably  could 
neither  read  nor  write,  and  from  his  extreme 
height  was  perhaps  awkward  and  bashful ;  as 
he  suffered  afterwards  from  fits  of  insanity 
(ch.  xvi.  14),  he  may  always  have  been  flighty 
and  wilful ;  and  altogether,  though  possessed 
of  marvellous  gifts,  was  certainly  the  very 
opposite  of  Samuel's  well-trained  and  orderly 
scholars. 

Ver.  13. — He  came  to  the  high  place 
Saul  had  met  the  prophets  coming  down 
from  the  Bamah ;  but  the  same  religious 
fervour,  which  had  made  him  take  so  earnest 
a  part  in  the  prophesyings  of  the  young 
men,  urged  him  now,  after  parting  from  their 
conipany,  himself  to  go  up  to  the  high  place, 
there  to  offer  his  prayers  and  praises  to  God. 

Vers.  14 — 16. — Saul's  nnole.  According 
to  ch.  xiv.  50,  51  ;  1  Chron.  viiL  83,  this 
would  be  Abner.  The  conversation  pro- 
bably took  place  after  Saul  had  returned 
from  the  Bamah  and  gone  to  his  own  home, 
for  in  so  brief  a  summary  much  necessarily 
is  omitted.  It  is  curious  that  the  conversa- 
tion should  have  taken  place  with  the  uncle, 
and  not  with  the  father ;  but  possibly  the 
latter  was  too  well  pleased  to  have  his  son 
back  again  to  be  very  particular  in  his 
inquiries.  Not  so  Abner.  He  was  evidently 
excited  by  his  nephew's  visit  to  the  prophet, 
and  struck  perhaps  by  the  change  in  Saul 
himself,  and  would  gladly  have  heard  more. 
But  Saul  does  not  gratify  his  curiosity.  Oi 
the  matter  of  the  kingdom  ...  he  told 
him  not.  It  was  not  merely  prudent,  but 
right  to  keep  the  matter  secret.  An  able 
man  like  Abner  would  probably  have  begun 
to  scheme  for  so  great  an  end.  Saul's  silence 
left  the  fulfilment  of  the  prophet's  words 
entirely  to  God. 


HOMILBTICS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — Supports  to  faith  and  duty.  The  facts  are— 1.  Samuel  privately 
anoints  Saul  as  the  cnosen  of  God.  2.  He  gives  him  four  signs  of  the  Divine  sanc- 
tion of  the  act  of  anointing.  (1)  The  safety  of  the  asses,  and  his  father's  sorrow. 
(2)  The  spontaneous  gift  of  sacrificial  bread  near  Bethel.     (3)  A  welcome  by  the 

1   BAM  I 


178  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  x.  1— 1« 

prophets  at  Gibeah.  (4)  An  inspiration  from  God  to  prophesy.  3.  He  instrocts 
him  on  the  completion  of  the  signs  to  act  on  his  own  judgment,  with  the  assurance 
that  God  is  his  helper.  4.  He  finally  directs  him  to  wait  at  Gilgal  for  himself, 
there  to  receive  further  guidance.  The  course  taken  by  Samuel  was  the  natural 
completion  of  his  protracted  intercourse  with  Saul.  The  hour  had  come  in  which 
the  symbolism  of  the  recent  feast  and  the  foreshadowings  of  suggestive  language 
must  receive  deiinite  form  in  word  and  deed.  As  one  chosen  of  God  to  high  office 
in  his  government  of  Israel,  Saul  is  anointed  with  oil ;  and  Samuel  voluntarily  gives 
him  what  he  must  have  valued  above  all  price,  the  kiss  of  homage  and  of  congratu- 
lation, thus  indicating  his  perfect  readiness  to  fall  in  with  the  new  order,  and  his 
tender  interest  in  the  king  s  prosperity.  A  new  era  of  responsibility  opened  up  to 
Saul.  He  had  to  go  forth,  believing  himself  to  be  God's  chosen  servant,  ready  for 
the  onerous  duties  attaching  to  great  honours.  But  a  man  could  not  thus  have  his 
faith  taxed  without  craving  for  encouragement.  There  were,  in  the  circumstances  of 
Israel  and  of  Saul,  obvious  reasons  for  this  private  announcement  and  anointing. 
The  deliberate  act  of  such  a  man  as  Samuel  must  go  far  to  banish  doubt.  But  still 
human  nature  needs  many  supports,  and  God  is  very  considerate  of  our  frame.  The 
day  might  come  when  difflculties  and  disappointments  would  recall  the  primary  mis- 
givings of  the  reality  of  the  Divine  call.  Hence  the  provision  made  by  Samuel  for 
the  encouragement  of  Saul. 

I.  There  is  always  in  God's  service  a  need  op  bufpoet  to  faith  and  dutt. 
Others  have  been  summoned  to  a  life  requiring  strong  faith  and  unfailing  courage 
in  duty.  1.  There  is  a  call  to  special  service.  Abraham  was  called  to  be  a  pilgrim 
in  a  strange  land,  and  to  thereby  secure  a  seed  in  whom  all  should  be  blessed. 
Moses  was  called  to  surrender  the  wealth  of  Egypt,  and  to  lead  God's  people  to 
freedom.  The  apostles  were  bidden  to  leave  house  and  business  for  Christ's  sake. 
Every  true  pastor  and  Christian  worker  recognises  a  voice  which,  in  commanding 
separation  to  his  service,  puts  honour  on  the  servant.  The  instrument  by  which  each 
is  called  may  be  human,  as  truly  as  it  was  a  human  hand  and  voice  that  set  apart 
Saul.  The  evidence  of  the  call  may  be  clear.  But  tedious  toils  have  to  be  borne. 
Events  will  not  realise  the  expectations  of  a  too  sanguine  temperament.  Abraham 
needed  the  support  of  occasional  manifestations,  as  well  as  of  fulfilled  predictions. 
Moses  could  not  go  without  "  signs."  Christ  promised  proofs  that  he  was  sending 
forth  his  disciples.  2.  There  is  a  call  to  Christian  life.  This  is  the  most  blessed 
summons  to  privilege,  honour,  and  obligation.  The  call  to  Christian  life  is  endless 
in  its  form  and  manner  and  seasons.  It  may  come  in  infancy,  when  we  are  uncon- 
sciously made  new  creatures  in  Christ ;  or  in  mature  years,  by  the  preacher's  voice, 
the  written  word,  the  loss  of  friends,  and  the  adversities  of  life,  or  the  still  small 
voice  in  the  heart.  There  may  be  instances  in  which  it  is  as  clear  as  was  Samuel's 
voice  and  hand  to  Saul ;  and  a  wonder  and  sense  of  unworthiness  may  arise  as  sincere 
and  deep  as  was  his.  But  times  will  come  when  a  horror  of  great  darkness  falls 
on  the  spirit ;  the  difficulties  of  one's  path  will  raise  the  question  as  to  the  reality  of 
that  call  which  once  seemed  so  clear,  and  the  possibility  of  maintaining  the  distinct 
line  of  duty  once  entered  on  A  man  cannot  find  support  simply  in  retrospect  of 
what  was  a  marked  change  ir.  his  life  ;  he  needs  something  else  to  convince  him  that 
all  is  right,  that  the  past  change  was  not  an-  illusion. 

II.  The  SUPPORT  given  is  varied — adapted  to  the  entire  need.  Saul  needed  to 
be  assured  of  the  fact  that  it  was  God,  nnd  not  merely  man,  who  appointed  him ;  he 
had  it  in  the  f ourf old  fulfilled  prediction  (vers.  2,  3,  6,  6).  He  needed  the  sympathy 
and  concurrence  of  the  religious  portion  of  Israel ;  he  was  assured  of  it  symbolic- 
ally by  the  worshippers  spontaneously  ofEering  him  nourishment.  He  needed  the  co- 
operation of  the  most  important  educators  of  the  age  ;  he  was  assured  of  it  in  the 
symbolical  welcome  given  to  him  by  the  company  of  prophets,  the  thwi  rising  power, 
which  in  years  hence  was  to  exert  so  great  an  influence  on  the  national  life.  He 
needed,  moreover,  a  power  and  wisdom  in  excess  of  that  inherited  from  his  father, 
and  acquired  during  years  of  private  life  ;  he  had  it  given  when  the  spirit  of  the 
Lord  made  him  another  man.  Wisely,  therefore,  were  these  arrangements  made  for 
the  servant  of  God.  They  are  beautifullv  congruous  with  the  position  of  Saul,  and 
the  age  in  which  he  was  called  to  act.     An  examination  of  the  lives  of  Abraham, 


CO.  X.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  179 

Moses,  and  the  apostles  will  show  that  an  equally  wise  arrangement  was  made  for 
the  support  of  their  faith  and  duty.  So  modem  servants  of  God  can  point  to 
promises  fulfilled,  in  a  blessing  on  their  toil,  as  evidence  that  they  were  not  mistaken 
in  the  call  to  work ;  and  their  once  distrustful  heart  becomes  strong  in  the  conscious- 
ness of  a  ^ower  not  their  own.  In  a  difEerent,  though  not  less  real,  way  the  indi- 
vidual Christian  finds  varied  support  to  his  belief  that  God  has  called  him  into  the 
kingdom,  and  made  him  a  "  king  and  a  priest ;  "  as  also  to  his  discharge  of  the  duties 
appropriate  to  his  high  and  holy  calling. 

III.   The  REALISATION  OF  THE  PROVIDED  SUPPORT  BKSUES  ON  THE  EFFORT  TO  EXEBCISB 

THE  PAITH  AND  TO  DISCHARGE  THE  DDTY.  When  Saul  acted  on  the  belief  that  Samuel 
was  a  true  prophet  speaking  and  acting  for  God,  he  found  all  to  turn  out  as  he  had 
been  promised.  The  exercise  of  such  faith  as  he  had,  in  the  first  instance,  put  him 
in  possession  of  the  supports  to  faith  for  future  times ;  and  the  discharge  of  duty,  so 
far  as  made  clear,  led  to  a  discovery  of  the  supports  to  duty  that  would  be  his  in  the 
more  conspicuous  acts  of  life.  So  was  it  with  Abraham,  and  Moses,  and  the  apostles. 
Every  true  servant  gets  encouragement,  not  by  waiting,  but  while  "  going  on  his  way," 
and  doingthe  deeds  appointed.  The  Saviour  said  to  the  palsied,  " Put  forth  thy 
hand."  In  the  attempting  of  the  impossible  act  the  faith  came  and  grew.  Faith 
finds  nourishment  for  itself,  and  waxes  strong  in  proportion  as  it  is  exercised. 

Geaeral  lessons : — 1.  We  may  render  valuable  service  by  timely  sympathy  and 
co-operation  with  those  called  to  occupy  difBcult  positions.  2.  The  most  unassail- 
able Christian  evidence  is  that  to  be  gained  in  a  life  of  entire  devotion  to  Christ.  3. 
Full  confirmation  of  our  hopes  and  beliefs  will  come  in  so  far  as  we  are  faithful  to 
carry  into  action  what  confidence  we  already  have. 

Another  man.  The  mind  of  Saul  was  evidently  overcharged  with  the  great 
things  which  had  so  unexpectedly  been  brought  before  his  attention.  His  imagin- 
ation must  have  been  filled  with  those  pictures  of  royal  state  and  lofty  duties 
which  are  ever  in  Eastern  minds  associated  with  kingship.  But  he  was  scarcely  able 
to  frame  an  adequate  conception  of  what  Samuel  mgant  by  saying,  "  Thou  shalt  be 
turned  into  another  man.  There  are  several  grades  of  transformation  brought 
before  us  by  ordinary  life  and  by  Scripture. 

I.  "  Another  man  "  is  sometimes  made  by  total  change  op  cirodmstances.  We 
all  are  partly  subject  to  our  surroundings  ;  but  some  natures  happen  to  be  in  cir- 
cumstances which  appear  to  be  quite  alien  to  the  development  of  what  is  in  them. 
They  are  repressed ;  the  strong  forces  of  their  life  refuse  to  come  forth  ;  they  are 
comparative  nonentities  ;  if  no  change  occurs  in  their  relative  position  they  will  pass 
away  from  life  unknown  and  almost  useless.  There  are  in  some  persons  mental 
faculties  which,  being  predominant,  but  not  drawn  out  by  appropriate  nutriment  and 
exercise,  give  to  the  individual  an  appearance  of  stupidity  and  vacuity.  A  poet's" 
Boul  encompassed  by  everything  antagonistic  to  its  development  will  be  miserable 
as  a  lark  that  cannot  rise.  But  when  the  unnatural  restraints  are  removed,  and  the 
dispositions  and  faculties  of  individuals  are  placed  amidst  circumstances  favourable 
to  their  proper  development,  there  comes  a  change  as  rapid,  as  fresh,  and  striking  as 
when  the  light  and  rain  of  spring  call  forth  the  bulb  from  under  the  dull  earth  into 
a  form  of  beauty  and  sweetness.  An  observer  of  life  cannot  but  have  met  with 
many  cases  of  this. 

II.  "  Another  man  "  is  sometimes  made  by  special  endowments  for  official 
DUTIES.  This  was  the  case  with  Saul.  It  is  the  teaching  of  Scripture  that  "  every 
good  and  perfect  gift "  cometh  from  God.  He  gave  wisdom  and  cunning  to  the  men 
who  framed  the  choice  work  of  the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xxxi.  2 — 6).  Keason  is  his 
gift,  though  too  often  used  against  him.  The  Old  Testament  speaks  of  special  gifts 
for  men  called  to  lead  on  the  people  of  God.  The  endmvment  of  S  lul  was  in 
harmony  with  that  of  Moses  and  Joshua.  The  contrast  of  the  men  as  not  endowed 
and  endowed  is  striking.  The  figure  of  Moses  after  he  went  forth  in  the  nwme  oj 
Jehovah  dwarfs  the  Moses  feeding  Jethro's  sheep.  The  timid,  questioning,  spirit- 
ually ignorant  men  who  followed  Christ  as  long  as  they  dared,  and  "  thought "  that  he 
"  would  have  redeemed  Israel,"  can  scarcely  be  recognised  as  the  men  who,  when 
endowed  with  power  from  on  high,  stood  forth  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and,  with 

»  2 


m  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  tern.  x.  1—14 

calmness  and  fearlessness,  expounded  the  spiritual  nature  of  his  kingdom  who  was 
crucified.     Spiritual  power  works  marvels  in  men. 

III.  "  AnOTHEH    man  "    IS    MADE   WHEN    THE    SOUL   IS    EBNEWED    BY  THE   SPIEIT  OF 

God.  This  is  the  most  radical  of  all  changes ;  it  is  more  than  an  enlargement  of  the 
ordinary  powers,  more  than  the  gift  of  discrimination  by  which  ordinary  duties  can 
be  discharged  ;  it  is  the  renovation  of  that  deep,  subtle  spring  of  feeling  and  willing 
which  determines  the  character  of  the  entire  life.  The  will  of  a  man  is  supposed  to 
be  the  key  to  his  destiny ;  but  the  change  wrought  by  the  Holy  Spirit  seems  even  to 
penetrate  into  the  mysterious  rear  of  the  will,  and  insure  that  it  shall  issue  in  acts  of 
repentance,  of  faith  in  Christ,  of  supreme  love  for  God,  of  delight  in  holiness.  The 
reality  of  the  transfwmation  is  seen  in  the  now  aims,  the  new  joys,  the  new  acts  of 
the  auul,  the  new  outward  form  of  life,  the  new  spiritual  discernment  of  the  spiritual 
and  unseen,  the  new  hidden  secret  which  no  words  can  reveal,  the  new  absorption  in 
Clirist. 

IV.  "  Another  man  "  is  made  when  wb  attain  to  the  complete  redemption  fob 
WHICH  Christ  died.  Relatively  to  a  life  of  sin,  the  regenerate  life  of  the  Christian  on 
earth  is  a  new  creation,  he  is  "another  man ; "  and  likewise,  relatively  to  the  imper- 
fect, struggling  life  we  spend  on  earth,  that  which  awaits  us  beyond  is  a  new  creation. 
When  the  full  stature  of  a  man  in  Christ  is  attained,  and  becomes  clothed  upon  with 
a  body  "like  unto  his  own  glorious  body,"  then  may  it  be  most  truly  said  of  each, 
he  is  "  turned  into  a  new  man."  How  unlike  our  former  selves  will  be  that  perfectly 
holy,  tearless,  strong,  joyous,  unwearied  life,  exercised  in  a  "  spiritual  body,"  created 
in  special  adaptation  for  the  new  activities  and  joys  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

General  considerations : — 1.  Reflect  on  what  the  world  may  lose  by  careless  disre- 
gard in  our  social  life  of  the  adaptation  of  circumstances  to  aptitudes  and  abilities. 

2.  There  is  room  for  every  man  to  examine  himself  and  see  whether  his  religion  is 
really  the  product  of  a  radical  renewal  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  3.  With  so  lofty  a 
destiny  before  us  as  Christians,  the  inquiry  should  arise,  how  it  is  that  we  are  so 
little  afEeoted  by  the  prospect,  and  by  what  means  we  can  more  fully  live  under  the 
inspiring  "powers  of  the  world  to  come." 

Limitations  of  prerogative.  Saul  was  told  that  when  the  promised  "  signs  "  came 
upon  him  he  miglit  do  as  occasion  required,  and  for  the  assigned  reason  that  God  was 
with  him  (ver.  7).  This  great  freedom  immediately  receives  a  limitation  in  the 
command  to  wait  at  Gilgal  till  Samuel  came  and  offered  sacrifice,  and  gave  further 
instructions.  The  royal  prerogative  was  to  be  exercised  under  limitations.  Here  the 
question  of  civil  and  spiritual  power  is  brought  into  distinct  concrete  form  as  the 
natural  outcome  of  Israel's  history.  The  analogy  between  Israel  and  all  other  nations 
cannot  be  established  in  detail  with  respect  to  this  question ;  but,  nevertheless,  there 
are  a  few  truths  of  general  application  illustrated  in  the  restrictions  put  by  the 
prophet  of  God  on  the  actions  of  Israel's  king. 

I.  The  ultimate  ends  for  which  governments  exist  are  spiritual.    There  is 

3.  difference  between  the  immediate  concern  of  a  government — namely,  with  protec- 
tion of  life  and  property,  the  repression  of  crime ;  scope  for  the  free  action  of 
citizens,  and  for  the  development  of  national  resources — and  the  ultimate  end  for 
which  Providence  designs  it  and  all  other  institutious.  Man's  body  exists  for  his 
spirit  Society,  in  the  mind  of  God,  exists  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  individuals. 
There  is  an  evolution  progressing  towards  a  world-wide  righteousness,  and  govern- 
ments are  one  of  the  agencies  which  are  to  subserve  this  issue.  Attention  to  the 
material  and  intellectual  interests  of  a  people  may  be  to  rulers  an  end  in  itself,  but 
not  to  God.  Governments  may  subserve  this  spiritual  end  without  consciously 
entering  into  questions  pertaining  to  its  nature  and  varied  means  for  securing  it. 
A  faithful  discharge  of  definite  functions,  on  approved  principles,  cannot  but  help 
on  the  purpose  for  which  God  is  himself  governing  mankind. 

II.  The  Church  of  God  is  the  true  witness-bearer  and  the  means  op  accom- 
plishing THESE  spiritual  ENDS.  Samuel  was  the  representative  of  the  spiritual 
power.  He  had  authority  to  assert  the  Messianic  truth,  to  educate  the  people  in 
harmony  with  that  truth,  and  to  demand  that  the  king  should  govern  in  such  a  way 
»B  to  allow  free  scope  to  the  spiritual  work.     He  and  the  religious  comnauliiiy  ^ere 


cfl.  X.  i— i6.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  181 

one  in  this  respect.  And  the  living  Church  of  Christ  is  the  assertor  of  Messianic 
truth — claiming  to  hold  what  Christ  has  given,  pointing  to  the  spiritual  reign  of  Christ 
over  every  heart  and  home  as  the  goal  of  all  efEort  and  the  hope  of  the  world  ;  and 
the  witness-bearer,  calling  upon  rulers  to  observe  in  their  administration  the  prin- 
ciples of  righteousness,  truth,  and  benevolent  regard,  which  God  alone  will  honour 
with  his  blessing. 

III.  Civil  kulbrs  are  bound  to  act  in  harmony  with  the  witness-bearing 
OF  the  Church.  Saul  was  bound,  morally,  and  as  a  condition  of  stability  to  his 
throne,  to  recognise  Samuel  in  his  capacity  as  prophet  of  God,  working,  with  all  the 
devout,  for  Messianic  purposes.  He  must  not  ignore  the  spiritual  power,  and  thus 
dishonour  God  (ver.  8 ;  cf.  ch.  xiii.  8 — 10)  ;  nor  must  he  arrogate  its  functions.  His 
duty  lay  in  administering  government  on  the  principles  of  righteousness,  and  so  as 
not  to  bar  the  way  to  the  realisation  of  the  Messianic  purpose.  And  knowing  as  we 
do  that  in  the  truth  given  by  Christ,  and  borne  witness  to  by  the  living  Church,  there 
are  all  the  sound  principles  of  human  progress  as  well  as  of  personal  salvation,  every 
government  is  morally  bound  to  act  on  them,  and  is  guilty  of  fearful  presumption  if 
it  professes  to  supplant  them  by  creations  of  its  own.  As  surely  as  decay  at  the 
root  of  a  tree  will  issue  in  its  fall,  so  surely  will  every  government  perish  which  acts 
on  other  principles  than  those  asserted  by  the  living  Church  of  God.  No  govern- 
ment can  successfully  wage  war  with  the  one  living  Church,  which,  by  example, 
word,  and  deed,  preaches  righteousness,  and  claims  the  right  to  do  so. 

IV.  The  Chorch  is  bound  to  confine  attention  to  her  own  proper  functions. 
Samuel  left  Saul  to  "do  as  occasion"  might  "serve"  (ver.  7).  He  simply  claimed 
that  there  was  another  power  in  the  development  of  Israel's  life  beside  the  civil,  and 
that  Saul  must  recognise  this.  The  exercise  of  the  power  had  reference  to  general 
principles  of  conduct,  and  the  securing  of  Messianic  purposes.  The  Church  of  Christ 
is  bound  to  avoid  everything  that  would  be  inharmonious  with  her  spiritual  nature 
and  uses.  To  be  the  educator  of  the  state  conscience,  to  assert  her  own  independ- 
ence as  a  spiritual  community  for  spiritual  purposes,  this  is  the  function  of  the 
Church  in  relation  to  the  civil  power,  as  illustrated  in  the  conduct  of  Samuel,  involved 
in  the  spiritual  nature  of  Christ's  body,  and  confirmed  by  the  adversities  and  pros- 
perities of  history. 

General  considerations: — 1.  How  far  the  controversies  connected  with  spiritual 
supremacy  are  the  result  of  a  deviation  from  the  simplicity  of  purpose  characteristic 
of  apostolic  times.  2.  To  what  extent  calamities  have  befallen  the  world  by  the 
professing  Church  being  more  concerned  for  the  assertion  of  power  than  for  the 
preaching  and  practising  of  righteousness.  3.  Whether  history  does  not  show  that 
•n  earnest  Church,  solely  bent  on  preaching  the  gospel,  and  enforcing  it  by  example, 
exercises  more  real  power  over  the  destinies  of  nations  than  a  Church  ever  watchful 
to  limit  the  powers  of  civil  rulers. 

Vera.  9 — 17. — The  reasonableness  of  incongruities.  The  facts  are— 1.  Saul  ex- 
periences the  truth  of  all  that  Samuel  had  told  him.  2.  Being  met  by  a  company  of 
prophets,  Saul,  under  an  inspiration  from  God,  also  prophesies.  3.  The  people 
remark  on  the  incongruity  of  Saul's  being  among  the  prophets.  4.  Saul's  uncle,  bei^ig 
too  inquisitive  in  the  matter  of  Samuel's  intercourse  with  him,  is  not  gratified.  Tlie 
general  reader  of  the  Bible  is  struck  with  the  incongruity  between  Saul's  antecedents 
and  his  sudden  participation  in  the  gifts  of  prophecy ;  and  men  generally  have  sym- 
pathised with  the  surprise  which  expressed  itself  in  the  proverb,  "  Is  Saul  among  the 
prophets  ?  "  Too  frequently  the  event  here  recorded  is  left  as  one  of  the  strange, 
unaccountable  things  scattered  over  the  page  of  sacred  history,  furnishing  to  the  mind 
more  of  perplexity  and  embarrassment  than  of  instruction  and  aid  to  faith.  It  will, 
however,  be  found  that  in  the  course  of  Providence  the  seeming  incongruities  play  an 
important  part,  that  they  are  not  essentially  unreasonable,  and  are  all  reducible  to  a 
common  principle. 

I.  The  course  of  Providence  presents  numerous  instances  of  striking  ihcon- 
OBUITT.  Whatever  the  precise  definition  of  incongruity,  the  thing  itself  may  be  f  oun  1 
in  the  form  of  conduct,  association,  relation,  and  means.  Leaving  out  all  instances 
reiolting  from  human  folly  and  eccentricity,  we  may  notice  a  few  in  the  order  of 


182  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  x.  1— lb 


Providence  as  seen  in — 1.  Conduct.  Saul's  is  a  case  in  point.  He  was  an  instrument 
in  the  hand  of  God  of  producing  the  strange  impression  indicated  by  tlie  familial 
proverb.  To  the  Jews  in  Jerusalem  on  the  day  of  Pentecost  there  was  an  unaccount- 
able incongruity  in  the  speech  and  bearing  of  men  who,  up  to  that  time,  had  been 
timid,  obscure  followers  of  the  Crucified.  Considering  the  reputed  character  of  Peter 
as  a  rash,  impulsive  man,  it  was,  in  the  judgment  of  his  companions  and  in  the  light  of 
his  denial,  scarcely  congruous  to  commit  to  him  the  "  key"  of  the  kingdom.  And 
the  joyful  songs  which  rose  from  the  apostles  when  in  the  stocks  were  strange  music 
to  their  warders.  Modern  history  is  not  without  its  notable  instances.  2.  Associa- 
tions. For  Siiul  to  be  associated  with  a  prophetic  order  was  a  marvel.  That  a  glorious 
star  should  lead  wise  men  from  afar  only  to  a  babe  in  a  manger,  and  that  the  hosts 
of  heaven  should  sing  on  the  birth  of  a  helpless  child,  was  an  association  rare  and 
astonishing.  The  most  perplexing  incongruity  to  many  is  that  the  Eternal  One 
should  for  a  term  of  years  be  in  association  with  a  frail  body,  with  all  the  sorrowful 
incidents  inseparable  therefrom.  3.  Relations.  We  find  this  in  Saul's  case  ;  for 
men  can  see  no  congruity  between  his  ecstatic  excitement  as  prophet  and  the  office 
of  king  to  which  he  was  being  called.  The  relation  of  John  the  Baptist,  an  austere, 
unsociable  ascetic,  asforerunner  to  the  mild,  approachable  Christ,  struck  men  aa  remark- 
able, and  needed  the  vindication  that  "  wisdom  is  justified  of  her  children  "  (Matt.  xi. 
16 — 19).  It  also  occurred  to  John  as  a  most  incongruous  thing  that  he  should  have 
to  baptize  the  holy  Saviour  (Matt.  iii.  13 — 15).  4.  Means.  As  a  means  of  qualifying 
Saul  for  the  discharge  of  kingly  functions  this  prophetic  excitement  seemed  to  be 
most  unsuitable.  So,  likewise,  to  many  there  is  no  propriety  in  the  uplifting  of  a 
brazen  serpent  as  a  means  of  restoring  health  to  the  poisoned.  Naaman  could  not 
think  the  Jordan  better  than  the  rivers  of  his  own  country.  The  cross  of  Christ  was 
despised  by  the  Greeks  as  foolishness — a  most  incongruous  means  for  the  subjugation 
of  the  world  to  liira  who  died  thereon. 

II.  The  SEEMING  INCONGRUITIES  IN  THE  COURSE  OF  PrOVIDEKCB  ABB  EELATIVB  TO  OUR 

IGNORANCE.  That  is  incongruous  only  which  is  not  understood.  "  Things  are  not 
what  they  seem."  Our  surprises  and  astonishments  are  often  the  index  of  our  lack 
of  knowledge.  It  may  not  be  possible  in  every  instance  to  find  a  complete  solution, 
but  some  clue  may  be  found  if  we  will  consider  all  the  events  of  Providence  as  inter- 
related, and  throwing  light  on  one  another.  The  reasonableness  of  incongruities  may 
be  illustrated  by  taking  as  a  typical  instance  the  conduct  of  Saul.  The  appearance 
of  a  prophetic  order  at  that  juncture,  under  the  direction  of  Samuel,  was  a  necessary 
feature  in  the  moral  elevation  of  the  people.  The  stagnant  indifEerenoe  of  men  could 
be  best  aroused  by  urgent  zeal.  The  reasonableness  of  Saul's  excitement  resolves 
itself  into  that  of  the  order.  We  are  to  remember  that  a  coming  good  in  Messiah's 
reign  was  the  hope  of  the  true  Israel.  Insofar  as  their  conviction  was  deep,  and  was 
attended  by  a  corresponding  pity  for  present  degradation,  it,  when  full  on  the  spirit, 
would  not  unnaturally  produce  an  excitement  proportionate  to  the  susceptibility  of 
the  temperament  and  the  external  occasion,  and  the  utterance  of  the  truth  would  be 
measured  by  the  degree  of  excitement.  Therefore  the  educational  value  of  these  men 
was  great,  and  they  were  obedient,  in  their  extravagance,  to  the  laws  of  mind  and  the 
urgency  of  religious  conviction.  Now  it  was  reasonable  for  Saul  to  share  in  this 
gift — 1.  For  the  people.  It  would  call  their  attention  to  him,  and  prepare  them  for 
the  subsequent  action  of  Samuel.  2.  For  Saul  himself.  He  was  to  be  king,  and 
the  people  imagined  that  their  king  would  be  after  the  pattern  of  other  kings.  But 
Israel's  king  must  rule  in  harmony  with  the  spiritual  destiny  of  the  nation.  He  must 
be  in  sympathy  with  prophets.  3.  For  the  order  of  prophks.  This  order  was  one 
of  the  great  powers  in  fashioning  the  future  of  the  people  of  God.  It  therefore  was 
interested  in  the  character  and  aspirations  of  whatever  king  might  be  chosen.  Saul's 
endowment  with  their  own  gift  would  assure  them  that  he  was  worthy  of  their  sup- 
port, and  would  not  be  as  the  kings  of  the  nations.  The  incongruity  was  most 
reasonable. 

III.  The  TRUE  SOLUTION  OF  ANY  INCONGRUITY  IN  THB  COURSE  OF  PboVIDEKCB  IB  TO  BB 

FOUND  IN  THB  SERIES  OF  WHICH  THE  EVENT  IS  BUT  ONE.  Saul's  conduct,  regarded  in 
relation  to  the  antecedents  of  Israel's  life,  and  the  gradual  preparation  of  the  world 
for  Christ,  stands  out  as' most  fit  and  useful ;  therefore,  natural.     No  one  can  rightly 


OB.  X.  1— IG.]  THK  FlliST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  183 

judge  of  Scripture  events  who  does  not  consider  the  course  of  Providence  as  a  develop- 
ment from  the  imperfect  to  the  more  perfect.  The  place  and  power  of  every  mole- 
cule in  the  universe  are  relative  to  the  antecedent  and  subsequent  movements  of  the 
whole.  Astronomers  have  met  with  perturbations  and  irregularities  which  seemed 
incongruous  with  all  they  knew,  but  in  time  they  discovered  the  place  of  these  so- 
called  irregularities  in  the  mechanism  of  the  heavens,  and  they  became  at  once 
beautiful  regularities.  The  issue  of  redemptive  methods  will  throw  light  on  the 
process. 

General  lessons: — 1.  The  most  unlikely  of  men  may  be  called  to  do  God's  will  in 
forms  unlooked  for.  2.  The  varied  gifts  requisite  to  an  ofBce  will  be  forthcoming 
to  all  whom  God  calls  to  the  office.  3.  We  should  be  careful  to  keep  our  mind  free 
from  prejudice  against  methods  which,  though  unusual,  may  be  of  God.  4.  A  deep 
and  patient  study  of  the  Bible  as  a  whole  is  the  only  means  of  learning  the  beauty 
and  harmony  of  his  ways.  6.  A  true  philosophy  will  induce  us  to  suspend  our  judg- 
ment on  some  subjects  until  we  can  see  more  clearly  the  relation  of  the  past  to  the 
future. 

Wise  reticence.  The  notice  taken  of  an  inquiry  by  Saul's  uncle  is  evidently  for 
the  purpose  of  bringing  in  bold  relief  Saul's  wisdom  in  being  reticent  on  the  import- 
ant matters  concerning  the  kingdom.  It  is  probable  that  the  bearing  of  Saul  indi- 
cated that  something  unusual  had  transpired,  and  the  prophesying  would  only  confirm 
the  suspicion.  Saul's  replies  do  not  make  clear  whether  the  uncle  was  designedly 
prying  into  what  he  knew  were  secrets,  or  was  simply  seeking  general  information. 
But  in  either  case  Saul  formed  a  proper  estimate  of  his  own  position,  and  manifested 
a  proper  reserve. 

I.    A   DEGREE   OP   BETICENCE    IS   ESSENTIAL   TO   A  WISE  LIFE.       "There  is   B.  time   to 

speak,  and  a  time  to  be  silent."  Reticence,  however,  is  more  than  silence;  it  is 
deliberate  silence  where  speech  is  possible  and  sought.  It  may  be  considered  with 
reference  to — 1.  Its  source.  In  every  case  its  source  is  in  the  will  acting  freely  in 
the  form  of  a  negative  judgment.  But  still  this  judgment  may  in  some  persons  be 
connected  more  with  temperament  than  with  an  enlightened  estimate  of  what  is 
proper.  The  wise  reticence  is  that  which  comes  from  a  just  estimate  of  what  is  due 
to  the  occasion  and  the  subject-matter.  2.  Its  proper  subject-matter.  This  must 
be  determined  by  a  calm  judgment  on  the  right  of  others  to  know  what  we  know, 
and  the  utility  of  unveiling  uur  knowledge.  But  taking  a  general  view  of  human 
life,  we  may  say  that  reticence  is  due  to — (1)  Our  deepest  religious  eocperience. 
There  are  depths  in  the  soul  which  no  eye  but  God's  can  penetrate,  and  there  are 
experiences  there  so  sacred,  tender,  and  awful  that  it  would  be  a  species  of  profanity 
to  endeavour  to  unfold  them  in  form  of  speech.  If,  for  purpose  of  seeking  assistance, 
reference  is  made  to  secret  experiences,  the  surface  only  is  to  be  touched.  No  one 
who  reveres  the  sacredness  of  religious  life  will  attempt  to  pry  into  what  is  secret 
between  the  soul  and  God,  or  to  probe  wounds  which  "shame  would  hide."  (2) 
Private  and  domestic  affairs.  There  are  in  every  life  interests  which  belong  to  no 
one  else ;  and  in  home  there  are  solemn  secrets  on  which  the  cold,  critical  eye  of  the 
world  must  not  be  allowed  to  gaze.  Much  of  the  sweet,  binding  influence  of  home 
lies  in  the  unforced  reticence  of  its  members.  (3)  Secrets  pertaining  to  office.  Office 
in  Church,  State,  or  commerce  implies  knowledge  to  be  used  only  for  specific  pur- 
poses in  relation  thereto.  No  one  is  fit  for  office  who  cannot  control  his  tongue  aibd 
resist  temptation  to  speak.  3.  Its  value.  As  a  hahit  of  mind,  when  distinguished 
from  sullen  reserve,  the  result  of  mere  temperament,  it  gives  power  to  the  possessor. 
It  reveals  a  sober,  discriminating  judgment,  a  strength  of  purpose  that  can  resist 
inducement,  and  a  profound  regard  for  the  sanctities  of  life.  In  society  it,  wisely 
exercised,  insures  confidence,  renders  transaction  of  affairs  easy,  and  promotes 
respectful,  courteous  bearing.  In  religious  associations  it  tends  to  reverence,  devout- 
ness  of  spirit,  and  sincerity.  4.  Its  dangers.  It  is,  if  not  carefully  guarded,  likely 
to  degenerate  into  a  love  of  secrecy,  an  unnaturally  close,  reserved  habit  of  mind. 
In  religious  life  its  excess  may  put  a  check  on  the  free  utterance  cif  life's  sorrows 
and  cares  even  to  God.  and  also  deprive  the  Church  of  the  benefits  of  a  rich 
txperienc*. 


184  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUfeL.  [ch.  x.  1— 16, 

II.  Wise  reticence  will  always  be  consistent  with  truthfulness.  It  is 
possible  to  state  partial  truth  in  such  a  way  as  virtually  to  lie,  and  to  be  silent  when 
silence  may  be  designed  to  convey  a  false  impression.  Saul  was  truthful  in  hia 
reticence.  He  answered  questions ;  he  did  not  volunteer  information.  Had  he 
been  pressed  he  most  likely  would  have  declined  to  answer.  Christ  was  reticent  when 
pressed  on  the  question  of  John's  baptism,  and  when  examined  by  Pilate,  but  no 
false  impression  was  conveyed.  In  cases  of  difficulty  it  is  better  point  blank  to 
refuse  information  than  incur  the  risk  of  suspected  prevarication.  Inquisitive  men 
should  be  plainly  rebuked  rather  than  put  o£E  with  questionable  answers. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  10.  (GiBEAH.)  —  A  company  of  prophet.  This  is  the  first  mention  of  "« 
company  (cord,  chain,  or  band)  of  prophets  (Nabhis).  There  were  previously  indi- 
vidual prophets.  And  on  one  occasion  the  seventy  elders  prophesied  (Num.  xi.  25), 
and  Moses  said,  "  Would  God  that  all  the  Lord's  people  were  prophets,  and  that  the 
Lord  would  put  his  Spirit  upon  them."  But  until  the  time  of  Samuel  there  was  no 
association  or  community,  college  or  school,  of  prophets'.  1.  His  language  shows 
his  intimate  relation  to  this  "  company,"  of  which  he  was  doubtless  the  founder, 
and  appears  subsequently  as  president  (ch.  six.  20) ;  for  it  is  not  likely  that  there 
■were  now  several  such  "  companies,"  as  in  later  times  (1  Kings  xx.  35 ;  2  Kings  ii. 
3,  16  ;  iv.  88).  2.  Its  formation  was  due  to  a  newly-awakened  religious  life  among 
the  people,  and  intended  as  a  means  o£  deepening  and  extending  it.  3.  It  arose 
about  the  same  time  as  the  establishment  of  the  monarchy,  and  furnished  a  regular 
succession  of  prophets,  by  whom  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  spoken  for  the  guidance 
and  restraint  of  the  king.  "  Samuel  saw  the  need  of  providing  a  new  system  of  train- 
ing for  those  who  should  be  his  successors  in  the  prophetic  office,  and  formed  into 
fixed  societies  the  sharers  of  the  mystic  gift,  which  was  plainly  capable  of  cultiva- 
tion and  enlargement.  As  it  was  a  leading  crisis  of  the  dealings  of  God  with  men, 
unusual  operations  of  the  Spirit  marked  the  time  of  Samuel ;  but  they  were  not  con- 
fined to  him,  though  he  is  far  the  most  conspicuous  figure"  ('Heroes  of  Heb.  Hist.*). 
Notice  their — 

I.  Spiritual  calling.  They  are  called  prophets  with  reference  to  their  vocation 
or  profession.  But  this  was  founded  upon  an  individual  and  inner  call  by  the  Divine 
Spirit.  Dwelling  on  the  high  ground  of  Divine  contemplation,  they  were  often  visited 
by  breezes  of  spiritual  influence  to  which  others  were  strangers,  borne  along  in  an 
ecstasy  beyond  their  own  control,  and  impelled  to  give  utterance  to  the  overflowing 
feeling  of  their  hearts ;  and  some  of  their  number  were  chosen  by  God  to  be  the 
recipients  of  the  gift  of  prophecy  in  the  highest  sense.  Their  calling  represents  that 
of  the  Christian  ministry,  and  more  generally  the  vocation  of  all  Christians  (Acts  ii. 
17  ;  Ephes.  v.  18,  19). 

II.  Fraternal  union.  They  formed  a  "  company,"  a  voluntary,  organised  society, 
apparently  dwelling  together  in  the  same  place,  and  pursuing  the  same  mode  of  life. 
The  bond  of  their  union  was  the  cominon  spirit  they  possessed ;  and  their  association 
contributed  to  their  preservation  and  prosperity,  and  their  power  over  others.  "  They 
presented  the  imifying,  associative  power  of  the  prophetic  spirit  over  against  the 
disruption  of  the  theocratic  life,  which  was  a  legacy  of  the  time  of  the  judges" 
(Erdmann).  Of  Christian  union  the  like,  and  much  more,  may  be  said  (John  xvii. 
21 ;  Acts  ii.  46 ;  iv.  23). 

III.  Musical  skill.  "  And  before  them  a  psaltery  (cithara),  and  a  tabret  (tam- 
bourine), and  a  pipe  Tflute),  and  a  harp  (guitar) ; "  stringed,  percussion,  and  wind 
instruments  of  music  (ver.  6 ;  Gen.  iv.  21 ;  xxxi.  27 ;  Exod.  xv.  20).  They  made  a 
religious  use  of  music,  and  cultivated  it  with  great  care.  It  prepared  them  for  high 
and  holy  emotion  (2  Kings  iii.  15),  and  gave  aj)propnate  expression  to  it.  It 
strengthened  the  feeling  to  which  it  gave  expression,  regulated  it,  and  stirred  in 
others  a  similar  feeling.  Their  sacred  music  was  the  germ  of  the  splendid  choral 
•ervice  of  the  temple  in  subsequent  time. 


dS.  X.  1— 1«.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  Ot  SAMUEL.  ItS 

"  What  passion  cannot  music  raise  and  quell  f 
When  Jubal  struck  the  chorded  shell, 

His  listening  brethren  stood  around, 
And  wonder  on  their  faces  fell, 

To  worship  that  celestial  sound  j 
Less  than  a  god  they  thought  there  could  not  dwdl 
Within  the  hollow  of  that  shell, 
That  spoke  so  sweetly  and  so  welL 
What  passion  cannot  music  raise  and  quell  t "  (Dryden) 

rV.  Pkophbtio  utterance.  "And  they  shall  prophesy."  Poetry,  like  mnsio,  is 
the  natural  vehicle  of  strong  emotion.  And  in  it  they  recited  and  sang  in  an 
impassioned  manner  the  praises  of  God,  and  the  wonders  which  he  had  wrought  on 
behalf  of  his  people  (1  Chron.  xxv.  1,  3). 

V.  Popular  reputation.  The  manner  in  which  they  were  spoken  of  by  the 
people  generally  (ver.  11)  shows  the  important  position  they  occupied,  and  the  high 
estimation  in  which  they  were  held.  When  the  professed  servants  of  God  are  so 
regarded — 1.  It  is  an  evidence  of  their  worth  and  consistency.  They  commend 
themselves  to  "  every  man's  conscience."  If,  being  faithful  to  their  vocation,  they 
are  despised,  it  only  reveals  the  evil  character  of  their  despisers  ;  and  it  is  not  honour, 
but  shame,  to  be  commended  by  foolish  and  wicked  men  (Luke  vi.  26).  2.  It  indicates 
the  prevalence  of  a  right  sentiment  in  society.  3.  It  afEords  a  favourable  condition 
of  bearing  witness  for  God  and  successful  spiritual  labour. — D. 

Vers.  11 — 13.  (Gibeah.) — Saul  among  the  prophets.  "Is  Saul  also  among  the 
prophets  ?  "  Of  the  three  signs  of  which  Sau]  was  assured,  the  occurrence  of  the  last 
alone  is  particularly  described.  "  And  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  him,  and  he  pro- 
phesied among  them."  "  Turned  into  another  man  "  (ver.  6).  It  was  "  the  most 
important  for  his  inner  life."  "  Through  this  sign  his  anointing  as  king  was  to  be 
inwardly  sealed."     In  what  is  here  recorded  we  see  an  instance  of — 

I.  Surprising  transformation.  The  question  was  mainly  one  of  surprise.  The 
change  was — 1.  Sudden.  In  what  are  called  "  sudden  conversions,"  indeed,  there  is 
often  a  secret  preparation  of  mind  and  heart.  Even  in  the  case  of  Saul  the  surprise 
would  not  have  been  so  great  if  his  recent  interview  with  Samuel  and  its  effect  upon 
him  had  been  known.  2.  In  extraordinary  contrast  to  his  previous  life,  wherein  ho 
had  exhibited  little  interest  in  or  aptitude  for  spiritual  exercises.  Four  or  five  days 
ago  among  them  wholly  occupied  with  the  care  of  oxen  and  asses — dull,  moody,  and 
silent ;  now  in  a  transport  of  religious  emotion,  and  "speaking  in  a  new  tongue  I  " 
3.  Supernatural.  It  was  plainly  due  to  the  "  Spirit  of  God,"  i.  e.  (in  the  Hebrew 
conception)  the  direct,  invisible,  operative  energy  of  God,  whether  put  forth  in 
nature  or  in  man,  in  imparting  mental  or  physical  force  for  great  enterprises,  in 
promoting  moral  improvement,  in  producing  exalted  states  of  feeling,  or  in  acts  of 
the  highest  inspiration  (Gen.  i.  2  ;  Exod.  xxxi.  3 ;  Num.  xxiv.  2 ;  Judges  xiii.  25 ;  2 
Sam.  xxiii.  2 ;  Isa.  xi.  2)  ;  and  (according  to  the  fuller  revelation  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment) the  holy,  personal.  Divine  Spirit  of  God  and  of  Christ.  The  expression  (here 
used  in  this  book  for  the  first  time)  is  not  employed  with  respect  to  Samuel,  whose 
intercourse  with  God  is  represented  as  more  voluntary,  self-conscious,  intimate,  and 
continuous  than  that  which  it  here  denotes. 

II.  Sympathetic  enthusiasm.'  Saul  was  drawn  into  sympathy  with  the  Divine 
enthusiasm  of  the  "  company  of  prophets."  1.  The  links  which  unite  men  are  secret, 
subtle,  and  mysterious',  and  the  influence  which  some  men  exert  over  others  is  extra- 
ordinary. 2.  Human  influence  is  a  common  condition  of  Divine.  3.  The  contagious 
power  of  strong  emotion  is  often  seen  in  religious  revivals,  and  to  some  extent  also  in 
other  public  movements.  "  Ecstatic  states  have  something  infectious  about  them. 
The  excitement  spreads  involuntarily,  as  in  the  American  revivals  and  the  preaching 
mania  in  Sweden,  even  to  persons  in  whose  state  of  mind  there  is  no  affinity  to  any- 
thing of  the  kind  "  (Tholuck).  "  As  one  coal  kindles  another,  so  it  happens  that  where 
good  is  taught  and  heard  hearts  ^>o  not  remain  unmoved — Acts  xvi.  13,  14"  (Hall) 

III.  Spirituai  bndowmbnt.     "  And  one  of  the  same  place  answered,"  in  reply  t« 


IM  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [<«•  *•  *— *•• 


the  qnestion  (asked  somewhat  contemptuously  and  soeptically),  "  What  has  happened 
to  the  son  of  Kish  ?  Is  Saul  also  "  (whose  relationship  and  antecedents  are  so  different) 
"among  the  prophets?  and  said,  But  who  ia  their  father?'  "Who  is  he  that 
teacheth  these  prophets,  and  causeth  the  spirit  of  prophecy  to  rest  on  them  ?  Nor  is. 
there  any  cause  for  astonishment  in  this  ;  for  the  same  holy,  blessed  One  who  teach- 
eth these  prophets  teacheth  also  this  one  "  (Kirachi).  "  Prophetical  perfection  is  not 
a  matter  that  is  conveyed  from  father  to  son.  Under  these  circumstances  the  son 
may  he  a  prophet,  though  the  father  is  not  so  "  (R.  Levi  Ben  Gersom,  quoted  by  Ed. 
of  Smith's  '  Sel.  Dis.').  1.  Spiritual  gifts  are  not  the  result  of  natural  relationship. 
2.  They  are  due  to  the  free  and  sovereign  operation  of  the  Divine  Spirit,  "  dividing  to 
every  man  severally  as  he  will."  3.  When  they  are  bestowed  on  ourselves  they  should 
be  received  with  humility,  and  when  they  are  observed  in  others  they  should  be  regarded 
without  envy,  and  with  admiration  and  thankfulness. 

IV.  Partial  conversion.  "  And  when  he  had  made  an  end  of  prophesying,  be 
came  to  the  high  place  "  (ver.  13).  His  inspiration  was  transitory,  and  the  change 
which  he  had  undergone,  great  as  it  was,  and  in  the  direction  of  a  renewal  of  his  heart 
in  righteousness,  did  not  involve  such  renewal.  "  This  transformation  is  not  to  be 
regarded  as  regenerationln  the  Christian  sense,  but  as  a  change  resembling  regeneration 
which  affected  the  entire  disposition  of  mind,  and  by  which  Saul  was  lifted  out  of  his 
former  modes  of  thought  and  feeling,  which  were  confined  within  a  narrow,  earthly 
sphere,  into  a  far  higher  sphere  of  his  new  royal  calling,  was  filled  with  kingly  thoughts 
in  relation  to  the  service  of  God,  and  received  another  heart — ver.  9  "  (Keil).  1. 
Great  spiritual  gifts  may  be  possessed  without  the  possession  of  a  new  heart  (Num. 
xxiv.  35  ;  xxxi.  8  ;  Matt.  vii.  22  ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  2).  2.  There  may  be  considerable  moral 
reformation,  much  spiritual  feeling,  correct  orthodox  beliefs,  outward  profession  of 
piety,  and  strict  observance  of  religious  ordinances,  whilst  the  supreme  afEection  or 
ruling  purpose  of  the  soul  remains  unchanged  (Matt.  xiii.).  3.  A  real  renewal  of  the 
heart  is  manifested  by  its  permanent  fruits  (Matt.  vii.  20 ;  John  xv.  16  ;  Heb.  iii.  14). 
"  If  Samuel  is  the  great  example  of  an  ancient  saint  growing  up  from  childhood  to 
old  age  without  a  sudden  conversion,  Saul  is  the  first  direct  example  of  the  mixed 
character  often  produced  by  such  a  conversion.  .  .  .  He  became  '  another  man,'  yet 
not  entirely.  He  was,  as  is  so  often  the  case,  half  converted,  half  roused.  .  .  .  His 
religion  was  never  blended  with  his  moral  nature  "  (Stanley) 

"  Let  not  the  people  he  too  swift  to  judge. 
As  one  who  reckons  on  the  blades  in  field 
Or  e'er  the  crop  be  ripe.     For  I  have  seen 
The  thorn  frown  rudely  oil  the  winter  long,  - 
And  after  bear  the  rose  upon  its  top ; 
And  bark,  that  all  her  way  across  the  sea 
Kan  straight  and  speedy,  perish  at  the  last 
E'en  in  tlie  haven's  mouth.     Seeing  one  steal, 
Another  bring  his  offering  to  the  priest, 
Let  not  Dame  Birtha  and  Sir  Martin  thence 
Into  Heaven's  counsels  deem  that  they  can  pry ; 
For  one  of  these  may  rise,  the  other  fall  "  (Dante,  Par.  xiiL).— D. 

Vers.  14 — 16.  (Gibeah.) — Inquisitiveness.  Inquiry  after  truth  is  a  necessary  and 
invaluable  exercise.  But  inquiry,  when  it  is  directed. to  matters  in  which  we  have  no 
proper  concern,  degenerates  into  vain  curiosity,  or  mere  inquisitiveness.  And  this 
often  appears  both  in  relation  to-Divine  affairs  (Gen.  iii.  6  ;  Deut.  xxix.  29  ;  1  Sam. 
vi.  19  ;  Luke  xiii.  23 ;  Acts  i.  6)  and  human  affairs  (John  xxi.  21).  Of  the  latter 
we  have  here  an  illustration.  Saul,  having  reached  his  home,  was  asked  by  his  uncle 
concerning  his  journey  and  interview  with  Samuel.  "Whither  went  ye?"  "Tell 
me,  I  pray  thee,  what  Samuel  said  to  you."  This  man  was  doubtless  acquainted  with 
the  popular  agitation  about  a  king,  but  what  his  precise  motives  were  we  are  not  told. 
Such  inquisitiveness  as  he  displayed — 

I.  Manifests  a  wbonq  disposition.  1.  An  unrestrained  desire  of  knowledge. 
There  must  be  self- restraint  in  this  desire,  as  In  every  other ;  else  it  leads  to  reckless- 
ness, irreverence,  Mid  pride.     2.  An  unjust  disregard  of  the  rights  of  otiiers.    The 


:'H.  X.  17—27.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


187 


claims  of  family  relationship  are  sometimes  exaggerated  so  aa  to  ignore  or  interfere 
with  those  rights.  It  is  imagined  that  they  justify  the  expectation  of  an  answer  to 
any  inquiry,  however  little  it  affects  the  inquirer.  3.  Uncharitable  and  suspicious 
thoughts  about  the  conduct  of  others,  expressed  in  impertinent  and  annoying  questions, 
which  naturally  cause  resentment  and  discord.  It  may  be  added,  that  persons  who 
are  "busybodies  in  other  men's  matters"  (1  Pet.  iv.  15)  are  seldom  so  diligent  and 
faithful  in  their  own  as  thoy  ought  to  be.  The  proper  province  of  every  man  affords 
plenty  of  scope  for  his  attention  and  effort  (2  Thess.  iii.  11 ;  1  Tim.  v.  13). 

II.  Kequibes  to  be  promptly  checked.  1.  Out  of  due  regard  to  higher  claimt. 
What  Samuel  said  to  Saul  was  intended  for  him  alone,  and  to  divulge  it  would  be  a 
breach  of  duty,  2.  Lest  the  information  given  should  be  used  to  the  disadvantage  of 
him  who  gives  it.  Who  knows  how  Saul's  uncle  would  have  employed  the  knowledge 
of  his  having  been  appointed  king  by  the  prophet  ?  He  might  have  done  irreparable 
mischief.  Many  excellent  projects  have  been  frustrated  by  an  untimely  disclosure 
of  them.  3.  For  the  good  of  the  inquirer  himself.  The  gratification  of  his  curiosity 
tends  to  increase  his  inquisitiveness,  the  mortification  thereof  to  its  cure.  It  was  for 
the  benefit  of  the  Apostle  Peter  that  the  Lord  said,  "  What  is  that  to  thee  ?  Follow 
thou  me." 

III.  Should  be  checked  in  a  bight  manner.  Judiciously,  discreetly,  and,  more 
particularly — 1.  With  strict  truthfulness.  "He  told  us  plainly  that  the  asses  were 
found  "  (ver.  16).  Saul  spoke  the  truth,  but  not  the  whole  truth ;  nor  was  he  in  the 
circumstances  described  under  any  obligation  to  do  so.  "  A  fool  uttereth  all  his  mind ; 
but  a  wise  man  keepeth  it  till  afterwards"  (Prov.  xxix.  11).  2.  With  due  courtesy. 
By  a  blunt  refusal  and  rude  repulsion  Saul  might  have  alienated  his  uncle,  and  turned 
him  into  an  enemy.  "  Honour  all  men."  "  Be  courteous."  3.  Vfith  few  words  ot 
resolute  silence.  "  But  of  the  matter  of  the  kingdom  whereof  Samuel  spake  he  told 
him  not."  There  is  a  "  time  to  keep  silence  "  (Bccles.  iii.  7 ;  Amos  v.  13).  "  Then  he 
(Herod)  questioned  him.  with  many  words ;  but  he  answered  him  nothing  "  (Luke 
xxiii.  9).  Our  Lord  himself  is  thus  an  example  of  silence  to  us  when  addressed  with 
questions  which  it  would  not  be  prudent  or  beneficial  to  answer.   "  Silence  is  golden." 

Conclusicm. — 1.  Check  the  tendency  to  curiosity  in  yourselves,  so  that  it  may  not 
be  checked,  disappointed,  and  reproved  by  others.  2.  In  checking  it  in  others  seek 
their  improvement  rather  than  your  own  dignity  and  honour. — D. 


EXPOSITION. 


FVBLIO  8BLE0TI0N  0»  SAUL  AS  KINO  (verS. 

17—21).  Ver.  17. — Samuel  called  the 
people  together  unto  Jehovah  to  Mizpeh. 
For  the  reason  why  Mizpah  (so  the  name 
should  be  spelt)  was  chosen  as  the  place  of 
meeting  see  ch.  viL  15.  TTnto  Jehovah. 
Because  in  some  way  the  Divine  presence 
there  was  indicated;  possibly  by  the  high 
priest  having  been  summoned  thither  with 
the  Urim  and  Thummim. 

Ver.  18. — And  said  .  .  .  Samuel  first 
points  out  in  his  address  to  the  assembled 
people  that  Jehovah  .always  had  done  for 
them  the  very  thing  for  which  they  desired 
a  king.  They  wished  for  deliverance  from 
the  Philistines,  and  Jehovah  had  delivered 
them  ont  of  the  hand  of  the  Egyptians, 
and  out  of  the  hand  of  all  kingdoms  that 
oppressed  them  (the  A.  V.  wrongly  inserts 
"  and  of  them").  But  their  deliverance  by 
Jehovah  had  been  made  dependent  upon 
their  own  conduct ;  they  were  required  to 
repent  them  of  their  sins,  and  purge  the 
land  from  idolatry,  before  victory  could  be 


theirs.  What  they  wantau  wu  national 
independence  freed  from  this  condition,  and 
secured  by  an  organisation  of  their  military 
resources. 

Ver.  19. — Samuel,  therefore,  protests  nnto 
them,  Ye  have  this  day  rejected  yonr  God, 
because  what  you  want  is  a  divorce  of  your 
national  well-being  from  religion.  Never- 
theless, God  granted  their  request,  it  being  a 
law  of  his  providence  to  leave  men  free  to 
choose.  The  king  was,  however,  to  be  ap- 
pointed by  him,  the  selection  being  by  lot. 
By  your  thousands.  The  natural  subdivi- 
sion of  a  tribe  is  into  families ;  but  when 
Moses  distributed  the  people  into  thousands, 
hundreds,  fifties,  and  tens  (Ezod.  xviii.  26), 
the  numerical  arrangement  was  probably 
made  to  yield  as  far  as  possible  to  the 
natniral,  so  that  about  a  thousand  men  more 
or  less  of  the  same  kin  should  be  classed  u  a 
family.  Hence  the  terms  are  aynonymoos 
here,  and  in  Num.  L  16  ■  x.  4  ;  Josh.  xziL 
14,  &C. 

Ver.  21.— The  bmily  of  Uatri,  or  tf  tb« 


188 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[CH,  X.  17—27 


ilatrite*.  Matri  is  not  mentioned  anywhere 
else ;  and  numerons  aa  are  the  omissions 
in  the  genealogies,  we  can  scarcely  sup- 
pose that  the  name  of  the  head  of  one  of 
the  main  subdivisions  of  a  tribe  could  be 
passed  over.  The  conjecture,  therefore,  ia 
probable  that  Matri  is  a  corruption  of  Bikri, 
2,  «.  a  descendant  of  Becher,  for  whom  see 
1  Chron.  vii.  8.  After  the  lot  had  fallen 
upon  this  family  they  would  next  cast  lots 
upon  its  smaller  subdivisions,  as  in  Josh. 
vii.  17,  18,  until  at  last  they  came  to  house- 
holils,  when  first  Kish,  and  finally  Saul  was 
taken.  The  latter,  foreseeing  that  this  would 
happen,  had  concealed  himself.  For  though 
a  noble  change  had  taken  place  in  him  (ver. 
9),  yet  no  really  worthy  man  was  ever  pro- 
moted to  high  office  without  having  to  over- 
come his  own  unwillingness,  and  no  one  pro- 
bably ever  worthily  discharged  solemn  duties 
without  having  felt  oppressed  and  humbled 
with  the  consciousness  of  his  own  unfitness 
to  undertake  them.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  Saul 
was  now  called  to  a  most  weighty  responsi- 
bility, and  he  failed  and  was  rejected,  though 
not  without  proving  that  he  was  a  man  of 
extraordinary  genius  and  power.  And  it  never 
can  be  said  of  him  that  presumption  was  the 
cause  of  his  fall,  or  that  he  hastily  undertook 
serions  duties  in  the  spirit  of  light-hearted 
levity. 

Ver.  22.  —  They  inquired  of  Jehovah 
farther,  if  the  man  should  yet  come  thither. 
More  correctly,  "Is  any  one  as  yet  come 
hither  ? "  The  Septuagint  and  Vulgate  trans- 
late as  if  there  were  an  article  before  "  any 
one  "  (Hebrew,  a  man),  and  give,  "  Is  the 
man  coming  hither?"  But  the  Hebrew  text 
is  the  more  satisfactory.  For  the  object  of 
the  incjuiiy,  made  by  the  Urim  and  Thummim, 
was  to  find  Saul,  wherever  he  might  be  ;  and 
the  enigmatical  way  of  putting  the  question, 
Is  any  one  aa  yet  come!  was  regarded  as 
more  reverential  than  asking  directly.  Is 
Saul  come!  Among  the  8ta£  /.  e.  the 
baggage,  as  in  ch.  xvii.  22,  where  it  is  trans- 
lated "carriage.""  The  people,  collected 
from  all  Israel,  would  come  with  wagons 
and  provisions,  and  such  arms  as  they  could 
procure  j  for  very  probably  the  Philistines 
would  interrupt  such  a  meeting,  as  they  had 
that  convened  formerly  by  Samuel  (ch.  vii. 
?).  Naturally,  therefore,  they  would  follow 
the  regulations  of  an  army,  and  so  arrange 
their  baggage  as  to  form  a  place  of  defence 
in  case  of  attack.     See  on  ch.  xviL  20. 

Ters.  23,  24.— And  when  he  stood.  This 
rendering  spoils  the  poetic  force  of  the  ori- 
ginal, where  the  rapidity  of  their  action  ia 
expressed  by  three  preterites  following  hard 
upon  one  another.  The  Hebrew  is,  "And 
they  ran,  and  took  him  thence,  and  he  stood 
forth  (see  ch.  xii.  7)  among  the  people,  and 
he  wu  teller,"  be.     And  now  Samuel  pre- 


sents him  to  the  multitude  as  "the  cho.ien 
of  Jehovah,"  and  the  people  shout  their 
assent  by  saying,  "Let  the  king  live."  For 
this  the  A.  V.  puts  our  English  phrase,  L.ut 
tlio  Hebrew  exactly  answers  to  the  French 
Vive  le  roi  I 

The  events  which  pollowed  immedi- 
ately UPON  Saul's  election  (vers.  25 — 27). 
Ver.  25. — The  manner.  The  difficult  word 
already  discussed  in  ch.  ii  13 ;  viii.  11. 
Here,  however,  it  is  not  used  for  rights  so 
exercised  as  to  become  wrongs,  but  iu  a  good 
sense,  for  what  we  should  call  a  constitution. 
The  heathen  kings  were  despots,  subject  to 
no  higher  law,  and  Samuel,  in  ch.  viii.  11  — 
18,  speaks  with  merited  abhorrence  of  their 
violation  of  the  natural  rights  of  their  sub- 
jects ;  but  under  the  theocracy  the  king's 
power  was  limited  by  laws  which  protected, 
in  the  enjoyment  of  their  privileges,  the 
people,  the  priests,  and  the  prophets.  The 
latter  class  especially,  as  being  the  mouthpiece 
of  Jehovah,  formed  a  powerful  check  upon 
the  development  of  despotic  tendencies.  In 
sketching  Saul's  kingly  rights  Samuel  would 
be  guided  by  Deut.  xvii.  14 — 20,  and  would 
give  the  king  his  true  position  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  Jehovah  both  in  all  matters  of 
internal  administration  and  of  war.  And 
laid  it  up  before  Jehovah.  Probably  by  the 
side  of  the  ark.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that 
Samuel  wrote  this  at  Mizpah,  He  would  fully 
explain  to  Saul  and  the  people  there  what  a 
theocratic  king  ought  to  be,  and  would  after- 
wards draw  up  a  formal  document  both  aa  a 
memorial  of  what  had  been  done,  and  for 
the  use  of  future  sovereigns,  and  place  it 
within  the  sanctuary.  It  is  noteworthy  that 
this  is  the  first  notice  of  writing  since  the 
days  of  the  illustrious  scribe  Eleazar. 

Vers.  26,  27. — Saul  did  not  at  once  enter 
upon  his  duties,  but  went  home  to  Gibeah, 
and  there  went  with  him,  not  a  band  of 
men,  but  the  host,  or  the  force,  L  e.  tliose 
brave  men  whose  hearts  God  had  touched. 
Whatever  was  noble  and  valiant  accompanied 
him,  to  take  counsel  for  the  nation's  good  ; 
but  the  children  of  Belial,  i.  e.  worthless, 
good-for-nothing  creatures  (see  ch.  i.  16  ;  ii. 
12),  despised  him.  In  the  A.  V.  the  anti- 
thesis between  the  force,  the  strength  and 
bravery  that  went  with  Saul,  and  the  worlh- 
lessness  which  rejected  him,  is  lost  by  th6 
mistranslation  of  both  words.  The  Septua- 
gint, on  the  contrary,  strengthens  it  bj 
rendering  "sons  of  strength'  and  "pesti- 
lent sons."  Aa  there  was  a  garrison  in  the 
district  of  Gibeah,  this  proceeding  was  likely 
to  embroil  Saul  with  ihe  Philistines,  and 
probably  was  so  intended.  They  brought 
him  no  presents.  Apparently,  therefore, 
the  people  did  bring  him  presents ;  and  aa 
these  would  chiefly  consist  of  food,  they 
would  be  uaeful  only  for  maintaining  a  body 


CH.  X.  17—27.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


189 


of  men.  This,  too,  would  scarcely  escape 
the  notice  of  so  watchAil  an  enemy,  and  yet 
until  Saul  smote  one  of  their  garrisons  they 
did  nothing ;  but  then,  forthwith,  they  in- 
raded  Israel  so  promptly,  and  with  such  over- 
whelming numbers,  as  seems  to  prove  that 
they  had  been  busily  making  prejiarations 
meanwhile  to  maintain  their  empire.  He  held 
his  peace.  Literally,"  was  as  one  that  is  deaf." 
Had  Saul  not  controlled  his  anger,  a  civil 
war  would  have  been  the  result,  and  the 
lordly  tribei  of  Ephraim  and  Judah  might 


have  refused  a  king  chosen  from  the  little  tribt 
of  Benjamin.  In  fact,  Judah  never  does  seem 
to  have  given  a  hearty  allegiance  to  Saul. 
The  Septuagint,  followed  by  Josephus,  offers 
a  not  improbable  different  reading,  which 
involves  but  a  veiy  slight  change  in  the 
Hebrew.  Uniting  the  words  with  the  next 
chapter,  they  translate,  "  And  it  came  to 
pass,  after  about  a  month,  that  fTahash  the 
Ammonite,"  ic.  The  Vulgate  has  both 
readings. 


HOMILETICS 

Vers.  17 — 25. — Casting  the  lot  in  life.  The  facts  are— 1.  Samuel,  in  calling  the 
people  together  to  exercise  their  choice,  reminds  them  of  their  sin.  2.  Proceeding 
to  a  choice  by  lot,  Saul  is  taken.  3.  For  reasons  secret  to  himself,  Saul  is  not  forth- 
coming when  sought.  4.  By  acclamation  the  people  recognise  him  as  their  king, 
and  thereupon  receive  from  Samuel  instructions  relating  to  the  new  form  of  govern- 
ment. During  the  intercourse  of  Samuel  with  Saul  the  people  were  waiting  for  the 
fulfilment  of  the  promise  implied  in  the  prophet's  words  (ch.  viii.  10).  In  this 
section  we  have  the  consummation  of  their  desire  for  change  in  the  form  of  g  vern- 
ment.     Its  details  are  essentially  Hebrew,  but  its  teacliing  is  world-wide. 

I.  Men  finally  committing  themselves  to  a  self-willed  course  are  furnished 
WITH  CPPOBTUNITT  FOR  CONSIDERING  THEIR  RESPONSIBILITY.  The  Self- willed  character 
of  Israel's  conduct  had  been  emphatically  marked  and  denounced  by  the  prophet  in 
the  first  instance  (ch.  viii.  6 — 10).  Had  they  received  his  rebuke  in  a  becoming 
spirit,  they  would,  during  the  interim,  have  repented  of  their  decision,  and  have 
eTitreated  that  the  old  order  might  continue  until  such  time  as  it  might  please  God  to 
alter  it.  Sometimes,  as  here,  God  takes  men  at  their  word,  and  yet,  before  an  irre- 
versible committal  to  their  choice  is  made,  another  chance  is  given  to  retreat  if  they 
so  willed.  It  was  thus  that  Pharaoh  was  dealt  w^ith  when  it  was  in  his  mind  to  pre 
fer  self-will  to  the  will  of  God.  Nineveh  had  an  opportunity  of  persisting  in  sin  or 
turning  from  it.  To  erring  Christians  in  Asia  a  chance  of  retracing  their  steps  was 
given  (Rev.  ii.  21).  Providence  raises  up  for  us  all  some  voice  or  circumstance 
which,  before  a  final  step  is  taken,  sounds  the  last  warning,  and  creates  a  definite 
consciousness  of  unfettered  responsibility. 

II.  EVEBY  BE  VIEW  OF  God's  DEALINGS  WITH  HIS  PEOPLE  ONLY  CONFIRMS  THE  UN- 
REASONABLENESS OF  SELF-WILL.  The  reference  to  God's  all-sufficing  care  in  the  p'ast, 
and  the  magnitude  of  the  deliverances  effected  (vers.  18,  19),  was  both  a  justifioa- 
tion  of  Samuel's  former  remonstrance,  and  a  new  demonstration  of  the  sinful  folly  of 
the  resolve  to  have  a  king.  It  was  considerate  on  the  part  of  Samuel  to  draw  their 
attention  to  the  past  before  translating  their  resolve  into  accomplished  fact ;  for  in 
the  impetuosity  of  life  the  will  is  apt  to  be  misled  by  delusive  reasons,  which  in 
calmer  moments  vanish  before  the  light  of  history.  The  axiom  that  God's  way  and 
time  are  best  shines  in  full  lustre  whenever  we  consider  the  works  he  has  wrought. 
If  ever  blind  self-will  urges  on  to  a  course  agreeable  to  taste,  and  apparently  sustained 
by  reason,  we  cannot  do  better  than  take  a  survey  of  what  God  has  done  for  us  when 
we  were  obedient  to  his  will.  There  are  deliverances  in  the  life  of  every  one,  and  a 
quiet  reflection  of  these  when  we  are  under  the  temptation  to  embark  on  some 
questionable  career  will  prove  a  wholesome  check,  at  least  it  will  vindicate  the  waye 
of  God  when  judgment  overtakes  our  folly. 

III.  Men  in  carrying  out  their  purpose  fall  into  perplexity  with  respect 
TO  WHAT  IS  BEST.  To  desire  a  king  is  one  thing,  to  select  one  another.  In  Israel 
there  were  diversities  of  opinion  concerning  the  qualities  requi.site  to  their  regal 
representative.  As  they  took  their  own  way  in  having  a  monarch,  there  was  a  fitnesa 
in  his  being,  with  respect  to  culture,  morality,  patriotism,  and  religion,  an  embodi- 
ment of  the  average  attainments  of  the  nation.  The  choice  wiis  thrown  upon  the 
people  as  a  whole,  and  they  were  conscious  of  the  difficulty.     Sinners  must  take  thf 


19C  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  x.  17—27 

consequences  of  self-will,  as  did  Balaam  when  his  path  was  hedged  with  obstacles, 
and  Jonah  when  he  preferred  to  go  to  sea.  The  difficulty  in  case  of  Israel  was  inci- 
dental, and  soon  removed  by  the  mercy  of  God ;  but  the  principle  holds  good  that 
the  very  first  step  of  a  self-willed  course  is  attended  with  embarrassment.  All 
nature  is  at  war  with  wrong.     Sin  is  a  condition  of  disorganisation. 

IV.  When  God  permits  action  to  meet  self-created  difficulties,  it  is  wise  to 

USE  MEANS  most  APPKOPRIATE  TO  THE  END  IN  VIEW.  Although  the  difficulty  of  find- 
ing a  king  truly  representative  of  the  age  was  self-created,  God  permitted  action  in 
reference  to  it  as  truly  as  though  he  had  originated  the  resolve  for  a  king  ;  and  under 
such  circiirastances,  guided  by  Samuel,  the  wisest  means  were  adopted  for  overcom- 
ing the  difficulties  of  the  case.  As  the  nation  willed  a  king,  every  one  had  equal 
choice,  and  was,  theoretically,  in  the  absence  of  precedents,  equally  eligible. 
Abstractedly  there  was  as  much  reason  against  one  being  chosen  as  against  another. 
The  jealousies  and  envies  consequent  on  a  "preferential  choice  might  prove  a  source 
of  perpetual  intrigue.  The  "lot"  was  believed  to  meet  these  requirements  of  the 
case,  and  therefore  was  adopted.  In  this  particular  the  conduct  of  Israel  under 
Samuel's  guidance  is  worthy  of  imitation  in  many  seasons  of  difficulty  independent 
of  self-will.  In  every  life  there  are  emergencies  when  men  are  at  their  wits'  end. 
Home  has  to  be  provided  for,  business  improved,  sons  placed  out  in  the  world, 
embarrassments  in  the  Church  removed.  Our  wisdom  lies  in  considering  all  the 
facts,  and  then  deliberately  adopting  those  means  which  seem  to  us  to  be  most 
suited  for  the  occasion.  And  if,  in  a  spirit  of  prayer,  we  are  able  to  consult  the 
"  lively  oracles,"  there  is  no  doubt  that  in  the  main  the  right  steps  will  be  taken,  as 
in  the  case  of  the  disciples  (Acts  i.  18 — 26).  We  in  our  way  "cast  the  lot"  when 
we  take  a  choice  of  possible  means  and  commit  our  way  to  the  Lord. 

V.  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  in  using  the  best  means  at  our  disposal 
IN  a  right  spirit  God  will  direct  the  means  to  the  best  result.  God  approved 
of  Israel's  use  of  the  "lot"  as  just  to  a  community  where  political  equality  was 
recognised,  and  as  least  likely  to  engender  jealousies  and  strifes ;  and  because  he  ap- 
proved, and  because  the  people  believed  that,  though  the  lot  was  "  cast  into  the  lap,  the 
whole  disposing  thereof  was  of  the  Lord  "  (Prov.  xvi.  33),  he  graciously  so  controlled 
the  intricacies  of  the  free  actions  of  men  as  to  insure  the  result  which,  in  relation  to 
Israel's  conduct  and  aspirations,  was  best.  The  deep  conviction  dwelt  even  in  the  heart 
of  imperfect  Israel  that  God  exercises  complete  and  constant  control  over  all  the  subtle 
and  intricate  actions  and  movements  of  men.  When  it  is  said  of  Christ  that  he  is 
"  Lord  of  all,"  the  language  is  not  that  of  courtesy,  but  of  fact.  It  means  power  to 
not,  to  direct,  to  control.  If  there  is  any  sense  in  Scripture  on  this  subject,  and  any 
congruity  in  our  primary  notions  of  the  almighty,  ever-present,  free,  living  God,  we 
must  believe  that  he  can  and  does  hold  a  mastery  over  every  atom,  every  resolve, 
in  all  time  and  circumstances.  Unbelief  in  his  supremacy  over  will  and  action 
find  matter  and  force  is  most  irrational.  The  real  energy  of  God  is  tl.e  most  philo- 
sophical of  all  beliefs ;  and  therefore  we  see  that  he  can  direct  the  "  lot "  while 
allowing  fullest,  most  conscious  freedom.  Let  men  but  \ia.ve  faith  in  God.  This  is 
the  greSt  lack.     "  0  ye  of  little  faith  !  " 

VI.  It  becomes  men  to  rejoice  in  the  result  of  the  use  of  means  appeoved  bt 
God  in  so  far  as  ri:  is  expressive  of  his  will.  In  the  shout,  "  God  save  the  king," 
the  people  no  doubt  expressed  their  gratification  in  seeing  their  self-will  realised ; 
but  blended  with  this  there  was  a  distinct  recognition  of  God  as  the  Disposer  of  the 
lot.  Saul's  self-concealment  seems  to  indicate  that  his  sense  of  responsibility,  and 
perhaps  feeling  of  awkwardness  in  handling  public  affairs,  may  have  moderated  his 
joy,  yet  he  must  have  felt  that  God's  will  was  being  done  as  well  as  man's.  Realised 
preference  may  carry  its  own  chastisement  with  it ;  yet  in  so  far  as  God  has  enabled 
us  to  obtain  something  better  than  would  have  been  possible  had  we  been  left  alone 
without  his  kind  control,  we  may  heartily  rejoice.  Leaving  out  the  weakness  and 
sin  of  man  in  this  transaction,  are  we  not  reminded  of  a  time  when  the  true  King, 
the  King  of  the  spiritual  Israel,  shall  be  welcomed  with  a  joy  unspeakable?  The 
"  King  in  his  beauty  ''  shall  be  glorified  in  all  who  believe,  and  by  every  heart  and 
tongue  of  the  purified,  perfected  kingdom. 

General  lessons: — 1.  It  is  useful  to  obtain  seasons,  free  from  strong  impulse,  foi 


CH.  X.  17—27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  191 

calmly  considering  the  wisdom  and  justice  of  our  main  lines  of  conduct.  2.  One  of 
the  great  helps  in  battling  with,  sinful  propensities  lies  in  occasional  studies  of  th« 
mercies  of  God.  3.  It  will  add  strength  to  purpose  and  comfort  in  trouble  to 
remember  that  God  always  works  with  those  who  use  means  approved  by  him.  4. 
One  of  the  cures  for  modern  unbelief  is  to  be  found  in  a  more  frequent  and  reason- 
able exposition  of  what  is  contained  in  the  primary  and  necessary  beliefs  of  men. 
5.  If  the  heart  remains  true  we  need  never  fear  undertaking  responsibilities  pot  on 
us  by  Providence. 

Vers.  .26,  27. — Sympathy  and  disparagement.  The  facts  are — 1.  Saul  is  followed 
by  a  band  of  men  brought  into  sympathy  with  him  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  2.  He  is 
despised  by  a  depraved  section  of  the  people.  3.  He  takes  no  notice  of  the  dis- 
paragement. 

I.  The  SIMPLE  FACTS  GIVEN  ABE  EXCEEDINGLY  NATURAL.  For  in  Israel  there  were 
men  anxious  for  a  king,  and  pledged  to  sustain  one ;  and  men,  as  in  all  communities, 
corrupt,  unreasonable,  prone  to  disapprove  of  anything  not  done  solely  by  themselves. 
Equally  natural  was  it  that  he  who  had  graciously  regulated  Israel's  self-will  should 
incline  some,  by  voluntary  personal  attendance,  to  assure  the  monarch  of  sympathy  in 
seeking  honourably  to  discharge  the  duties  of  his  onerous  office.  The  principal  facts 
here  recorded  are  of  constant  recurrence.  Chosen  ones  enter  on  grave  responsi- 
bilities; they  need  the  support  which  flows  from  hearty  sympathy ;  God  provides  it 
by  his  secret  action  on  human  hearts  ;  the  entrance  on  duty  renders  them  objects  of 
criticism,  and  men  of  depraved  natures  assail  them  with  reproach  and  abuse ;  having 
confidence  in  their  appointment,  they  move  on,  relying  on  coming  events  for  their 
self-vindication. 

II.  The  MOST   ILLUSTBlOnS   INSTANCB  ON  EECOBD  OF  THE  TBUTH  HEBE   EXPBESSED  IS 

THAT  OF  CUB  Savioub.  The  parallel  is  remarkable  in  the  most  prominent  features.  1. 
He  was  the  true,  perfect,  anointed  One,  chosen  of  God  to  rule  over  the  true  Israel, 
and  introduced  into  publicity  by  a  control  of  intricacies  more  lasting  and  complicated 
than  those  of  the  lot  at  Mizpah.  2.  His  rulership  was  to  be  coextensive  with  the 
whole  of  God's  people — over  a  holy  nation  more  complete  and  united  even  than  was 
Israel  before  the  dispersion  of  the  ten  tribes ;  and  a  rulership  conducted  on  principles 
of  righteousness  more  sweeping  in  their  range  and  fruitful  in  consequences  than 
those  embodied  by  Samuel  in  the  book  laid  up  before  the  Lord  (ver.  25).  3.  He,  as 
bone  of  our  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,  was  in  need  of  the  sympathy  of  true,  loving 
hearts  in  bearing  the  burdens  and  cares  of  his  exalted  position ;  and  such  hearts  were 
drawn  to  him  both  from  the  human  and  the  angelic  spheres.  4.  His  appearance 
among  men  was  the  occasion  of  the  most  severe  and  relentless  criticism,  ever  issuing 
from  suspicious,  captious  minds.  His  social  connections,  his  habits  of  life,  his 
requirements  of  obedience,  his  claim  to  save  all  mankind,  were  assailed  from  the  first 
to  the  last.  5.  He  "  held  his  peace:"  He  did  "  not  strive  nor  cry,"  nor  "  lift  up  his 
voice  in  the  streets."  He  was  "meek  and  lowly  in  heart,"  and  bided  his  time. 
What  though  hated  and  scorned  ?  He  knew  what  was  coming.  He  saw  "  from 
the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  was  satisfied." 

III.  What  is  tboe  of  Christ  is  in  a  measure  tbue  of  all  whose  lives  are  con- 
FOKMABLB  TO  THE  OBJECT  OF  Bis  SUFFERINGS.  Every  disciple  is  a  chosen  one,  sus- 
tained by  God-created  sympathy,  laden  with  responsibilities  -as  well  as  honours, 
criticised  and  despised  by  "  men  of  Belial,"  and  confident  that,  in  due  time,  his 
righteousness  will  come  forth  as  the  light,  and  his  judgment  be  established  as  the 
noonday. 

General  lessons: — 1.  Let  our  concern  be  that  we  are  among  the  chosen  ones 
called  to  be  kings  and  piiests  unto  God.  2.  Let  us  accept  and  yield  sympathy  from 
and  to  all  who  are  doing  God's  work  in  the  world.  3.  Let  not  disparagement  shake 
our  confidence,  as  though  some  strange  thing  had  befallen  ua.  4.  Cherish  faith  in 
the  Blow  but  sure  triumph  of  all  that  is  Christly. 


19St  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  x.  17—87. 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

_VerB.  17 — 26.  (Mizpah.) — Saul  publicly  chosen.  There  are  critical  days  in  th« 
history  of  nations  as  well  as  in  the  lire  of  individuals.  One  of  these  days  in  the  history 
of  Israel  was  that  which  is  here  described.  What  had  taken  place  hitherto  was  only 
private  and  preparatory.  The  people  themselves  must  now  take  their  part  in  relation 
to  the  choice  of  a  king ;  yet  in  such  a  way  as  to  recognise  the  fact  that  he  was  really 
chosen  by  God,  "  the  only  difference  between  God's  appointment  of  the  judges  and  Saul 
being  this,  that  they  were  chosen  by  internal  influence  ;  hb  by  lots,  or  external  desig- 
nation "  (Warburton).  For  this  purpose  Samuel  summoned  a  national  assembly  to 
Mizpah,  the  site  of  an  altar  to  Jehovah,  and  the  scene  of  signal  victory  over  the  Philis- 
tines (ch.  vii.).  Thither  the  chief  men  of  the  tribes  repaired  in  g^reat  numbers,  and, 
collecting  their  travelling  baggage  in  one  place  (ver.  22),  presented  themselves  before 
him  for  his  instructions.  He  was  desirous  of  correcting  the  wrong  state  of  mind  which 
they  had  exhibited  in  requesting  a  king ;  of  showing  them  that  Saul  was  appointed  by 
the  Lord,  and  not  by  himself  merely  (ch.  viii.  5)  ;  of  securing  their  united  and  hearty 
acceptance  of  "  him  whom  the  Lord  chose,"  so  that  the  purpose  of  his  appointment 
might  be  effected  ;  and  of  guarding  as  far  as  possible  against  the  abuse  of  the  royal 
power.  With  these  ends  in  view  he  spoke  and  acted  on  that  eventful  day.  The 
choice  of  Saul  was — 

I.  Preceded  by  a  salutaby  beproop  of  sin  (vers.  18,  19).  1.  Based  upon  the 
gracious  hdp  which  their  Divine  Ruler  had  afforded  them.  He  brought  them  out  of 
Egypt,  delivered  them  from  the  hand  of  Pharaoh  and  his  hosts,  and  saved  them  from 
all  who  afterwards  fought  against  them  and  oppressed  them.  Remembrance  of  the 
compassion,  faithfulness,  and  aid  of  God,  so  great,  so  long-continued,  and  so  effectual, 
should  lead  men  to  cleave  to  him  with  all  their  heart  (Josh,  xxiii.  11),  even  more 
than  fear  of  the  consequences  of  disobedience  (ch.  viii.  11).  The  goodness  of  God, 
as  displayed  in  "  his  wonderful  works  to  the  children  of  men,"  is  the  mightiest  incen- 
tive to  repentance  of  sin  and  the  practice  of  righteousness.  2.  Consisting  of  a  charge 
ot  flagrant  disloyalty.  "  And  ye  have  this  day  rejected  your  God,"  &c.  Their  con- 
duct was  unreasonable,  inasmuch  as  no  other  could  do  for  them  what  he  had  done  ; 
ungrateful,  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  past ;  and  unl/ul,  because,  in  spite  of  expostula- 
tion, they  had  said,  "  Nay,  but  a  king  thou  shalt  set  over  us ''  (ver.  19).  It  was, 
therefore,  inexcusable,  and  deserving  of  severest  reprobation.  And  it  must  be  plainly 
set  before  them,  that  they  might  be  convinced  of  their  guilt,  humble  themselves  before 
the  Lord,  and  seek  his  pardon.  "  Therefore  will  the  Lord  wait,  that  he  may  be 
gracious  unto  you  "  (Isa.  xxx.  18).  "  The  Lord  will  not  forsake  his  people  for  his 
great  name's  sake"  (ch.  xii.  22).  3.  Associated  with  instruction  concerning  the 
proper  course  they  should  pursue.  "  And  now  present  yourselves  before  the  Lord," 
&c.,  at  his  altar,  where  your  relation  to  him  may  be  set  right,  and  his  guidance  may  be 
afforded.  Although  sinful  requests  may  be  granted  by  God,  yet  the  spirit  in  which 
they  are  made  must  be  renounced.  And  the  ready  submission  of  the  people  to  the 
direction  of  Samuel  shows  that  his  reproof  was  not  without  effect. 

II.  Conducted  under  the  special  direction  of  God  (vers.  20 — 22).  1.  He 
determined,  by  means  of  the  sacred  "  lot,"  who  should  he  their  king.  "  As  the  result 
of  the  lot  was  regarded  as  a  Divine  decision,  not  only  was  Saul  to  be  accredited  by  this 
act  in  the  sight  of  the  whole  nation  as  the  king  appointed  by  the  Lord,  but  he  himself 
was  also  to  be  more  fully  assured  of  the  certainty  of  his  own  election  on  the  part  of 
God  "  (Keil).  "  The  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap  (bqsom  of  a  garment),  but  from  Jehovah 
is  all  its  decision  "  (judgment)  (Josh.  vii.  19  ;  1  Sam.  xiv.  37 ;  Prov.  xvi.  33).  "  A  lot 
is  properly  a  casual  event,  purposely  applied  to  the  determination  of  some  doubtful 
thing.  As  all  contingencies  are  comprehended  by  a  certain  Divine  knowledge,  so  they 
are  governed  by  as  certain  and  steady  a  providence.  God's  hand  is  as  steady  as  his 
eye.  Now  God  may  be  said  to  bring  the  greatest  casualties  under  his  providence 
upon  &  twofold  account : — (1)  That  he  directs  them  to  a  certain  end  ;  (2)  oftentimes  to 
very  weighty  and  great  ends"  (South,  i.  61).  2.  He  indicated,  in  answer  to  special 
inqiiiry,  where  he  was  to  be  found.  Assured  beforehand  of  what  the  result  would  be, 
and  out  of  the  same  diiSdence,  modesty,  and  humility  as  he  had  previously  exliibited 


OH.  X.  17—27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  •      193 

(ch.  ix.  21),  Saul  "  preferred  to  bo  absent  when  the  lots  were  cast."  Hence  inquiry 
was  made  (apparently  by  Urim  and  Thummim)  concerning  him  (oh.  xxii.  10 ;  xxiii. 
2),  and  the  response  of  the  oracle  was  definite  and  conclusive.  God  mercifully 
adapts  his  modes  of  communication  with  men  to  their  common  modes  of  thought, 
their  capacity  and  need  ;  and  those  who  humbly  and,  sincerely  seek  his  guidance  are 
not  long  left  in  uncertainty.  His  communications  to  men,  moreover,  carry  in  them- 
selves the  evidence  of  their  Divine  origin  to  those  who  truly  receive  them,  and  are 
further  verified  by  the  events  to  which  they  lead  (ver.  23).  3.  He  presented  him 
before  them,  through  his  recognised  servant,  as  chosen  by  himself.  "  See  ye  him  w!jom 
the  Lord  hath  chosen,  that  there  is  none  like  him  among  all  the  people  ?  "  (ver.  24). 
The  conduct  of  Samuel  herein  was  singularly  generous  and  noble.  He  did  not  exhibit 
the  slightest  trace  of  jealousy  or  distrust  of  the  king  into  whose  hands  his  own  power 
as  civil  magistrate  was  just  about  to  be  transferred.  "  No  man  ever  resigned  the 
first  power  in  the  state  into  other  hands  with  so  much  courtesy,  tenderness,  dignity, 
and  grace."  Having  ascertained  the  will  of  the  Lord  concerning  his  people,  he  aimed 
at  nothing  else  but  to  carry  it  into  effect. 

III.  CONFIKMED  BT  THE  GENERAL  APPEOBATION  OF  THE  PEOPLE  (verS.  23,  24).  Al- 
though the  choice  was  of  God,  it  was  necessary  that  it  should  be  recognised  and 
accepted  by  them ;  and  their  approbation — 1.  Accorded  with  the  commendation  of 
Samuel.  2.  Was  influenced  by  Saul's  outward  appearance :  "  higher  than  any  of  the 
people  from  his  shoulders  upward  " — just  such  a  man  as  they  wished  "  to  go  out 
before  them  and  fight  their  battles."  3.  And  was  expressed  in  the  acclamation,  "  God 
save  the  king  "  (literally.  May  the  king  live).  The  people  had  now  the  object  of  their 
desire  ;  but  the  Divine  providence  which  had  guided  Saul  guided  them  to  the  result. 
Nations,  as  well  as  individuals,  are  subject  to  the  direction  and  control  of  him  "  who 
stilleth  the  noise  of  the  sea  and  the  tumult  of  the  people."  "  Every  act  of  every  man, 
however  it  may  have  been  against  God  in  intention,  falls  exactly  into  the  even  rhythm 
of  God's  world-plan." 

IV.  Followed  by  permanent  eegulations  foe  the  monarchy  (ver.  25).  "The 
manner  {mishpal)  of  the  kingdom "  =  "  the  laws  and  rules  by  which  the  kingly 
government  was  to  be  managed  "  (Poole),  and  differs  from  "  the  manner  {mishpat)  of 
the  king"  (ch.  viii.  11)  ;  being  designed  by  the  wisdom  and  forethought  of  Samuel 
to  guard  against  the  evils  incident  to  royalty.  "  Thus  under  the  Divine  sanction,  and 
amidst  the  despotism  of  the  East,  arose  the  earliest  example  of  a  constitutional 
monarchy  "  (Kitto).  But  there  was  no  stipulation  or  compact  between  the  people 
and  the  king.  His  rights  and  duties  were  prescribed  by  the  will  of  God,  whose 
servant  he  was.  His  power  was  restrained  by  the  living  voice  of  prophecy,  and 
sometimes  justly  opposed  by  the  people  themselves  (oh.  xiv.  45).  "  This  much,  how- 
ever, is  clear  upon  the  whole,  that  the  king  of  Israel  was  not  an  unlimited  monarch, 
as  the  defenders  of  the  Divine  right  of  kings  and  of  the  passive  obedience  of  sub- 
jects are  wont  to  represent  him  "  (Michaelis,  'Laws  of  Moses,'  i.  286).  The  regu.'it- 
tions  for  the  inonarchy  were — 1.  Founded  upon  the  existing  law  of  Moses  (Deut 
xvii.  14 — 20),  although,  doubtless,  not  entirely  confined  to  it.  The  king  must  not  be 
ambitious,  occupied  in  military  preparations  and  aggressive  wars,  vying  with  heathen 
despots,  relying  on  "  an  arm  of  flesh  "  rather  than  on  God.  He  must  not  be  given 
to  sensual  indulgence,  forming  a  large  harem  and  luxurious  court ;  nor  to  the  accu- 
mulation of  wealth,  taxing  and  oppressing  the  people  for  that  purpose.  But  he  must 
make  himself  familiar  with  "  the  law,"  and  humbly  obey  it  like  his  brethren  (2  Kings 
xi.  12).  His  work  was  not  to  make  new  laws,  but  to  administer  those  which  Jehovah 
had  given,  and."  do  all  his  pleasure."  "Then  must  he  constantly  bear  in  mind  that 
above  him  there  abides  another  King— the  Eternal ;  and  that  only  in  as  far  as  he 
works  together  with  God,  and  consequently  with  all  spiritual  truth,  can  any  earthly 
monarch  be  a  king  after  the  heart  of  the  King  of  kings  "  (Ewald).  0  that  Saul  had 
borne  these  things  in  mind  1  2.  Expounded  in  the  hearing  of  the  people.  3.  Recardea 
and  carefully  preserved  for  future  reference.  "  That  the  law  of  the  king  should  nol 
be  a  dead  letter,  that  royal  self-will  should  be  kept  within  bounds,  was  to  be  the  care 
not  of  a  representative  popular  assembly,  but  of  prophecy,  which  stood  as  theocratic 
watchman  by  the  side  of  royalty  "  (Oehler). — D. 

1  BAX.  • 


194       _  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  x.  17—27, 

Ver.  24.  (Mizpah.  ) — God  save  the  king.  For  the  first  time  in  the  history  of  Israel 
there  now  arose  the  cry  of  "  Long  live  the  king  "  (Vive  le  rot),  which  was  to  be  so 
often  repeated  in  subsequent  ages  (2  Sam.  xvi.  16;  2  Kings  i.  19;  xi.  12),  The 
nations  of  the  earth  have  since  undergone  vast  and  varied  changes.  Great  empires 
have  arisen  and  disappeared.  The  theocratic  kingdom  of  Israel,  in  its  outward  form, 
has  long  ago  passed  away ;  and  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  in  which  its  spiritual  idea 
has  been  realised,  has  grown  up  amidst  the  kingdoms  of  the  world.  But  the  old 
acclamation  is  still  often  heard  at  the  accession  of  a  monarch,  and  in  it  Christians  as 
well  as  others  may  and  ought  to  join.     The  acclamation  is  expressive  of — 

I.  Cheerful  becognitios  of  his  dignity.  1.  As  appointed  by  Divine  providence. 
The  invisible  and  eternal  Ruler  of  the  universe  is  the  Source  of  all  law  and  order,  and 
is  ever  working  in  the  world  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  out  of  the  evil  and  confusion 
that  prevail  a  state  of  things  in  which  "  righteousness,  peace,  and  joy  "  shall  abound. 
And  in  connection  with  and  subserviency  to  this  design  he  has  ordained  civil  govern- 
ment (Dan.  iv.  32;  John  xix.  11).  "The  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God" 
(Eom.  xiii.  1),  i.  e.  human  government  generally  is  appointed  by  him,  although  no 
judgment  is  expressed  by  the  apostle  concerning  the  Divine  right  of  any  one  form  of 
government  or  particular  ofiSce  beyond  others.  When  a  ruler  is  directly  chosen  by 
the  people  he  is  still  a  "  minister  of  God."  2.  As  representing  the  supreme  authority 
and  power  of  "  the  Most  High,  who  ruleth  in  the  kingdom  of  men."  There  is  in 
every  government  an  element  which  is  Divine  ;  a  reflection,  however  dim  and  dis- 
torted, of  that  Divine  power  which  is  above  all.  But  that  government  is  most  Divine 
which  is  the  fairest  exhibition  of  wisdom  and  truth,  righteousness  and  justice,  mercy 
and  loving-kindness ; "  "  for  in  these  things  I  delight,  saith  the  Lord  "  (Jer.  ix.  24). 
"  By  me  (wisdom)  kings  reign  and  princes  decree  justice"  (Prov.  xviii.  15).  Rever- 
ence for  God  should  be  expressed  in  giving  honour  to  those  who,  in  their  high  ofi&ce, 
represent  God,  and  "to  whom  honour  is  due."  "Fear  God.  Honour  the  king.  Sub- 
mit yourselves  to  every  ordinance  of  men  for  the  Lord's  sake,  whether  it  be  to  the 
king  as  supreme,"  &c.  (1  Pet.  ii.  13,  14) — supreme,  i.  e.,  not  in  all  things,  but  in  those 
over  which  he  has  legitimate  authority.  In  a  theocracy,  where  the  laws  of  God  were 
identical  with  those  of  the  state,  the  sphere  over  which  that  authority  extended  wa« 
larger  than  that  which  properly  belongs  to  any  existing  government.  3.  As  trlinis- 
tering  to  human  good.  Even  the  absolute  rule  of  a  Caesar  or  a  Czar  is  unspeakably 
better  than  anarchy.  "  He  is  a  minister  of  God  to  thee  for  good  "  (Eom.  xiii.  4). 
He  exists  for  the  good  of  the  community ;  and  although  the  good  which  he  is  able 
to  efEect  and  ought  to  aim  at  is  necessarily  limited,  he  "  does  not  bear  the  sword  in 
vain."  He  bears  it  for  the  protection  of  the  good  against  the  bad.  And  under 
his  sway,  when  he  uses  his  power  aright,  his  subjects  are  able  to  "  lead  a  peaceable 
and  quiet  life,  in  all  godliness  and  gravity." 

II.  Fervent  desire  for  his  welfare.     "May  the  king  prosper"  ('Targum*). 

1.  The  prcaervation  of  his  life,  which  is  of  great  importance  to  the  well-being  of  the 
nation,  and  is  often  exposed  to  imminent  danger  from  the  exalted  position  he  occupies. 

2.  The  possession  of  strength  and  wisdom,  justice  and  the  fear  of  God  (2  Sam.  xxiii. 
3).  Adequate  sympathy  is  not  always  felt  with  "  kings  and  those  who  are  in 
authority  "  in  their  arduous  duties  and  extraordinary  diflSculties.  3.  The  prosperity 
of  his  reign.  The  desire  thus  felt  should  be  expressed  in  prayerto  the  supreme  Ruler 
and  the  Givei  of  every  good  and  perfect  gift  (1  Tim.  ii.  1,  2).  "  We  (Christians)  do 
intercede  for  all  our  emperors  without  ceasing,  that  their  lives  may  be  prolonged, 
their  government  secured  to  them,  their  families  preserved  in  safety,  their  armies 
brave,  their  senates  faithful  to  them,  the  people  virtuous,  and  the  whole  empire  at 
peace,  and  for  whatever,  as  man  or  Caesar,  an  emperor  would  wish  "  (Tertullian, 
'Apology,'  oh.  XXX.). 

III.  Loyal  devotion  to  his  government.  1.  Personal  obedience  to  its  laws. 
"  Put  them  in  mind  to  be  subject  to  principalities  and  powers,  to  obey  magistrates  " 
(Titus  iii.  1).  "Ye  must  needs  be  subject."  (Acts  iv.  19;  v.  29  ;  Matt.  xxii.  21.)  2. 
Strenuous  02)position  to  its  enemies.  3.  Faithful  endeavour  to  promote  its  efficiency 
and  prosperity.  This  is  plainly  our  duty  as  citizens ;  and  whilst,  under  the  pro- 
tection afEorded  us,  we  also  seek  as  Christians  in  various  ways  to  extend  the 
kingdom  of  Christ,  we  thereby  make  the   work   of  ^ood  government  easier,  an4 


CH.  X.  17—27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  19fi 

secure  the  wisest  and  most  just  and  honourable  men  for  its  accomplishment.  So  far 
from  being  contrary  to  each  other,  the  Christian  religion  and  civil  government  are 
mutually  helpful,  and  each  has  its  part  under  Divine  providence,  the  one  more  and 
the  other  less  directly,  in  bringing  about  the  time  when  "  the  people  shall  be  all 
righteous." 

"  When  all  men's  good  (shall) 
Be  each  man's  rale,  and  universal  peace 
Lie  like  a  shaft  of  light  across  the  land, 
And  like  a  lane  of  beams  athwart  the  sea, 
Through  all  the  circle  of  the  Golden  Year"  (Tennyson). — ^D 

Vers.  26,  27.  (Mizpah  and  Gibeah.) — Friends  and  opponents  in  godly  enter- 
prise. It  was  a  saying  of  Socrates  that  every  man  in  this  life  has  need  of  a  faithful 
friend  and  a  bitter  enemy — the  one  to  advise  him,  the  other  to  make  him  look  around 
him.  This  saying  was  more  than  fulfilled  in  Saul,  who,  on  being  chosen  king,  was 
followed  by  a  band  of  faithful  friends,  and  despised  and  opposed  by  "  certain  worth- 
less men."  The  same  thing  often  happens,  under  difEerent  circumstances,  to  other 
men,  and  especially  to  the  servants  of  God  when  they  enter  upon  some  new  enterprise 
which  has  for  its  aim  the  furtherance  of  his  kingdom,  and  deeply  affects  men's 
interests  and  passions.  In  relation  to  such  an  enterprise  we  have  here  an  illustration 
of— 

I.  The  diverse  dispositions  of  men,  as — 1.  Often  existing  when  not  suspected, 
and  notwithstanding  all  that  is  done  to  harmonise  them.  When  the  people  shouted, 
"  Long  live  the  king,"  the  dissatisfaction  that  lurked  in  many  breasts  was  little  sur- 
mised. Samuel  did  all  that  lay  in  his  power  to  bring  about  a  complete  union  of  the 
tribes  ;  but  his  efforts  did  not  altogether  succeed.  Reason  and  persuasion,  though 
they  ought  to  be  employed  to  the  utmost,  frequently  fail  to  conciliate  men  because  of 
the  different  disposition  of  their  hearts.  2.  Commonly  manifested  by  special  events. 
The  honour  conferred  upon  the  leader  of  a  new  movement,  or  the  decisive  action 
taken  by  him,  serves  to  "  reveal  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts."  A  single  circum- 
stance sometimes,  like  a  flash  of  lightning  in  the  darkness,  suddenly  lays  bare  to  the 
view  what  was  previously  hidden.  3.  Clearly  distinguished  as  belonging  to  one  or 
other  of  two  classes:  "the  host"  (sons  of- strength,  LXX.)  "whose  hearts  God  had 
touched,"  and  "  sons  of  worthlessness."  "  He  that  is  not  with  me  is  against  me  " 
(Matt.  xii.  30).  The  demands  of  certain  enterprises,  like  those  of  Christ  himself, 
render  neutrality  impossible. 

"  Once  to  every  man  and  nation  comes  the  moment  to  decide, 
In  the  strife  of  truth  with  falsehood,  for  the  good  or  evil  side  ; 
Some  great  cause,  God's  new  Messiah,  offering  each  the  bloom  or  blight, 
Parts  the  goats  upon  the  left  hand,  and  the  sheep  upon  the  right, 
And  the  choice  goes  by  for  ever  'twixt  that  darkness  and  that  light"  (Lowell), 

II.  The  inestimable  worth  of  friends.  Their  worth  is  always  great ;  but  it  is 
especially  so  in  a  time  of  need,  when  new  and  responsible  positions  have  to  be 
occupied,  arduous  duties  to  be  performed,  numerous  enemies  to  be  encountered. 
Their  counsel  and  support  are  indispensable ;  their  very  presence  is  a  mighty  en- 
couragement. "  Whom  when  Paul  saw,  he  thanked  God,  and  took  courage  "  (Acts 
xxviii.  16).  Their  worth  depends  upon — 1.  Their  hearty  sympathy  "n  spirit  and  aim. 
A  merely  formal  adherence  is  of  little  value  ;  and  if  there  be  an  inward  and  ardent 
devotion,  it  is  "  from  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  ex.  3).  And  when  God  impels  a  man  to  useful 
service  he  does  not  leave  him  without  those  who  sympathise  with  him.  2.  Their  p«r- 
feet  unanimity  in  arrangement  and  method.  3.  Their  practical  co-operation  in  labour 
and  conflict.  They  "  went  with  him,"  formed  his  body-guard,  and  stood  ready  to 
defend  and  help  him.  In  this  manner  their  sympathy  proved  itself  to  be  genuine, 
and  rendered  most  effectual  service.  Would  that  all  who  are  favourable  to  nobla 
enterprises,  and  all  members  of  Christian  Chuiches,  rallied  thds  aronnd  theii 
••  leaders  I"  (Phil.  i.  27). 

•  S 


196  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMDEL.  [ch.  x.  17—27. 

III.  The  prudent  treatment  of  opponents.  "  How  shall  this  man  save  us  ?  " 
"  Shall  Saul  reign  over  us  ?  "  (ch.  xi.  12).  It  is  not  improbable  that  they  who  thus 
spolie  belonged  to  the  princes  of  Judah  and  Ephraira,  and  were  envious  at  his  election. 
They  were  certainly  unbelieving,  neither  recognising  the  hand  of  God  therein,  nor 
looking  further  than  man  for  deliverance.  They  were  contemptuous,  deeming  him 
unfit  to  rule  over  them.  "  Tliis  man."  And  they  were  disloyal  and  disobedient. 
The  law  said,  "  Thou  shalt  not  revile  the  gods  (=  God,  or  the  judges),  nor  curse  the 
ruler  of  thy  people  "  (Exod.  xxii.  28)  ;  but  they  "  despised  him,  and  brought  hinn  no 
presents,"  like  others,  as  an  expression  of  their  submission.  They  might,  therefore, 
liave  been  justly  punished  as  traitors.  Yet  '■'  he  was  as  though  he  were  deaf ;  " 
although  he  heard  them,  he  did  not  retaliate,  but  went  on  his  way  in  silence.  This  is 
often  the  best  way  of  treating  opponents,  and  it  displays — 1.  Great  self-control. 
2.  Much  wisdom  and  foresight.  To  attempt  at  this  time  to  punish  these  men  might 
have  produced  civil  war.  It  is  sometimes  necessary  that  gainsayers  should  be 
answered,  but  in  most  cases  they  do  least  mischief  by  being  let  alone,  and  are  soonest 
silenced  by  silence.  3.  Strong  confidence  in  Divine  help,  and  the  success  which  it 
insures.  In  contending  against  those  whom  God  calls  to  do  his  work  men  contend 
against  him,  and  faith  calmly  leaves  them  in  his  hands,  to  be  dealt  with  as  he  may 
think  fit  (Acts  v.  39  ;  Rom.  xii.  19). 

Conclusion. — 1.  Expect  to  find  opposition  in  the  way  of  duty.  2.  Let  the  for- 
bearance of  God  toward  his  enemies  teach  you  foi-bearance  towards  yours.  3.  Be 
thankful  for  the  sympathy  and  help  of  earthly  friends,  and  still  more  for  the  sympathy 
mA  help  of  the  Lord. — D. 

Vers.  26,  27. — Illusive  Presages.  A  mild,  clear  morning  may  be  followed  by  a 
stormy  day.  A  prince  may  begin  to  reign  with  gentleness  who  afterwards  becomes 
proud,  ruthless,  impatient,  even  harsh  and  bloodthirsty.  There  are  few  instances  of 
this  in  history  so  pathetic  as  the  case  of  Saul,  who  began  his  reign  with  every  indica- 
tion of  a  magnanimous  character,  yet  was  soon  deteriorated  by  the  possession  of 
power,  and  made  liimself  and  all  around  him  most  unhappy.  In  him  we  see  how 
good  impulses  may  be  overcome  by  evil  passion,  and  what  fair  promise  may  come  tc 
nought.  In  order  to  catch  the  lessons  of  warning  and  admonition  which  come  from 
the  tragic  story  of  Saul,  it  is  necessary  to  do  full  justice  to  the  bright  beginning  of 
his  career. 

I.  His  religious  sensibility.  We  know  that  his  prophesying  left  little  trace 
behind ;  but  that  Saul  was  quickly  susceptible  of  religious  impressions  is  plain 
enough,  and  this  in  his  early  days  must  have  awakened  fond  hopes  regarding  him  in 
the  breasts  of  those  who  were  zealous  for  the  Lord  of  hosts. 

II.  His    ATTRACTION    FOR    THE    FERVENT    SPIRITS    OF    THE    NATION.        We    are  told, 

with  a  sort  of  naJivetS,  how  his  height  impressed  the  people  at  large,  and  was  pointed 
to  even  by  Samuel.  So  the,  Greeks  gloried  in  the  huge  Ajax,  and  in  the  towering 
form  of  Achilles.  It  is  not  said  or  implied,  however,  that  Saul  himself  showed  any 
pride  in  the  admiration  which  his  grand  appearance  won.  The  significant  thing  is, 
that  he  drew  after  him  "a  band  of  men  whose  hearts  God  had  touched."  They  saw 
in  his  eye,  or  supposed  they  saw,  the  fire  of  a  kindred  enthusiasm.  Here  was  one, 
they  thought,  worthy  to  be  king  of  a  holy  nation.  So  they  formed  a  body-guard 
round  him  as  the  Lord's  anointed.  Their  mistake  is  not  at  all  an  isolated  one. 
Ardent  young  men  often  fail  in  discernment  of  character,  and  attach  themselves  to 
questionable  leaders.  Let  no  one  count  it  enough  that  some  good  people  think  well 
of  him,  and  assume  his  warmth  of  spirit  as  sufficient  evidence  of  his  being  ''  bom 
again."  A  man  is  what  he  is  in  the  enduring  habits  and  controlling  principles  of  his 
character  and  life.  Value  the  good  opinion  of  the  wise,  if  they  have  opportunity  to 
see  the  unexcited  tenor  of  your  conduct;  but  do  not  count  it  a  sure  mark  of  grace 
that  you  have  at  some  time  felt  a  glow  of  religious  ardour,  and  that  others  in  the 
same  mood  have  hailed  you  as  brother,  or  even  leader,  in  the  Church  of  God.  After 
all  the  attraction  exerted  by  Saul  over  the  fervent  spirits  of  his  time,  he  hardened  his 
own  heart,  and  the  Lord  departed  from  him. 

III.  His  patiencb  and  magnanimity.      There  were  exceptions  to  the  general 
approval  with  which  Saul  was  raised  to  the  throne.    Some  held  aloof,  and  scoffed  at 


OB.  X.  It— 27.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  I#i 

the  confidence  which  was  placed  so  rashiy  in  the  tall  Benjamite.  They  disliked  him 
all  the  more  that  the  devout  rallied  about  him ;  for  they  themselves  were  "song  of 
Belial,"  men  whose  hearts  the  Lord  had  not  touched.  It  was  a  serious  risk  for 
.the  young  king  to  have  a  disloyal  faction,  treating  his  authority  with  open  contempt. 
Yet  Saul  bore  it  quietly.  He  "  held  his  peace. "  Nor  was  this  a  mere  politic  delay 
till  he  should  be  strong  enough  to  crush  the  malcontents,  for  there  is  no  mention  of 
his  ever  having  called  these  sons  of  Belial  to  account.  Surely  this  was  a  fine  point 
of  character — to  bear  obstruction  so  patiently,  and  be  content  to  eapi  public  con- 
fi'l'snce  by  his  kingly  bearing  and  exploits.  It  was  a  virtue  beyond  the  expectations, 
and  even  the  wishes,  of  his  people.  Who  that  saw  that  young  king  could  have 
imagined  that  he  who  was  so  patient  would  grow  so  restless  as  he  did ;  and  he  who 
was  so  magnanimous  would  become  almost  insane  with  envy,  and  chase  his  own 
3on-in-law  among  the  hills  of  Judaea,  thirsting  for  his  blood?  So  hard  is  it  for  a 
man  to  be  known  I  Virtue  may  leap  to  the  front,  and  show  itself  on  some  auspiciouii 
day ;  but  vice  lurks  in  the  rear,  and  may  prove  the  stronger.  When  its  day  comes 
it  will  take  the  mastery,  and  then  the  fair  promise  of  youth  is  succeeded  by  a  wilful, 
selfish,  ignoble  manhood.  You  meet  a  man  with  bloated  face  and  reckless  bearing, 
a  companion  of  fools,  half  a  rogue  and  half  a  sot.  Yet,  could  you  have  seen  him 
twenty  years  ago,  you  would  have  looked  on  a  healthy,  happy,  kindly  boy,  the  hope 
of  his  father's  house,  the  pride  of  his  mother's  heart.  But  tliere  was  a  weak  point  in 
liim,  and  strong  drink  found  it  out.  So  it  has  come  to  this  degradation.  Virtue  is 
laughed  at ;  self-respect  is  gone ;  the  boy  is  sunk  and  lost  in  this  gross  and  shameless 
man.  Or  you  see  one  who  is  hard  and  mercenary,  inexorable  to  those  who  fall 
into  his  power,  indifEerent  to  the  works  of  genius  and  to  the  efforts  of  philanthropy, 
occupied  always  with  his  own  moneyed  interest.  Yet,  could  you  have  seen  him 
thirty  years  ago,  you  would  have  looked  on  a  young  man  who  loved  art,  or  letters, 
or  religion,  and  seemed  likely  to  develop  into  a  cultured  and  useful  citizen.  But  in 
an  evil  hour  the  passion  of  worldly  acquisition  seized  him  ;  or,  rather,  that  which  had 
long  been  dormant  and  unperoeived  began  to  rule  over  him,  as  his  opportunities  for 
acquisition  widened,  and  so  his  bright  beginning  has  resulted  in  this  sordid  and 
ignoble  character.  Human  deterioration,  the  disappointment  of  youthful  presages 
of  goodness — it  is  a  painful  subject,  but  one  which  moral  teachers  may  not  neglect. 
It  is  diflBcult  to  stop  the  evil  process  once  it  has  begun  ;  and  the  oeginning  may  be 
so  quiet,  so  little  suspected  1  It  is  difiicult  to  know  one's  self,  or  any  one  else,  and 
to  say  whether  it  be  only  a  good  impulse  one  has  in  his  youth,  or  a  rooted  principle. 
Some  men  certainly  turn  out  niucli  better  than  they  promised,  but  some  turn  out 
much  worae.     Let  us  watch  and  pray. — F. 

EXPOSITION. 

GoimBMATION  OF  SaIII.  IN  THE  EiNQDOM  (CHB.  XI.,  Xn.). 
CHAPTER  XI. 


The  defeat  op  the  Ammonites  (vers. 
1 — 13).  Vers.  1,  2. — Nahash  the  Ammonite. 
The  same  name  is  found  in  2  Sam.  z.  2  as 
that  of  the  father  of  Hanun,  who  treated 
David's  ambassadors  so  shamefully,  and 
probably  they  mean  the  same  person.  He 
IS  there  said  to  have  shown  kindness  to 
David;  and  as  we  read  in  2  Sam.  xvii.  26 
that  Abigal  (so  the  Hebrew,  not  Abigail  as 
the  A.  V. ,  who  was  David's  wife),  Amasa'g 
mother,  was  the  daughter  of  Nahash,  and  as 
Abigal  was  the  sister  or  half-sister  of  Zemiah, 
David's  aunt,  there  seems  to  have  been  some 
relationship  between  them.  The  Ammonites 
were  old  enemies  of  the  Israelites,  alleging 


east  of  the  Jordan  which  rightfully  belonged 
to  tlium  (Judges  xL  13) ;  but  after  their  de- 
feat by  Jephthah  their  power  was  so  broken 
that  they  allowed  a  century  to  elapse  before 
they  ventured  again  to  assert  their  claim. 
Nahash,  apparently  after  other  invasions  (eh. 
xii.  12),  now  attacks  Jabesh-Gilead,  a  city  in 
the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh,  which  had  been 
cruelly  treated  by  the  Israelites  (Judges  xxi 
10),  but  apparently  had  risen  again  from  its 
ruins.  Its  inhabitants  were  willing  humbly 
to  submit  to  Ammonite  rule;  but  Nahash 
will  grant  them  no  other  terms  than  that 
they  should  lot  him  thrust  out — Hebrew, 
bore  through — all  their  right  eyes,  not  from 
anv  special  spite  against  them,  but  as  an 
tnsnlt  to  all  Israel      No  better  proof  could 


that  Israel  had  taken  possession  of  territorv  '  be  given  of  the  disorganisation  of  the  natioi 


196 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[CH.  XI.  1  — 15 


than  that  a  petty  despot  should  yenture  to 
show  his  contempt  for  it  in  so  offensive  a 
way. 

Ver.  8. — ^The  elders  who  govern  the  town 
know  nothing  of  a  king  having  been  ap- 
pointed, nor  do  they  send  to  Samuel  to  ask 
him,  as  the  judge,  to  protect  them  ;  but  they 
request  a  seven  days'  respite,  that  they  may 
send  messengers  unto  all  the  coasts  of 
Israel,  and  Nahash;  feeling  sure  that  no 
combined  action  would  be  the  result,  gi-ants 
their  request,  that  so  Israel  far  and  wide 
might  know  of  his  triumph. 

vers.  4,  5. — Among  other  places  the  mos- 
sengers  came  to  Gibeah  of  Saul,  where  they 
make  no  appeal  to  him,  but  tell  their  sad 
tidings  in  the  ears  of  all  the  people.  Power- 
less to  help,  they  can  only  weep  ;  but  in  the 
midst  of  their  lamentation  Saul  came  after 
the  herd  (Hebrew,  following  the  oxeji)  out  of 
the  field.  Saul  was  not  driving  a  herd  of 
cattle  home,  but  had  been  ploughing,  and, 
labour  being  over,  was  returning  with  the 
team  of  oxen. 

Ver.  6. — And  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon 
Saul.  Rather,  descended  mightily  upon 
Saul  (see  ch.  i  6).  No  miraculous  influence 
is  here  meant ;  far  more  full  of  meaning  and 
piety  is  the  lesson  so  constantly  taught  in  the 
Book  of  Judges,  that  all  mighty  and  noble 
acts  are  from  God  (Judges  UL  10  ;  vi.  34  ;  zi 
29  ;  xiii.  25  ;  xiv.  6  ;  xv.  14,  &c.).  Even  the 
heathen  saw  in  enthusiasm  something  Divine, 
for  it  means  the  having  God  within.  The 
energy  with  which  Saul  acted  was  strictly 
natural,  but  yet  as  truly  Divine  ;  and  it  is  a 
sign  of  the  irreligion  of  modem  days  that  it 
can  see  and  hear  of  great  and  heroic  achieve- 
ments and  assign  no  part  in  them  to  God. 
In  the  days  of  Samuel  and  the  judges  the 
whole  glory  of  such  acts  was  ascribed  to 
God.  But  equally  now,  whenever  men  ate 
moved  to  noble  acts,  it  is  "the  breath  of 
God  "  that  descends  upon  them  and  inspires 
them. 

Ver.  7.  —Acting  then  with  Divine  enthusi- 
asm, Saul  cut  into  pieces  a  yoke  of  oxen, 
and  sent  them  throughout  all  the  coasts  of 
Israel  by  the  hands  of  messengers.  For  a 
similar  act  see  Judges  xix.  29.  Probably  Saul 
cut  the  oxen  into  twelve  pieces,  and  sent  one 
to  each  tribe,  with  the  threat  that  in  case  of 
disobedience  their  oxen  would  be  similarly 
treated.  The  threat  was  moderate  in  that  it 
did  not  touch  their  persons,  but  severe  as 
regards  their  property,  the  labouring  ox 
being  man's  faithful  friend  and  servant.  It 
is  important  also  to  notice  that  Saul  speaks 
not  only  in  his  own  name,  but  also  in  that 
of  SamueL  It  was  as  the  man  chosen  of 
Jehovah  to  be  king  by  the  voice  of  his 
prophet  that  he  acted,  and  so  as  one  pos- 
iessed  of  legitimate  authority ;  and  it  seems 
liaa  that  Samuel  went  with  him  in  person  to 


the  war  (ver.  12).  And  the  result  answered 
to  the  energy  with  which  Saul  acted,  for  the 
fear  of  Jehovah— or,  rather,  "a  terror  from 
Jehovah" — ^fell  on  the  people,  and  they  came 
out  with  one  consent,  or,  as  it  is  rendered' 
far  more  correctly  and  forcibly  in  the  margin, 
"  as  one  man."  United  by  the  kingly  power, 
it  was  a  nation  that  rose  to  defend  one  of  its 
injured  members. 

Ver.  8.  —  He  numbered  them  in  Bezek. 
This  place  was  in  the  tribe  of  Issachar,  and 
must  be  distinguished  from  that  mentioned 
in  Judges  L  3,  4,  which  was  in  Judah,  and 
too  remote  from  the  scene  of  operations. 
And  here  Saul  appears  as  the  commander-in- 
chief;  for  the  numbering  included  the  form- 
ing of  battalions,  arranged  in  thousands, 
hundreds,  and  fifties,  and  the  setting  officers 
over  them.  These,  naturally,  were  the  chief 
men  in  each  distnct.  The  result  would  be 
that,  coming  to  Bezek,  the  appointed  rendez- 
vous, a  disorderly  multitude,  they  would 
leave  it  as  an  army  arranged  in  order,  and 
Saul,  in  the  many  difficulties  that  would 
■•arise,  would  have  his  first  opportunity  of 
showing  his  powers  of  command.  Children 
of  Israel, .  .  .  men  of  Judah — the  distinc- 
tion which  ended  in  the  disruption  of  the 
nation.  Judah,  too,  with  its  30,000  men,  is 
but  poorly  represented,  nor  is  it  a  sufScient 
explanation  of  the  small  number  who  came 
that  the  tribe  had  enough  to  do  at  home  in 
making  head  against  the  Philistines.  Asa 
matter  of  fact,  Judah  always  stood  apart 
until  there  was  a  king  who  belonged  to  itself. 
Then,  in  David's  time,  it  first  took  an  active 
interest  in  the  national  welfare,  and  it  was 
its  vast  power  and  numbers  which  made  him 
so  powerfuL  Had  it  been  so  nearly  over- 
powered by  the  Philistines,  it  could  not  so 
suddenly  have  sprung  forth  with  a  might 
which  made  it  well-nigh  a  match  for  all  the 
rest 

Ver.  9. — To-morrow,  by  that  time  the  sun 
be  hot  As  Bezek  is  about  twenty  miles 
distant  from  Jabesh  -  Gilead,  Saul  would 
probably  march  most  of  the  way  that  even- 
ing, and  then,  halting  for  food  and  sleep, 
would  continue  his  advance  early  the  next 
morning. 

Ver.  10. — To-morrow  we  will  come  out 
unto  you.  This  was  apparently  intended  to 
throw  the  Ammonites  off  their  guard,  as 
they  would  suppose  that  the  men  of  Jabesh- 
Gilead  had  given  up  all  hopes  of  deliver- 
ance. 

Ver.  11. — They  came  ...  in  the  morning 
watch.  By  a  forced  march  Saul  came  upon 
the  unsuspecting  Ammonites  just  before  day- 
break, when  sleep  is  deepest ;  and  as  his  host 
was  unwieldy,  he  arranged  it  in  three  divi- 
sions, assigning  to  eadi  a  different  route, 
that  they  might  not  impede  one  another  o£ 
I  the  way,  and  might  also  cut  off  the  retreat  ol 


OB.  XI.  1— 16.J 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


199 


the  enemy.  Aa  the  fighting  went  on  for  five 
or  six  hours,  until  the  heat  of  the  day,  the 
Ammonites  must  at  first  have  made  some 
resistance  ;  but  when  all  three  divisions  of 
Saul's  army  had  come  up,  they  were  so 
utterly  routed  that  ' '  no  two  of  them  were 
left  together." 

Vers.  12,  13.  —  The  people  said  nnto 
Samuel.  Even  after  this  glorious  victory  the 
people  turn  to  Samuel,  and  doubtless  his  pre- 
sence and  influence  had  had  great  weight  in 
gaining  obedience  to  Saul's  command  (ver.  7). 
"They  now,  with  the  old  tumultuous  violence, 
demand  that  those  who  had  opposed  Saul's 
election  should  be  put  to  death.  Probably 
the  ringleaders  of  Saul's  opponents  were 
some  of  the  elders  disappointed  at  not  being 
chosen  themselves  (see  on  ch.  x.  27).  But 
Saul  displays,  first,  the  kingly  virtue  of 
clemency,  saying,  There  shall  not  a  man 
be  put  to  death  this  day — a  decision  politic 
as  well  as  generous,  for  bloodshed  would 
have  led  only  to  future  feuds ;  and,  secondly, 
piety,  in  so  humbly  ascribing  to  Jehovah 
the  salvation  that  had  been  wrought  in 
Israel. 

Savl  solemnly  consecrated  as  kinq 
(Ters.    14,  16).      Ver.    14. — Let  ni  go  to 


Gilgal.  The  famous  sanctuary  (ch.  vii  16) 
of  that  name,  situated  lower  down,  in  the 
Jordan  valley,  near  Jericho.  It  was  not  far 
from  Jabesh-Gilead,  and  naturally  the  vic- 
torious host  would  move  from  the  field  of 
battle  to  the  nearest  religious  spot  to  conse- 
crate their  king. 

Ver.  15. — They  made  Saul  king.  This  ia 
not  to  ba  interpreted,  with  the  Septuagint, 
of  a  second  anointing  of  Saul,  but  of  his 
confirmation  in  the  kingdom  by  the  unani- 
mous voice  of  the  nation,  whereas  the  first 
election  of  him  at  Mizpah  had  met  with 
opposition.  Before  Jehovah.  /.  e.  with 
religious  ceremonies  conducted  by  Samuel 
and  the  high  priest.  The  difference  between 
Saul's  election  at  Mizpah  and  the  confirma- 
tion of  it  at  Gilgal  is  much  the  same  as  be- 
tween the  first  proclamation  of  a  king  and 
his  coronation.  The  latter  i?  the  nation's 
acknowledgment  of  his  sovereignty,  and  the 
solemn  consecration  of  him  to  his  high  ofBce. 
Peace  offerings  were  tokens  of  joy  and  grati- 
tude, and  were  followed  by  a  feast.  At  thi  i 
there  was  great  rejoicing,  because  the  kin ; 
whom  they  had  desired  had  so  quickly 
proved  himself  worthy  to  be  their  head. 


HOMILETICa 

Vers,  1 — 3._ — The  rdaiive  power  of  evil  and  good.  The  facts  are — 1.  The  Ammon- 
ites, in  pursuit  of  the  enterprise  previously  arranged  for  (see  ch.  xii.  12  ;  cf.  viii.  6), 
threaten  Jabesh-Gilead.  2.  The  inhabitants  in  terror  seek  to  make  a  covenant  with  their 
enemy.  3.  This  being  insolently  refused,  a  respite  .of  seven  days  is  granted,  during 
which  external  aid  is  to  be  sought.  The  narrative  is  evidently  designed  to  trace  the 
circumstances  under  which  the  discontent  and  base  insinuations  of  "  men  of  Belial " 
(ch.  X.  27)  were  practically  shown  to  be  baseless.  This  was  a  war  of  revenge 
undertaken  by  the  strong  against  the  weak,  and  the  facts  as  a  whole  set  forth  three 
important  truths  of  general  interest. 

I.  Evil  is  strong  relatively  to  the  faithfulness  ob  unfaithfulnesb  of  God's 
PEOPLE.  Ammon  was  Israel's  ancestral  foe  (Deut.  xxiii.  4 ;  Judges  xi.  4).  The  pros- 
perity of  one  seemed  incompatible  with  that  of  the  other.  When,  under  the  inspiring 
leadership  of  Jephthah,  the  Ammonites  were  utterly  smitten,  their  strength  was  brought 
down  to  its  proper  proportions.  Had  Israel  continued  faithful  in  the  improvement 
of  privileges  enjoyed  as  the  chosen  race,  their  moral  and  political  strength  would  have 
proportionately  advanced  in  harmony  with  the  promises  given  through  Moses  (Deut. 
xxviii.  1 — 14).  The  relative  position  of  the  representatives  of  good  and  evil  had  en- 
tirely changed  when  Nahash  in  pride  of  strength  threatened  Jabesh-Gilead.  Even 
the  partial  reformation  effected  through  Samuel  had  not  yet  placed  Israel  beyond  the 
fear  of  well-organised  foes.  God's  people  are  strong  when  holy,  true,  and  diligent  in 
use  of  the  advantages  of  their  position.  The  truth  thus  taught  is  exempU^ed  in  Chwreh 
history,  in  modem  society,  in  private  and  domestic  life.  1.  Church  history  testifies 
that  the  energy  of  evil  arid  its  range  have  been  proportionate  to  the  faithfulness  of 
the  Church  to  its  lofty  mission  as  conserver  of  God's  truth  and  witness  for  Christ 
among  men.  The  Ammonites  have  multiplied,  become  insolent,  and  have  awakened 
feai  only  when"  the  Christian  Israel  have  lost  their  first  love  and  failed  to  keep  their 
solemn  vows.  i.  Modern  society  feels  that  the  grvwth  of  evil  is  another  form 
tif  weakened  spiritual  grace.    There  may  be,-  in  the  unseen  sphere  of  spiritirU 


200  THte  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL  [oh.  xi.  1—16. 

"principalities  and  powers,"  seasons  when  energetic  spontaneous  exertions  are  made 
to  overcome  the  influence  of  the  gospel.  But  to  speak  of  the  portentous  growth  of 
spiritual  ignorance,  disregard  of  religion,  infidelity,  and  open  vice,  especially  in  large 
centres  of  population,  is  but  another  way  of  saying  that  the  professed  followers  of 
Christ  have  not  been  as  earnest  and  united  in  effort  as  he  would  have  them  to  be. 
It  is  in  the  nature  of  light  to  get  rid  of  darkness,  of  salt  to  remove  corruption.  The 
grave  problem  of  the  age  may  require  many  elements — social,  sanitary,  educational, 
political — for  its  solution,  but  men  feel  that  the  chief  requirement  is  higher  spiritual 
power  in  Christians.  3.  In  private  and  domestic  life  the  power  of  evil  depends  on 
personal  fidelity  to  what  God  has  given  and  imposed.  The  remnants  of  sin  in  our 
nature  lose  force  in  so  far  as  we  faithfully  seek  cleansing  by  the  indwelling  of  the 
Spirit,  and  keep  a  strong  hand  on  the  first  uprising  of  unholiness.  The  force  of 
external  temptation  diminishes  in  so  far  as  our  cuJtured  holiness  of  disposition 
furnishes  it  with  no  affinity  within.  And  as  domestic  life  is  but  the  first  social  form 
of  the  life  cultured  in  private,  its  spiritual  evils  become  formidable  or  feeble  in  so 
far  as  the  soul  is  true  to  its  God. 

II.  Dangers  impending  from  the  growth  op  evil  mat  induce  recourse  to  the 
TRUE  Source  of  deliverance.  The  dangers  threatening  Jabesh-Gilead  sprang  from 
the  action  of  a  spiritual  law.  Israel  never  had  been  in  real  peril  during  any  seasons 
of  obedience  to  God.  In  the  present  instance  the  danger,  which  was  brought  on  by 
a  train  of  sad  defections  in  years  gone  by,  was  very  real,  and  became  so  pressing 
that,  in  utter  desperation,  the  people,  turn  their  thoughts  towards  the  king.  The 
miseries  consequent  on  past  sins  aroused  a  cry  for  the  lawful  deliverer.  This  was 
one  of  the  results  of  the  partial  reformation.  Much  is  gained  when  men  are 
impelled  to  have  recourse  to  the  agencies  and  sources  of  power  which  God  has 
specifically  ordained  for  their  help.  There  are  illustrations  of  this  in  life.  1.  The 
soul  is  often  driven,  in  desperation,  to  Christ  for  help.  Men  do  awake  to  the  fact 
that  destruction  awaits  them.  The  jailor's  cry  to  the  Apostle  Paul  has  been  repeated 
by  thousands.  Sin  and  judgment  are  terrible  realities.  But  often  men,  when 
oppressed  with  fear  of  coming  doom,  endeavour  to  find  relief  by  various  expedients. 
At  last,  half  in  despair  and  half  in  hope,  they  turn  to  him  who  is  the  Anointed  One  to 
secure  redemption  to  Israel.  2.  In  the  spiritual  conflict  a  sense  of  need  impels  to  a 
use  of  Divine  aids.  Some  men,  trusting  too  freely  to  merely  human  wisdom,  find 
that  disaster  comes  in  the  Christian  conflict.  Principles  become  gradually  weaker, 
and  there  is  a  risk  of  a  loss  of.  place  in  the  commonwealth  of  Israel ;  but  after  a 
bitter  experience  they  remember  and  recognise  the  means  of  defence  and  freedom. 
Weary,  sad,  conscious  of  inabiUty  to  cope  with  the  foe,  they  seek  closer  fellowship 
with  Christ,  and  a  more  earnest  use  of  the  sword  of  the  Spirit.  3.  The  modem 
Church  is  driven  hy  the  sheer  magnitude  of  social  dangers  to  have  recourse  more 
fully  to  the  radical  aire  of  all  ills — the  gospel.  Thoughtful  Christians  see  that  no 
mere  social  reforms  and  sanitary  arrangements,  or  scientific  discoveries,  will  avail  to 
arrest  the  real  dangers  of  human  nature.  The  evil  is  great,  the  risks  desperate  ■ 
the  full  gospel,  presented  with  all  the  energy  and  self-denial  and  love  which  the 
Christian  spirit  can  call  forth,  is  the  only  means  of  spiritual  deliverance.  The  material 
and  social  will  follow.  Whatever  others  may  do,  the  Church  must  betake  herself 
with  apostolic  zeal  to  the  ancient  lines  of  action. 

III.  Events  in  the  natural  order  of  Providence  afford  opportunity  for  the 
vindication  of  God's  servants.  It  is  instructive  to  notice  how  long  lines  of  intri- 
cate events,  and  working  out  collateral  purposes,  converge  in  securing  for  the 
anointed  king  an  opportunity  of  answering  by  deeds  the  aspersions  and  insinuations 
of  disafEected  men.  The  growth  of  Ammon's  power  for  evil  consequent  on  Israel's 
religious  defection,  and  the  gradual  reformation  that  had  for  some  years  been  pro- 
gressing in  Israel, — these  with  all  their  subsidiary  events, — created  occasion  for  an 
appeal  to  Saul.  He  "  held  his  peace  "  when  "  men  of  Belial "  reviled,  but  Providence 
was  working  in  his  behalf.  There  are  "  wheels  within  wheels."  The  same  order  it 
ever  going  on.  The  Saviour's  earthly  life  and  subsequent  resurrection  is  a  case  in 
point.  Righteous  men,  whose  motives  have  been  misinterpreted  and  characters 
maligned,  have  committed  themselves  in  silence  to  God,  and  he  has  brought  forth 
their  "  righteousness  as  the  light,"  and  tbeir  "  judgment  as  the  noonday."*    And, 


OH.  XI.  1—16/)  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  201 

•Iso,  all  events  are  converging  to  the  vindication  of  Christ's  claim  to  be  King  of 
kings  and  Lord  of  lords. 

General  ronsiderations : — 1.  What  maybe  the  special  causes  of  the  relative  pro- 
gress of  irreligion  in  diilerent  localities  ?  2.  To  what  extent  the  prevalence  of  irre- 
ligion  and  of  influences  adverse  to  the  gospel  are  traceable  to  the  unfaithfulness  of 
the  Church  in  generations  gone  by,  and  how  best  to  counteract  the  efEect  of  such 
historic  unfaithfulness  on  the  public  mind.  3.  In  how  many  ways  do  professing 
Christians  sometimes  endeavour  to  compromise  with  their  natural  enemy?  4. 
What  opportunites  does  Providence  naturally  open  for  the  vindication  of  oui 
personal  claim  to  be  true  servants  of  Christ  ? 

Vers.  4 — 11. — The  perfecting  gift.  The  facts  are — 1.  The  message  brought  to 
Gibeah  throws  the  inhabitants  into  grief  and  consternation.  2.  Saul,  on  hearing  the 
tidings,  is  aroused  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  summon  the  nation  to  follow  him  and 
Samuel.  3.  The  people  responding  to  the  call,  help  is  assured  to  the  men  of  Jabesh. 
4.  The  result  is  the  utter  defeat  of  the  Ammonites.  The  efEect  of  the  appeal  of  the 
men  of  Jabesh  on  the  people  of  Gibeah,  on  Saul,  and  subsequently  on  the  conflict 
with  the  foe,  brings  out  three  truths  of  wider  range  than  the  particular  instance 
recorded. 

I.  An  imperfect  appreciation  of  the  resources  placed  within  their  rbach 
ACCOUNTS  FOR  SOME  OF  THE  TROUBLES  OF  MEN.  "  The  people  lifted  up  their  voices 
and  wept."  Their  hearts  sank  within  them ;  the  boding  ruin  of  Jabesh  was  the  pre- 
cursor of  their  own.  This  conduct  was  the  efEect  of  a  non-appreciation  of  the  posi- 
tion they  then  held  under  the  care  of  God.  Had  they  duly  considered  the  significance 
of  the  return  of  the  ark,  the  value  of  the  reformation  already  inaugurated,  and  the 
lessons  of  history  (Judges  vii.  7),  they  must  have  seen  that  an  appeal  to  their  God- 
approved  king,  in  humble  dependence  on  God,  would  have  in  some  way  saved  their 
brethren  of  Jabesh.  Men  m  all  ages  have  lost  much  good  and  brought  on  much 
misery  hy  not  adequately  considering  the  resources  put  within  their  power.  1.  The 
earth,  air,  and  sea  have  been  for  age's  full  of  God's  hid  treasures  for  the  use  of  man ; 
there  lie  powers  to  heal,  to  accomplish  work,  to  promote  the  material  and  domestic 
good  of  all.  Neglect  or  forgetfulness  of  their  presence  for  generations  deprived 
men  of  physical  blessings  now  enjoyed  by  rich  and  poor.  Doubtless  other  resources 
are  close  at  hand,  if  only  we  duly  appreciated  them,  and  sought  them  in  the  right 
way.  2.  In  the  human  constitution  there  are  valuable  powers  which,  in  numberless 
instances,  are  not  duly  considered  and  developed.  Faculties  lie  dormant  which 
might  contribute  to  the  wealth,  culture,  and  comfort  of  the  possessor  and  society. 
The  material  and  intellectual  loss  to  the  world  of  undeveloped  powers  is  enormous. 
The  occasional  results  of  education  only  reveal  the  extent  of  our  deprivation  of  pos- 
sible good.  3.  Li  the  Christian  there  are  gifts  of  the  Spirit  not  sufficiently  stirred 
up.  In  the  ordinary  gifts  of  the  Spirit  there  is  generally  a  reserve  of  power  in 
excess  of  the  exertion  put  forth.  In  maintaining  the  conflict  with  sin  and  in  doing 
deeds  of  love  more  might  be  accomplished  by  a  proper  estimate  and  use  of  what 
already  dwells  in  the  renewed  soul.  4.  In  the  reserved  power  of  God,  dependent  for 
its  exercise  on  the  prayer  of  faith,  there  is  a  vast  store  of  blessing  not  often  touched. 
The  Divine  energy  has  not  all  been  expended.  Largely,  in  connection  with  the  pro- 
gress of  Christ's  kingdom,  it  is  dependent  for  its  outflow  on  the  effectual  fervent 
prayers  of  his  servants.  We  are  to  prove  him,  whether  he  will  not  open  the  windows 
of  heaven  and  pour  out  a  blessing.  5.  In  the  provision  for  the  renewal  and  forgive- 
ness of  the  most  guilty  there  is  a  resource  not  always  appreciated.  Many  men  con- 
tinue to  carry  their  guilt  and  yield  to  the  impulses  of  a  depraved  nature  because  they 
forget  or  do  not  duly  consider  who  stands  by  them  mighty  to  save.  Did  they  but 
truly  "  know  the  gift  of  God,  and  who  it  is  "  that  speaks  to  them  of  salvation,  they 
would  not  go  hither  and  thither,  sad,  and  weary,  and  tearful,  but  would  ask  of  him, 
and  he  would  give  them  "  living  water." 

II.  There  is  a  perfectinq  gift  from  God  requisite  to  develop  and  tub* 
TO  BEST  ACCOUNT  MUCH  ELSE  BESTOWED  BY  GoD.  Saul  was  already  a  powerful  main, 
chosen  by  the  nation,  and  recoicnised  by  God  as  king.  He  was  endowed  witL  pre- 
rogative and  l»tent  capabilitieii.     The  tidings  which  caused  wailing  among  the  mea 


SD2  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [OB.  ZL  1— li. 

of  Gibeah  because  of  their  non-appreciation  of  their  true  position  were  the  occmiob 
of  a  remarkable  display  of  courage  and  energy  on  the  part  of  Saul,  and  that  because 
"  the  Spirit  of  God  "  came  upon  him.  Whatever  the  precise  nature  of  this  higher 
gift,  its  practical  efEect  was  to  draw  out  all  that  was  in  the  man  and  the  king,  and  to 
enable  the  powers  already  bestowed  to  act  for  the  benefit  of  Israel.  It  perfected  all 
else  done  for  Saul.  There  is  a  relation  of  dependence  in  the  blessings  God  hestowt  on 
ut.  Some  come  to  full  development  only  when  allied  with  another,  which,  therefore, 
may  be  called  a  higher  good.  The  physical  energy  for  defeat  of  Ammon  lay  in 
Israel.  The  gift  of  Saul  turned  it  all  into  victory.  The  same  relation  is  seen 
amongst  us ;  e.  g.  material  wealth  is  a  boon  not  to  be  despised,  often  the  gift  of  God  j 
but  for  its  full  development  and  enjoyment  it  needs  another  gift — health  of  body 
and  generosity  of  spirit.  Great  mental  abilities  are  of  God ;  the  additional  gift  of  a 
devout,  lowly  spirit  insures  their  most  perfect  use.  Home  adorned  and  enriched  by 
all  that  wealth,  art,  and  domestic  afEection  can  contribute  is  a  precious  blessing ;  yet 
its  joys  are  more  JEuU  and  varied,  its  affections  more  pure,  and  its  sorrows  more 
endurable,  when  the  higher  blessing  of  personal  religion  is  supreme  there.  The 
external  privileges  of  religion,  free  use  of  the  word  of  God,  instruction  and  care  of 
pious  parents,  associations  of  the  sanctuary,  entreaties  of  pastors  and  friends,  are 
among  the  greatest  mercies  enjoyed  by  men ;  yet  even  these  are  raised  to  their 
highest  value  only  when  the  Holy  Spirit  comes  down,  like  "upper  and  nether 
springs  "  to  water  the  "south  land." 

III.  God  sometimes  effects  his  purposes  among  men  bt  indibect  action  upon 
THEM.  In  the  accomplishment  of  Divine  purposes,  in  the  physical,  mental,  or 
spiritual  spheres,  a  variety  of  combinations  are  often  requisite.  To  the  deliverance 
of  Jabesh-Gilead  it  was  needful  to  arouse  the  people  as  well  as  the  king.  It  was  by 
the  tremendous  energy  of  the  king,  aroused  by  the  direct  action  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
that  their  instant  co-operation  was  secured.  The  law  of  indirect  action  viiddy  pre- 
vails. That  the  Eternal  is  in  direct,  constant,  energetic  contact  with  each  being  is 
certain.  He  "  upholds  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power."  Yet,  if  language  may 
be  so  used  to  indicate  a  mystery,  the  import  of  his  energy  on  men  is  not  always 
immediate.  The  energy  of  one  spirit  acting  on  another  is,  so  to  speak,  a  refraction 
of  a  force  originally  in  God,  and  coloured  by  the  character  of  the  medium  through 
which  it  passes.  There  are  many  illustrations  of  the  general  truth  of  indirect  action. 
1.  In  the  sphere  of  mind  much  is  accomplished  by  powerful  intellects  affecting  a 
few  with  their  ideas  and  feelings,  who,  being  more  in  contact  with  the  masses,  give 
forth  the  truth  or  the  emotion  tinged  by  their  own  peculiarities.  2.  In  the  sphere  of 
spirit,  religiously  considered,  a  large  proportion  of  what  we  call  influence  is  of  this 
character.  Not  only  do  superior  Christians  act  on  a  wide  area  by  means  of  the  few 
who  come  under  their  personal  attention,  but  much  of  the  action  of  God  on  the 
world  is  through  his  people.  His  light  is  not  seen  by  many  except  mediately  in  the 
beautiful  lives  of  the  holy.  His  love  acts  on  the  hard  heart  of  man  through  the 
compassion  he  directly  produces  in  the  followers  of  Christ.  Men  see  by  holy  deeds 
and  spiritual  achievements  that  "  God  is  with  "  his  people,  and  are  thus  influenced 
by  God  to  submit  to  his  blessed  sway. 

General  lessoTis : — 1.  It  behoves  every  one  to  search  and  see  what  talents,  and 
means  of  becoming  holy,  and  of  advancing  Christ's  kingdom,  lie  unused.  2.  It  should 
be  a  matter  of  serious  inquiry  how  much  of  our  wailing  and  fear  are  the  result  of  a 
guilty  forgetfulness  or  distrust  of  God's  readiness  to  bless  our  endeavours.  3.  If  we 
are  in  possession  of  valuable  blessings,  and  they  do  not  yield  all  the  joy  and  satis- 
faction reasonably  to  be  looked  for,  we  should  find  out  what  is  that  higher  gift  not 
yet  sought  from  God.  4.  The  Church  and  the  Christian  have  need  to  inquire  how 
much  of  the  non-success  of  endeavour  is  due  to  lack  of  receptivity  for  the  highest 
gift  of  all,  the  rich  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  5.  Every  one  should  so  live  as  to 
be  a  fit  and  perfect  vehicle  for  the  transmission  of  the  healing,  saving  power  of  God 
on  mankind. 

Vers.  12 — 15. — The  concurrence  of  human  and  Divine  action.    The  facta  are— -I 
On  the  completion  of  the  victory  over  the  Ammonites,  the  supporters  of  Saul  desir* 
the  punisliment  by  death  of  the  "men  of  Belial"  who  had  reviled  him.    2.  Sau^ 


OH.  XI.  1—15.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  SOS 

recognising  the  merciful  help  of  God,  refuses  to  mar  the  joy  of  victory  by  personal 
retaliation.  3.  At  the  invitation  of  Samuel  the  people  assembled  in  Gilgal  for  the 
recognition  of  Saul  as  victorious  king,  coupled  with  thanksgiving  to  God.  To  an 
ordinary  observer  looking  on  the  conflict  between  Israel  and  Ammon,  it  wonld  seem 
to  be  simply  a  struggle  of  men  with  men.  The  preceding  verses  (6 — 11)  show  that 
an  element  more  than  human  entered  into  the  conflict,  and  Saul  gratefully  refers  to 
this  in  saying,  "  To-day  tJie  Lord  hath  wrought  salvation  in  Israel."  The  subsequent 
celebration  of  worship  by  Samuel  was  a  recognition  of  the  same  fact. 

I.  It   is  THE  CONCTRBBNCE  OF    GOD's    ACTION    WITH    THAT  OF    MAN  WHICH    BRINGS 

ABOUT  RESULTS  OF  A  JOYOUS  CHARACTER.  The  personal  will  and  muscular  and 
mental  energy  of  Saul,  aided  by  the  co-operating  powers  of  the  people,  led  to  the 
defeat  of  the  Ammonites.  That  was  the  visible  human  element.  But  these  powers 
were  set  at  work  and  sustained  by  the  action  directly  on  the  nature  of  Saul  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  (ver.  6),  and  indirectly  through  the  awe  inspired  thereby  on  the 
minds  and  bodies  of  the  people.  The  issue,  therefore,  is  to  be  ascribed  to  concurrent 
action  of  the  human  and  Divine,  the  latter  partly  direct  and  partly  indirect.  In  a 
general  way  it  may  be  said  that  all  effects  realised  by  man  are  by  this  concurrence 
of  action.  For  even  when  they  exercise  their  power  of  willing  and  devising  in  a 
wrong  direction,  it  is  only  possible  in  consequence  of  the  energy  of  God  sustaining 
those  powers  of  volition  and  thought.  But  the  more  specific  sense  in  which  the  con- 
currence is  true  may  be  seen  by  taking  instances.  1.  In  the  realisation  of  Messianic 
purposes.  The  appearance  of  Christ  on  earth  was  the  result  of  a  long  double  line  of 
action.  The  descendants  of  Abraham  freely  cherished  the  hope  of  Messiah,  and 
by  efEort  of  their  own  will  they  contributed,  as  described  in  the  Old  Testament,  the 
human  line  of  action  towards  this  issue.  But  all  this  time,  and  along  with  all  these 
acts,  the  Spirit  of  God  was  at  work,  making  them  willing  to  be  a  separate  people, 
controlling  events  to  secure  their  isolation,  inspiring  their  prophets  with  rapt  vision 
of  the  future,  and  at  last  coming  on  the  one  honoured  among  women  for  the  perfect- 
ing of  all  that  had  been  hoped  and  laboured  for  (Luke  i.  27 — 35).  2.  In  the  produc- 
tion of  the  Bible.  In  revelation,  as  a  whole,  we  have  a  long  train  of  human  events 
intertwined  with  a  successive  manifestation  of  the  Divine  will.  The  Bible  is  the 
record  of  the  combination.  This  holy  Book  itself  is  what  it  is,  in  its  historical 
portions,  because  human  hands  gathered  out  the  selected  facts  in  pursuance  of  a 
principle  given  of  God.  Moreover,  the  devout  exercises  of  human  spirits  in  such 
portions  as  the  Psalms  were  free,  yet  concurrent  with  a  Divine  influence  in  their  initia- 
tion ;  and  as  also  in  the  selection  of  thetn  subsequently  for  the  benefit  of  mankind. 
3.  In  the  victories  achieved  by  Ghristiamiy.  The  victories  of  Christianity  have  come 
about  by  the  free  efEort  of  individual  minds  combining  under  forms  of  Church 
organisation.  Men  have  spoken,  written,  entreated,  sympathised,  prayed.  Some 
critics  ascribe  all  success  in  heathen  lands  to  sheer  force  of  superior  intelligence  and 
moral  influence ;  and  in  civilised  lands  to  what  of  moral  excellence  there  may  be  in 
connection  with  a  great  superstition,  enforced  as  this  is  by  a  zeal  that  takes  captive 
the  uncritical.  But  the  solution  is  that  God  is  a  co-worker  with  the  Church.  The 
human  and  Divine  action  are  concurrent,  the  one  being  the  vehicle  through  which  the 
other  operates.  4.  In  the  sanctification  of  the  soul.  The  work  to  be  done  before 
the  human  soul  can  rise  to  the  highest  form  of  life  is  enormous.  Few  men  consider 
what  is  involved  in  "  entering  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven"  even  on  earth.  To  rise 
to  the  life  of  the  "  kingdom  means  work,  conflict,  suppression,  elevation,  excision, 
nurture,  self-denial,  aspiration,  ambition,  persistence  within  a  sphere  into  which  only 
the  eye  of  God  can  penetrate.  Yet  all  the  expenditure  of  energy  the  greatest  mind 
can  command  is  of  itself  inadequate.  We  are  conquerors  and  "  more  than  con- 
querors through  Christ,"  who  helpeth  us.  He  "  worketh  within  us  to  will  and  to  do." 
In  this  subtle  concurrence  of  the  Divine  and  human  the  highest  form  of  life  is 
realised  for  the  "  whole  body,  soul,  and  spirit.'' 

II.  It  is  BEFITTING  TO  SEIZE  OCCASION  FOR  RECOGNISING  God'S  CONCURRENT  ACTION 

WITH  US  IN  BRINGING  GOOD  ISSUES  TO  PASS.  It  was  fit  that  Saul  should  publicly 
recognise  the  hand  of  God  in  his  first  victory.  The  spontaneity  of  the  act,  and  the 
magnanimous  spirit  that  would  not  mar  the  joy  of  the  victory  by  personal  retalia- 
tion on  his  despisers,  indicate  that  at  this  period  of  his  history  he  possessed  sonM 


a04  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  zi.  1—15. 

excellent  moral  qualities,  which  certainly  were  strengthened  by  this  public  expression 
of  them.  Samuel's  participation  in  the  common  joy  was  also  proof  of  the  good  feel- 
ings of  Saul.  1.  It  is  good  to  pause  in  lifers  struggles  and  consider  gratefully  our 
personal  indebtedness  to  God's  power  working  with  us.  There^  are  dangers  in  activity. 
Absorption  in  tlie  outgoing  of  our  own  energy  may  unconsciously  induce  the  belief 
that  by  "  our  own  arm  "  have  we  gotten  the  victory.  Occasional  reflection  of  the 
need  and  fact  of  the  Power  that  "worketh  all  in  all,"  with  deeper  dependence  on 
God,  awaken  gratitude,  give  tone  to  our  own  exertions,  and  sustain  hope  of  iinal 
triumph.  2.  It  is  good  in  families  to  seize  opportunities  for  recognising  God's  help. 
The  parent  whose  business  has  prospered,  whose  children  are  being  happily  settled  in 
life,  whose  home  has  been  kept  free  from  great  calamities,  or  who  has  come  out  of 
severe  trials  with  honour,  will  do  well  to  remember  who  giveth  power  to  be  rich, 
ordereth  right  paths,  slieltereth  from  "  the  destruction  that  wasteth  at  noonday,"  and 
raiseth  the  needy  from  the  dust,  and  not  be  ashamed  to  let  his  household  know  how 
much  he  owes  to  God.  Such  conduct  will  bear  blessed  fruit.  3.  \t  is  good  for  nations 
to  recognise  God  in  signal  deliverances.  God  works  with  and  for  every  nation  that 
loves  and  seeks  righteousness.  National  homage  is  as  proper  as  individual  worship. 
Thanksgiving  services  are  of  Scriptural  authority.  The  precedents  are  numerous  in 
the  Old  Testament.  It  is  no  doubt  owing  solely  to  the  fact  that  Christianity  had  not 
permeated  nations  as  a  whole,  when  the  New  Testament  was  written,  that  no  precedents 
are  found  in  its  records.  Yet  the  Church  as  such  held  special  services  for  prayer  and 
thanksgiving  (Acts  iv.  23 — 33).  Those  who  contend  that  vigorous  human  action  is 
the  true  and  only  form  of  homage  to  God  overlook  the  fact  that  there  is  in  good  results 
more  tlian  human  action,  and  that  positive  acts  of  worship,  in  recognition  of  depend- 
ence and  in  expression  of  gratitude,  not  only  pay  honour  to  whom  honour  is  due,  but 
exercise  a  beneficial  reflex  influence  on  the  worshippers.  Such  acts  quicken  the 
public  conscience,  raise  thought  to  a  higher  level,  nourish  the  religious  feeling,  ofEer 
excellent  occasions  and  topics  for  instruction,  strengthen  the  national  sentiment, 
awaken  the  kindly  interest  of  class  for  class,  call  forth  the  more  generous  and  restrain 
the  harsher  impulses  of  life. 

General  lessons: — 1.  It  should  be  a  question  with  individuals  and  nations  as  to 
whether  they  in  their  aims  and  spirit  fulfil  the  conditions  on  which  alone  the  con- 
current action  of  God  can  proceed.  2.  Much  of  the  non-success  of  effort  may  arise 
from  an  insufficient  recognition  of  God  as  a  co-worker  with  us.  3.  Things  and 
private  persons  rise  in  honour  and  influence  as  they  display  a  generous  magnanimity. 
4.  The  joy  of  great  salvation  should  be  undiminished  by  the  intrusion  of  any  bitter 
human  feeling. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 16.  (Gibbah,  Bezek,  Jabesh.) — Saul's  first  victory.  Although  Saul  had 
been  privately  anointed  and  publicly  chosen  king,  he  did  not  immediately  assume 
royal  state.  Guided,  doubtless,  by  the  counsel  of  Samuel,  and  perceiving  from  the 
disaffection  of  certain  men  (ch.  x.  27)  that  the  nation  was  not  yet  quite  prepared  for 
the  change,  he  did  not  deem  it  prudent  to  do  so.  Returning  to  his  former  mode  of  life 
atGibeah  (ver.  5),  he  awaited  some  further  indication  of  his  call  to  be  "captain  over 
the  Lord's  inheritance."  "Nothing  but  true,  royal  action  for  the  welfare  of  the 
state,  alike  bravely  undertaken  and  firmly  carried  out  at  the  right  moment,  could  . 
win  for  him  that  real  deference,  that  joyful,  voluntary  co-operation  for  state  purposes 
from  all  his  subjects,  without  which  his  sovereignty  must  ever  remain  most  feeble 
and  equivocal"  (Ewald).  It  was  not  long  ("a  month,"  LXX.)  before  the  opportunity 
for  such  action  occurred.  He  proved  himself  equal  to  the  occasion,  and  his  patience 
was  justified  and  rewarded.  His  position  as  a  military  leader  was  fully  vindicated 
by  the  result,  and  his  sovereignty  was  heartily  recognised  by  all  the  people.  This  is 
the  chief  historical  significance  of  his  warlike  enterprise  or  campaign  against  the 
Ammonites  for  the  relief  of  Jabesh-Gilead.     Observe  that  it  was — 

I.  Undertaken  in  a  righteous  cause  (vers.  1 — 4).  If  ever  war  is  justifiable 
(and  it  soems  impossible  that  it  should  be  altogether  avoided),  it  is  when  undertaken, 


OH.  XI.  1—15.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  8AM0EL.  ZOfi 

M  in  this  case — 1.  To  repel  hostile  aggression.  The  Ainrnonites  were  old  enemies 
(Dent.  ii.  19 ;  xxiii.  3,  4 ;  Judges  iii.  13 ;  z.  7 ;  zi.  5).  They  were  a  nomadic, 
predatory,  cruel,  and  idolatrous  people.  For  some  time  Nahash,  animated  by  the 
desire  of  war  and  conquest,  "the  malady  of  princes,"  had  assumed  a  threatening 
attitude  (oh.  xii.  12),  and  now  laid  siege  to  the  capital  of  Gilead,  a  part  of  the 
Israelitish  territory  belonging  to  the  half-tribe  of  Manasseh,  beyond  the  Jordan.  His 
aggression  was — (1)  Without  adequate  ground.  He  probably  revived  a  claim  pre- 
viously asserted  and  refuted  (Judges  xi.  12 — 15).  But  men  readily  find  pretexts  for  a 
course  to  which  they  are  disposed.  "  From  whence  come  wars  ?  "  (James  iv.  1).  (2) 
Revengeful.  He  wished  to  avenge  the  defeat  long  before  inflicted  by  Jephthah. 
Hatred  between  nations  tends  to  perpetuate  itself,  and  to  become  intensified ;  and 
successes  in  war  often  sow  "  dragon's  teeth  "  that  produce  a  subsequent  harvest  of 
strife  and  misery.  (3)  Proud,  boastful,  and  cruel  (ver.  2).  2.  To  aid  imperilled 
brethren.  Between  the  people  of  Jabesh  and  the  Benjamites,  especially,  there  was 
an  intimate  connection  (Judges  xxi.  12 — 14).  Their  condition  was  now  degraded, 
fearful,  wretched ;  and  although  it  was  due  to  their  want  of  patriotism,  faith,  and 
courage,  yet  it  did  not  deprive  them  of  a  claim  upon  the  sympathy  of  their  brethren, 
but  was  a  powerful  appeal  to  their  compassion.  The  appeal  of  the  poor,  the 
oppressed,  the  slave  cannot  be  unheeded  without  sin  (Prov.  xxiv.  11,  12).  3.  To 
avert  a  common  danger.  The  siege  of  Jabesh  was  evidently  intended  as  the  first 
step  in  an  attack  upon  all  Israel.  The  distress  of  the  people  of  Gibeah  arose  not 
merely  from  sympathy  with  their  brethren,  but  also  from  fear  for  themselves,  and  a 
sense  of  helplessness  against  so  powerful  an  adversary.  Saul's  enterprise  was  thus 
one  of  self-defence.  4.  To  maintain  the  Divine  honour.  The  Ammonites  wor- 
shipped Moloch  (Moleoh,  or  Milcom),  "  the  abomination  of  the  children  of  Ammon  " 
(1  Kings  xi.  7),  and  sought  his  honour  in  opposition  to  that  of  Jehovah.  It  was  a 
part  of  the  calling  of  Israel  to  extirpate  idolatry,  and  it  was  commanded  them 
concerning  the  Ammonites,  "  Thou  shalt  not  seek  their  peace  nor  their  prosperity  all 
thy  days  for  ever"  (Deut.  xxiii.  6).  In  their  wars  with  the  heathen  they  acted 
under  a  Divine  commission.  The  religious  wars  which  have  been  waged  under  the 
Christian  dispensation  have  sometimes  been  undertaken  from  lofty  motives,  but  they 
have  not  had  the  same  justification,  and  the  honour  of  God  ought  to  be  sought  by 
other  and  more  effectual  means. 

II.  Waged  with  holy  enthusiasm  (vers.  5 — 11).  Enthusiasm  =  God  in  us.  It 
was — 1.  Inspired  by  the  Divine  Spirit.  On  returning  from  the  field,  and  learning  the 
cause  of  the  peopled  distress,  "  the  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  Saul,  and  his  anger  was 
kindled  greatly.  There  is  an  anger  which  is  not  sinful  (Mark  iii.  5 ;  Ephes.  iv.  26). 
The  feeling  of  resentment  is  a  weapon  put  into  our  hands  by  God  against  injury, 
injustice,  and  cruelty  of  every  kind.  (1)  The  anger  of  Saul  was  incited  by  the  same 
spirit  as  previously  constrained  him  to  utter  Divine  praises.  (2)  It  was  a  feeling  of 
wrath  and  burning  zeal  against  wrong.  (3)  It  was  directed  towards  the  welfare  of 
his  people  and  the  honour  of  God.  (4)  It  qualified  him  for  a  great  enterprise ;  led 
him  to  assume  the  leadership  of  the  nation  to  which  he  had  been  appointed,  and  to 
summon  the  tribes  to  rally  around  him.  The  gifts  of  the  Spirit  of  God  are  various, 
and  adapted  to  the  requirements  of  the  age.  2.  Sliared  in  by  all  the  people.  (1) 
"  The  fear  of  Jehovah  fell  on  the  people,"  i.  e.  a  fear  inspired  by  him.  "  In  Saul's 
energetic  appeal  the  people  discerned  the  power  of  Jehovah,  which  inspired  them 
with  fear  and  impelled  them  to  immediate  obedience"  (Keil).  That  power  is  able 
to  fill  a  whole  nation,  as  well  as  an  individual,  with  new  emotions  and  impulses.  (2) 
Under  its  influence  "  they  came  out  as  one  man  "  (with  one  consent).  (3)  Mustered 
under  the  leadership  of  Saul  in  Bezek,  near  to  Betbshan.  A  common  danger  often 
draws  men  into  closer  union  and  co-operation  than  peace  and  prosperity.  3.  Ex- 
pressed in  a  confdeni  assurance  of  help.  "  To-morrow,  by  the  time  the  sun  be  hot,  ye 
shall  have  help "  (ver.  9).  Faith  looks  upon  that  which  is  believed  as  if  it  wer« 
already  an  accomplished  fact.  4.  Manifested  in  energetic  action-  His  promise  was 
not  in  words  merely,  but  was  followed  up  by  deeds  (ver.  11).  "  It  was  night  when 
Haul  and  the  armed  multitude  which  followed  him  broke  up  from  Bezek.  Little  did 
he  know  how  well  the  brave  men  of  Jabesh  would  requite  the  service  (ch.  xxxi.  8 — 
'3).     Strange  that  Saul's  first  march  should  have  beei  by  night  from  Betbshan  t« 


ne  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  h.  1—16. 

Jabesh,  the  earn*  route  by  which  at  the  last  they  carried  his  dead  body  at  night " 

(Ederslieim). 

III.  Attended  with  extraordinary  success.  1,  The  defeat  of  the  enemy — 
sadden,  unexpected,  and  complete.  "  Two  of  them  were  not  left  together,"  and  their 
king,  Nahash,  was  slain  (Josephus).  "  Those  that  walk  in  pride  he  is  able  to  abase  " 
(Dan.  iv.  37).  2.  The  deliverance  of  the  oppressed,  who  were  not  afterwards  want- 
ing in  gratitude  or  courage.  3.  The  cessation  of  disafEeotion  (vers.  12, 13).  4.  The 
united  and  joyful  devotion  of  all  Israel  (vers.  14,  15). 

Observe — 1.  We  have  other  enemies  to  encounter  than  those  of  flesh  and  blood 
(Ephes.  vi.  12).  2.  We  must  contend  against  them  not  simply  for  our  own  safety, 
but  for  the  good  of  our  fellow-men.  3.  It  is  only  by  the  help  of  the  Lord  that  we 
can  prevail. — D. 

Vers.  12,  13. — Generosity  toward  enemies.  Some  men  are  subject  to  noble  impulses, 
under  which  they  rise  to  a  higlior  level  of  thought  and  feeling  than  that  which  they 
ordinarily  occupy.  The  difEerenoe  is  sometimes  so  great  that  they  do  not  seem  to 
be  the  same  persons.  But  the  change  is  transient,  and  they  speedily  relapse  into 
their  former  state.  Their  character  is  one  of  varying,  wayward,  and  uncertain  moods 
rather  than  high,  steadfast,  and  consistent  principle.  Such  a  man  was  Saul.  The 
impulse  under  which  he  spared  his  enemies  after  his  victory  over  the  Ammonites 
(probably  due,  as  other  impulses  were,  to  the  influence  of  Samuel,  who  may  have 
accompanied  him  to  the  battle — vers.  7,  12)  displayed  extraordinary  magnanimity. 
The  act  is  the  noblest  recorded  of  him,  and  stands  out  in  strong  relief  against  the 
dark  background  of  his  subsequent  career.  "  Saul  herein  showeth  his  piety,  human- 
ity, wisdom.  Hitherto  he  declareth  himself  an  innocent  man  and  a  good  prince  ;  but 
afterward  he  forgot  his  own  rule,  when  he  would  have  killed  Jonathan  (ch.  xiv.  45). 
This  mutability  in  Saul  and  changeable  nature,  in  falling  from  clemency  to  cruelty, 
froo  piety  o  profanity,  from  a  good  governor  to  become  a  tyrant,  doth  show  that 
these  virtues  were  not  thoroughly  gi-ounded  in  him,  but  only  superficially  infused  " 
(Willet).  Let  us  regard  liim  as  a  pattern  of  a  principle  which  ought  always  to  be 
exhibited.     His  generosity  toward  his  enemies  was  shown — 

I.  Under  strong  pbovocation,  arising  from — 1.  The  recollection  of  their  past 
conduct  towards  himself  (ch.  x.  27).  He  could  not  altogether  forget  it,  and  when 
he  was  disposed  to  put  it  away  from  his  thoughts,  he  was  reminded  of  i;  by  others. 
Nothing  is  more  provocative  of  wrath  than  brooding  over  the  wrongs  '  -t  have 
been  received.  On  the  other  hand,  the  surest  way  to  forgive  is  to  forget.  The 
feeling  of  natural  resentment  toward  them.  "  Eevenge  is  sweet,"  say  men  who 
are  not  restrained  by  Divine  wisdom  and  grace ;  and  they  are  especially  apt  Ut  say 
it  when  they  have  the  power  to  avenge  themselves,  and  when  they  persuade 
themselves  that  justice  and  prudence  require  that  the  wrong  should  not  go 
unpunished.  They  do  require  it,  doubtless,  in  some  cases ;  but  how  large  a  place 
does  the  desire  of  gratifying  personal  animosity  hold  in  most  instances  in  which 
men  seek  to  inflict  punishment  on  others.  "  Say  not,  I  will  do  so  to  him  as 
he  hath  done  to  me :  I  will  render  to  the  man  according  to  his  work  "  (Prov.  xxiv. 
29;  XX.  22).  3.  The  urgency  ot  others.  Men  are  only  too  prone  to  indulge  wrath 
without  such  an  incitement,  but  they  are  often  led  by  it  to  go  beyond  their  own 
judgment  and  feeling,  and  he  who,  like  Saul,  overcomes  it  gains  a  double  victory. 
"  Thereby  he  gained  another  victory — (1)  over  himself — he  restrains  himself  in  tlie 
exercise  of  a  right ;  (2)  over  the  anger  of  those  who  demanded  that  justice  be 
executed ;  (3)  over  his  former  opponents,  who  now  clearly  see  that  which,  under 
the  influence  of  haughty  contempt,  they  had  doubted  ;  and  (4)  over  the  whole  people, 
who  must  have  been  carried  along  by  him  in  the  path  of  noble  moral  conduct,  and 
lifted  above  themselves  to  the  height  on  which  he  stood  "  (Erdmann). 

II.  In  a  royal  manner.  "There  shall  not  a  man  be  put  to  death  this  day." 
1.  Promptly.  If  he  had  waited  till  the  morrow  his  purpose  might  have  changed. 
When  a  generous  emotion  fills  the  heart  it  should  be  at  once  translated  into  word  and 
deed.  First  thoughts  in  things  moral,  unlike  first  thoughts  in  things  intellectual,  an 
always  best.  Hesitation  and  delay  dim  their  brightness  and  weaken  their  power. 
i.  Dediivdy.    Saul  spoke  like  a  king.    He  refused  to  stain  his  laurels  with  blood. 


CH,  XI.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  107 

And  whilst  he  resolved  not  to  punish  his  enemies,  he  declared  his  detennination  that 
none  other  should  punish  them.  "  Where  the  word  of  a  king  is  there  is  power."  8. 
Completely.  "  Not  a  man."  Not  a  single  example  was  to  be  made,  but  his  clemency 
was  to  extend  to  all.  In  the  same  royal  manner  we  may  and  ought  to  show 
mercy.     "  Blessed  are  the  merciful,  for  they  shall  obtain  mercy." 

III.  From  a  proper  motive.  "  For  to-day  the  Lord  hath  wrought  salvation  in 
Israel."  "Not  only  signifying  that  the  public  rejoicing  should  not  be  interrupted, 
but  reminding  them  of  the  clemency  of  God,  and  urging  that  since  Jehovah  had 
shown  such  clemency  upon  that  day,  that  he  had  overlooked  their  sins  and  given 
them  a  glorious  victory,  it  was  only  right  that  they  should  follow  his  example  and 
forgive  their  neighbours'  sins  without  bloodshed  "  (Seb.  Schmid).  Saul  showed — 
1.  Regard  for  the  transcendent  excellence  of  mercy.  Nothing  is  more  beautiful  or 
more  pleasing  to  God,  and  its  exercise  is  necessary  that  we  may  obtain  mercy  (Matt. 
vi.15).  He  is  "merciful  and  gracious."  "  Meroy  rejoiceth  against  jadgment"  (Fror. 
XXV.  21 ;  Bom.  xii.  19,  20 ;  James  iL  13. ) 

"  It  beoomei 
The  throned  monarch  better  than  his  crown  | 
His  sceptre  shows  the  force  of  temporal  powtt, 
The  attribute  to  awe  and  majesty, 
Wherein  doth  sit  the  dread  and  fear  of  kingi  j 
But  mercy  is  above  this  sceptred  sway ; 
It  is  enthroned  in  the  heart  of  kings, 
It  is  an  attribute  to  God  himself, 
And  earthly  power  doth  then  show  likest  God'i 
When  mercy  seaaons  justice  "  ('  Merchant  of  Venice  "X 

To  return  good  for  good  and  evil  for  evil  is  natural,  to  return  evil  for  good  is  devilish, 

but  to  return  good  for  evil  is  Divine.  2.  Gratitude  for  the  abounding  goodness  oj 
God.  His  hand  was  fully  recognised  in  recent  victory  and  deliverance.  His  kindness 
to  us  should  constrain  us  to  be  kind  to  others,  and  his  forgiveness  is  shown  to  have 
been  experienced  only  when  it  leads  us  to  forgive  (Matt,  xviii.  35).  3.  Desire  for 
the  welfare  of  men.  " The  Lord  hath  wrought  salvation  in  Isroiel"  to  whom  these 
"  worthless  men "  belonged.  Even  such  men  are  objects  of  his  forbearance  and 
benevolence.  "  He  maketh  his  sun  to  rise  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good  "  (Matt.  v.  45). 
He  does  them  good,  and  thereby  seeks  to  subdue  their  hostility  toward  himself  (Ezek. 
xxxiii.  11).  We  ought  to  exhibit  the  same  spirit,  and  by  doing  so  we  shall  promote 
the  general  peace  and  happiness.  "  Be  ye  uierefore  merciful,  even  aa  your  Father 
also  is  merciful "  (Luke  vi.  36). — D. 

Vers.  11 — 13. — Saul  at  Ms  best.  Self-control,  promptitude,  courage,  capacity, 
ascription  of  praise  to  God,  forbearance  towards  men,  these  are  all  exhibited  by  the 
young  king.    Alas,  that  from  such  heights  he  fell  I 

L  Self-control.  Though  hailed  as  king  at  Mizpah,  Saul  was  in  no  haste  to 
assume  regal  state.  He  resumed  his  country  life  at  Gibeah,  waiting  till  the  Lord 
should  call  him  forth  in  some  emergency  to  take  command  of  the  army  of  Israel. 
In  this  he  followed  the  example  of  the  judges,  who,  so  to  speak,  won  their  spurs 
before  they  wore  them — first  wrought  some  deliverance  for  their  country,  and  then 
assumed  the  government. 

II.  Promptitude.  N«ws  of  the  doom  which  threatened  the  town  of  Jabesh  reached 
Saul  as  he  returned  home  from  the  field,  following  his  oxen  with  a  farmer's  slow  and 
heavy  step.  In  a  moment  he  was  another  man,  no  more  a  seeker  of  asses,  or  a 
follower  of  oxen;  but  a  leader  of  men,  prompt  and  resolute.  And  such  energy 
did  he  show  that  in  a  few  days  he  had  rallied  a  large  army  to  his  standard. 

III.  Courage  and  capacity.  Saul  had  no  time  to  train  or  discipline  his  forces, 
but  he  managed  to  gain  an  advantage  for  them.  He  lulled  the  enemy  to  security, 
mnd  then,  surprising  their  camp  by  night,  fell  on  them  with  impetuous  fury.  So  com- 
pletely were  they  dispersed  that,  as  the  graphic  historian  says,  "  two  of  them  were 
not  left  together." 


MS 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  oAMUEL. 


[oB.  xn.  1 — ^2& 


IV.  AscBiPTioN  OF  FSAI8K  TO  GoD.  After  the  victory  Saul  showed  no  disposition 
to  vain  boasting.  Nothing  coald  be  better  than  his  Te  Deum  lavdamus — "  To-day 
Jehovah  hath  wrought  salvation  in  Israel." 

V.  FoBBEARANCE  T0WABD8  MBH.  Saul  was  urged  by  the  exultant  people  to  put  to 
death  those  who  had  opposed  his  elevation  ;  but  he  would  not  have  the  lustre  of  his 
victory  darkened  by  such  a  deed  of  vengeance,  and,  not  only  ruling  his  own  spirit 
well,  but  checking  the  intolerance  of  others,  he  said,  "  There  shall  not  a  man  be  put 
to  death  this  day." 

Yet  from  this  moral  elevation  Saul  miserably  fell.  He  who  seemed  to  be  the 
rising  hope  of  Israel  became  one  of  the  most  hapless  and  tragical  personages  in 
all  his  nation's  history.  He  who  showed  at  first  patience  and  self-control  became 
a  restless,  jealous  king.  His  great  fault  was  wilfulness,  leading  to  the  most  foolish 
impatience,  and  wretched  envy.  He  who  executed  his  first  military  exploit  so  skil- 
fully, and  with  such  complete  success,  became  notorious  for  his  failures.  And,  at 
last,  he  who  had  shown  such  fearless  readiness  to  set  upon  the  Ammonites  was  afraid 
to  encounter  the  Philistines  (ch.  xxviii.  5).  Not  that  his  natural  courage  had  died 
out  of  him,  but  the  sustaining  faith  in  God  was  gone.  "  God  is  departed  from  me, 
and  answereth  me  no  more."  He  who  was  so  averse  to  shed  the  blood  of  dis- 
affected subjects  shed  the  blood  of  many  faithful  men,  as  of  the  priests  of  the  Lord, 
and  hurled  the  javelin  from  his  own  hand  again  and  again  at  the  worthiest  of  all  his 
subjects,  hating  him  without  a  cause.  1.  The  true  character  of  a  man  will  show 
itself.  No  veJ  will  cover  it ;  no  prudential  consideration  can  bind  it.  Sooner  or 
later  it  will  have  its  way.  2.  The  higher  the  promise  of  virtue,  the  greater  the 
momentum  of  him  who  falls  from  his  integrity,  the  farther  he  goes  into  evil.  3.  The 
path  of  the  wilful  and  proud  is  one  of  waning  light  and  thickening  darkness ;  but 
"  the  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light,  which  shines  more  and  more  untU  the 
perfect  day."— P. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  xn. 
Samttel's  bxhortatioh  to  thb  feoflb 
AT  GiLOAIi.  This  speech  of  Samiiel  is  not 
to  be  regarded  as  a  farewell  address  made 
upon  his  resignation  of  his  office  ;  for  though 
\  new  power  had  been  introduced,  and 
Samuel's  sons  excluded  &om  the  succession, 
yet  it  was  only  gradually  that  a  change  was 
made  in  his  own  position.  He  was  stiU 
judge  (ch.  vii.  16),  and  on  extraordinary 
occasions  came  forward  with  decisive  author- 
ity (ch.  xv.  33).  But  as  Saul  gathered  men 
of  war  round  him  (jh.  xiv.  62),  the  moral 
power  possessed  by  Samuel  would  be  over- 
shadowed by  the  physical  force  which  was  at 
Saul's  command.  But  no  formal  change 
was  made.  It  had  been  the  weakness  of  the 
office  of  the  judges  that  their  power  was 
irregular,  and  exercised  fitfully  on  special 
occasionsi  Such  a  power  must  fall  into 
abeyance  in  the  presence  of  the  regular 
authority  of  a  king  surrounded  by  armed 
men.  Without  any  direct  deposition,  there- 
fore, or  even  still  retaining  the  form  of  his 
•ffice,  Samuel  would  henceforward  chiefly 


act  as  the  prophet,  and  Saul  u  Jehovah's 
king. 

Tha  address  divides  itself  into  three  parts: 
— 1.  The  testimony  to  Samuel's  integrity  as 
judge  (vers.  1 — 5).  2.  The  reproof  of  the 
people  for  their  disobedience  and  ingratitude 
(vers.  6 — 17).  3.  The  Divine  testimony  to 
Samuel's  uprightness  and  teaching  (vera. 
18—26). 

Samuel's  lUTEOErrr  (vers.  1 — 6).  Ver. 
1. — I  have  hearkened  onto  your  voice.  See 
ch.  viii.  7,  9,  22. 

Ver.  2. — The  king  walketh  before  you. 
/.  e.  you  have  now  one  to  protect  and  lead 
the  nation,  whereas  my  business  was  to  raise 
its  religious  and  moral  life.  The  metaphor 
is  taken  from  the  position  of  the  shepherd 
in  the  East,  where  he  goes  before  his  flock 
to  guide  and  guard  them.  On  this  account 
the  word  shepheijd  or  pastor  is  used  in  the 
Bible  of  the  temporal  ruler  (Jer.  ii.  8  ;  xxiii. 
4,  &c.),  and  not,  as  with  us,  of  the  spiritual 
guide.  Uy  sons  are  with  you.  This  is  no 
mere  confirmation  of  the  fact  just  stated 
that  he  was  old,  but  a  direct  challenge  of 
their  dissatisfaction  with  his  sons'  conduct, 
as  far  at  least  as  concerns  any  connivance  on 
his  part,  or  support  of  them  in  their  covet' 


OH.  zn.  1—26.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


209 


ousnesa.  Samnel  says,  You  know  all  about 
my  sons ;  I  do  not  profess  to  be  ignorant 
that  charges  have  been  brought  against 
them.  Give  full  weight  to'  them,  and  to 
everything  said  against  them  and  me,  and 
then  give  judgment. 

Vers.  3,  4,  5. — Witness  against  me.  Lit- 
erally, "answer,"  as  in  a  court  of  justice 
to  the  formal  question  of  the  judge.  His 
anointed.  /.  e.  the  king  (see  on  ch.  iL  IQ, 
35  ;  X.  1).  Whose  oz,  .  .  .  whose  ass  t  See 
on  ch.  viii.  16.  Of  whose  hand  have  I  re- 
ceived any  bribe  to  blind  mine  eyes  there- 
with 1  Bribe  should  be  rendered  ransom. 
Literally  it  signifies  a  covering,  and  was  used 
of  money  given  by  a  guilty  person  to  induce 
the  judge  to  close  or  "blind  his  eyes,"  and 
not  see  his  sin.  It  does  not  mean,  there- 
fore, any  bribe,  but  onjy  that  given- to  buy 
off  a  guilty  person.  Such  persons  are  gener- 
ally powerful  men  who  have  oppressed  and 
wronged  others ;  and  the  knowledge  that 
they  can  cover  their  offence  by  sharing  their 
gains  with  the  judge  is  to  this  day  in  the 
East  the  most  fruitful  source  of  bad  govern- 
ment. The  people  all  bear  witness  to  Samuel's 
uprightness,  nor  is  there  any  contradiction 
between  this  and  their  desire  to  have  a  king. 
His  internal  administration  was  just  and 
righteous,  but  they  were  oppressed  by  the 
nations  round  them,  and  needed  a  leader  in 
war.  And  in  Samuel's  sons  they  had  men, 
not  vicious  or  licentious,  but  too  fond  of 
money,  and  so  neither  fit  to  be  their  generals 
in  war  nor  their  judges  in  peace.  We  gather 
from  ch.  xxii  2  that  though  Saul  proved  a 
competent  leader  in  war,  he  was  not  success- 
ful in  the  government  of  the  country  in 
peace. 

Samubl's  bbpboof  op  thk  people  (vers. 
6 — 17).  Ver.  8. — It  is  Jehovah  that,  &c. 
In  the  Hebrew  Jehovah  is  put  absolutely, 
without  any  government,  and  the  Septuagint 
rightly  supplies  is  witness.  Samuel  had 
said,  "Jehovah  is  witness  against  you;" 
the  people  in  answer  shouted  the  last  word, 
"Witness"  (see  end  of  ver.  5,  where  He  it 
is  supplied).  Then  Samuel  solemnly  repeats 
Jehovah's  name,  saying,  "Even  Jehovah 
that  advanced  Moses  and  Aaron."  This 
rapid  interchange  of  words  brings  the  whole 
scene  vividly  before  us,  whereas  nothing 
could  be  tamer  than  the  A.  V.  Out  of  the 
land  of  Egypt.  Samuel  begins  with  this  as 
the  first  act  of  Jehovah  as  Israel's  King ;  for 
the  theocracy  began  with  the  deliverance 
from  Em>t. 

Vers.  7,  8. — Stand  stiU.  Literally,  station 
ymwidvet,  take  your  places,  stand  forth 
(see  ch.  x.  23).  That  I  may  reason  with 
yoTi.  Literally,  "  that  I  may  deal  as  judge," 
t.  e.  that  with  aU  the  authority  of  my  office 
I  may  declare  that  Jehovah  has  acted  justly 
by  you,  and  tiut  yon  hare  dealt  nmnstly 
ISUf. 


with  him.  Bighteoug  acts.  The  margin, 
benefits,  is  wrong.  Samuol  vindicates  God's 
dealings  with  them  against  the  charge  of  his 
having  failed  to  protect  them  implied  in 
their  demand  for  a  king. 

Ver.  9. — When  they  forgat  Jehovah  their 
God.  The  theocracy,  as  we  have  seen  (ch. 
X.  18),  was  a  moral  government,  under  which 
idolatry  and  the  immorality  attendant  upon 
it,  as  being  rebeUiou,  were  punished  by 
Jehovah's  withdrawing  his  protection,  and 
the  consequent  subjection  of  the  nation  to 
foreign  rule.  It  was  the  repeated  sin,  therefore, 
of  the  people  which  made  Israel's  history  so 
chequered,  Sisera  (Judges  iv.  2),  the  Philis- 
tines (ibid.  m.  31),  and  Eglon,  king  of  Moab 
(ibid,  iii  12),  are  mentioned  as  three  of  the 
earlier  oppressors  of  Israel,  but  are  given  here 
in  the  reverse  order  to  that  found  in  the  Book 
of  Judges. 

Ver.  10. — We  have  served  [the]  Baalim 
and  [the]  Ashtaroth.  /.  e.  the  numerous 
Baals  and  Astartes,  which  were  worshipped 
under  various  titles  by  the  heathen.  For 
though  representing  the  same  power,  each 
people  had  their  own  epithets  for  their  own 
particular  personification  of  the  god  (see  on 
ch.  vii  4). 

Ver.  11. — Sedan.  Numerous  ingenious 
explanations  of  this  name  have  been  given, 
but  the  only  probable  account  is  that  Bedan 
is  a  misreading  for  Barak.  The  two  names 
are  very  similar  in  the  Hebrew,  and  the 
two  most  ancient  versions,  the  Septuagint 
and  the  Syriac,  actually  have  Barak.  And 
Samuel.  This  is  even  more  puzzling  than 
Bedan.  We  cannot  suppose  that  Samuel, 
who  hitherto  had  confined  himself  to  the  old 
deliverances,  would  thus  suddenly  introduce 
his  own  name.  In  mentioning  only  them 
he  had  avoided  everything  that  would  grate 
upon  the  ears  of  the  people,  but  this  would 
look  like  giving  way  to  personal  vexation. 
Some,  therefore,  would  read  Samson ;  but 
this,  though  found  in  the  Syriac,  is  supported 
by  no  other  version.  Possibly  some  scribe, 
mindful  of  Samuel's  recent  achievement  at 
Mizpah,  wrote  his  name  in  the  margin, 
whence  it  was  admitted  into  the  text.  And 
ye  dwelled  safe.  Literally,  "in  confidence," 
in  security.  With  sin  came  danger  and  un- 
quiet ;  upon  repentance,  not  only  was  their 
coimtry  free  from  danger,  bnt  their  minds 
were  at  rest 

Ver.  12. — Nahash  the  king  of  the  chil- 
dren of  Ammon.  This  makes  it  probable  that 
there  had  been  threats  of  war,  and  even 
incursions  into  the  Israelite  territory,  by 
Nahash  before  his  attack  on  Jabesh-Gilead. 
We  thus,  too,  should  be  able  to  account  for 
the  rancour  displayed  in  his  wish  so  to  treat 
the  men  of  that  town  aa  to  make  them  a 
reproach  to  all  Israel ;  for  his  hatred  of 
Israel  may  have  grown  in  intensity  in  the 


210 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  xn  1 — ^25 


oonne  of  a  harassing  war,  or  he  may  have 
learnt  to  despise  a  people  incapable  of  offering 
■  regular  resistance.  At  all  events,  Samuel 
describes  Nahash  as  giving  the  final  impetus 
to  the  desire  of  the  nation  for  a  king.  When 
Jehovah  your  God  was  your  king.  See 
Judges  viii.  23. 

Ver.  13.— Behold  the  king  whom  ye  have 
chosen  1.  .  .  behold,  Jehovah  hath  set  a  king 
over  yon.  We  have  here  the  two  sides  of 
the  transaction.  The  people  had  desired  a 
king,  chosen  and  appointed  by  themselves,  to 
represent  the  nation  in  temporal  matters ; 
Jehovah  gave  them  a  king  to  represent  him- 
self, with  authority  commg  from  God,  and 
Limited  by  God.  Most,  too,  of  the  kings  of 
Judah  were  as  truly  representatives  of  Je- 
hovah as  any  of  the  judges  had  been,  and 
David  even  more  so.  Desired  is  -rather 
"demanded,"  "required,"  They  had  done 
much  more  than  desire  a  king. 

Ver.  14.— If  ye  will  fear,  &c.  This  verse, 
like  Luke  xix.  42,  is  left  unfinished,  and 
we  must  supply  well,  as  in  Exod.  xxzii  32. 
For  the  verse  cannot  be  translated  as  in  the 
A.  v.,  but  is  as  follows:  "If  ye  will  fear 
Jehovah,  and  serve  him,  and  obey  his  voice, 
and  not  rebel  against  the  commandment 
(Hebrew,  the  mouth)  of  Jehovah,  and  if 
both  ye  and  the  king  that  reigneth  over  you 
will  follow  Jehovah  your  God,  it  shall  he 
well."  Samuel  piles  up  one  upon  another 
the  conditions  of  their  happiness,  and  then 
from  the  depth  of  his  emotion  breaks  off, 
leaving  the  blessed  consequences  of  their 
obedience  unsaid.  "To  follow  Jehovah" 
implies  willing  and  active  service  as  his 
attendants,  going  with  him  where  he  will, 
and  being  ever  ready  to  obey  his  voice. 

Ver.  15. — Against  you,  as  it  was  against 
your  fathers.  The  Hebrew  has  "  against 
you  and  your  fathers,"  and  so  the  Vulgate, 
for  which  the  Septuagint  reads,  "  against  you 
and  your  king,"  as  in  ver.  25.  The  text  is 
probably  corrupt,  and  to  make  sense  requires 
the  insertion  of  some  such  words  as  those 
given  in  the  A.  V.,  with  which  the  Syriao 
also  agrees. 

Ver.  16. — Stand.  Better  stand  forth,  as  in 
ver.  7  ;  take  your  places  in  solemn  order. 

Ver.  17. — Wheat  harvest  Barley  was  fit 
for  reaping  at  the  Passover,  and  wheat  at 
Pentecost,  i.  e.  between  the  middle  of  May 
and  the  middle  of  June.  Jerome,  on  Amos 
iv.  7,  testifies  that  during  his  long  residence 
in  Palestine  he  had  never  seen  rain  there 
during  June  and  July ;  but  Conder  ('  Hand- 
book of  Bible,'  p.  221),  says,  "  Storms  still 
occur  occasionally  in  harvest -time."  He 
ihall  send  thunder.  Hebrew,  voices,  and  so 
in  ver.  18  (see  ch.  ii.  10  ;  vil  9). 

DiVINB    TESTIMONY    TO    SAMTJEL'S*  INTK- 

SBiTT  (vers.   18—25).    Ver.   18. — Jehovah 
Mnt  thunder  and  rain     Bain  in  Palestine 


falls  usually  only  at  the  autumnal  and  vernal 
equinox,  and  though  thunder-storms  are  not 
unknown  at  other  times,  yet,  by  the  general 
testimony  of  travellers,  they  are  very  rare. 
Naturally,  therefore,  this  storm  deeply  im- 
pressed the  minds  of  the  people.  Though 
not  in  itself  miraculous,  the  circumstances 
made  it  so. 

Ver.  19.  —  Pray  for  thy  servants.  On 
Samuel's  mediatorial  office  see  ch.  viL 
6,8. 

Ver.  20.— Ye  have  done  all  this  wicked- 
ness. The  ye  is  emphatic,  and  to  give  its 
force  we  should  translate,  ' '  Ye  have  indeed 
done  all  this  eviL  "  From  following  Jehovah. 
See  on  ver.  16. 

Ver.  21. — I'or  then  should  ye  go  after  vain 
things.  The  word  for  is  omitted  in  all  the 
ancient  versions,  and  the  sense  is  complete 
without  it :  "And  turn  ye  not  aside  after  to- 
hu,,"  the  word  used  in  Gen.  i  1,  and  there 
translated  "without  form."  It  means  any- 
thing empty,  void,  and  so  is  often  used,  as 
here,  for  "  an  idol,  because,  as  St.  Paul  says, 
"an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world"  (1  Cor 
viiL  4).  So  Isaiah  (ch.  xliv.  9)  calls  the 
makers  of  idols  vanity,  Hebrew,  tohu,  i,  ci 
empty  people,  with  no  sense  in  them.  The 
word  is  used  again  at  the  end  of  the  verse 
—  which  idols  cannot  profit  nor  deliver ; 
for  they  are  tohu,  emptiness. 

Ver.  22.  — Tor  his  great  name's  gake. 
Though  Samuel  in  ver.  14  had  described 
their  well-being  as  dependent  upon  their  own 
conduct,  yet  in  a  higher  light  it  depended 
upon  God's  wilL  He  had  chosen  Israel  not 
for  its  own  sake  (Deut.  vii  7,  8),  but  for  a 
special  purpose,  to  minister  to  the  Divine 
plan  for  the  redemption  of  all  mankind,  and 
so,  though  individuals  might  sin  to  their  own 
ruin,  and  the  nation  bring  upon  itself  severe 
chastisements,  yet  it  must  continue  according 
to  the  tenor  of  God's  promises  (see  on  ch. 
ii.  30),  and  through  weal  and  woe  discharge 
the  duty  imposed  upon  it. 

Ver.  23.— God  forbid,  Hebrew,  "Far  be  it 
from  mo."  That  I  should  sin  .'.  .  in  ceasing 
to  pray  for  you.  In  no  character  of  the 
Old  Testament  does  this  duty  of  intercessory 
prayer  stand  forward  so  prominently  as  in 
Samuel  (see  ver.  19) ;  nor  does  he  rest  content 
with  this,  but  adds,  I  will  teach  you  the 
good  and  the  right  way.  This  was  a  far 
higher  office  than  that  of  ruler  ;  and  not  only 
was  Samuel  earnest  in  discharging  this  pro- 
phetic office  of  teaching,  but  he  made  pro- 
vision for  a  supply  of  teachers  and  preachers 
for  all  future  time  by  founding  the  schools 
of  the  prophets. 

Ver.  42.— For  consider,  &c.  Samuel  con- 
cludes his  address  by  appealing  to  the  mighty 
deeds  wrought  in  old  time  by  Jehovah  for 
his  people  ;  literally,  it  is,  "  For  considet 
how  grandly  he  hath  wrought  with  you. " 


oa.  TO,  1-25,]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  n\ 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 5. — Character  a  power.  The  facts  are — 1.  Samuel  reminds  the  people 
that  he  (a)  has  carried  out  their  wishes  in  setting  a  king  over  them,  (6)  is  now  a 
very  old  man,  and  (c)  has  spent  the  whole  of  his  life  among  them.  2.  He  appeals 
to  God  in  asserting  that  the  whole  of  his  official  life  has  been  free  from  self-seeking. 
3.  The  people  freely  admit  that  his  public  conduct  has  been  honest,  considerate, 
and  free  from  greed.  The  meaning  of  Samuel's  reference  to  himself  is  to  be 
sought  not  in  egotism,  but  in  a  desire  to  find  a  basis  for  his  intended  argument  and 
appeal.  The  actual  weight  of  counsel  depends  not  on  the  abstract  wisdom  of  the 
language  used,  but  on  the  readiness  of  the  hearers  to  give  heed  to  the  speaker  and 
their  conviction  of  his  integrity  of  purpose.  Samuel  appeals  to  character  in  order 
to  secure  moral  power  in  argument.  He  availed  himself  of  the  privilege  of 
honoured  age. 

I.  Chabacter  is  a  gbowih.  A  human  being  is  mutable  in  purpose  and  disposi- 
tion, and  time  is  requisite  in  order  to  insure  fixity  of  either.  Character  lies  in  deter- 
minateness,  permanent  fixity.  Morally  it  is  the  form,  style,  and  expression  the  life 
eventually  assumes.  It  remains  a  long  unsettled  question  as  to  what  determinate- 
ness  some  men's  nature  is  to  come.  In  so  far  as  instability  itself  is  an  undesirable 
quality,  its  presence  is  the  sign  of  permanent  badness.  But  even  in  the  absence  of 
instability,  men  suspend  their  judgment  of  their  fellow-men  because  all  good  quali- 
ties in  them  are  regarded  as  only  tentatively  estabhshed  in  the  soul.  The  true 
progress  of  a  life  is  secured  when  holiness  of  disposition  becomes  so  gradually 
master  of  every  faculty  as  to  be  the  distinctive,  invariable  mark  of  the  man. 
Obviously,  this  character  is  a  passing  of  an  inner  silent  force  into  all  the  avenues  of 
thought,  feeling,  and  action,  repeating  its  self -manifestations  in  these  day  by  day,  till 
those  who  know  the  individual  are  compelled  to  see  that  such  is  the  natural,  fixed, 
reliable  style  of  his  life. 

II.  The  CONDITIONS  OS  ITS  POWBE  ABI  TWOFOLD— One  in  the  individual  himself, 
and  the  other  in  observers.  1.  Gonstaney  and  steadiness  of  growth  is  one  condition. 
It  is  this  which  creates  a  belief  that  the  man  is  true.  There  is  a  strong  belief  that 
fluctuations  in  conduct  and  opinion  are  signs  of  either  weakness  or  actual  badness. 
Those  who  watch  the  steady,  early  growth  of  a  doubtful  plant,  and  observe  how  by 
the  action  of  a  powerful  law  it  at  length  assumes  a  given  type  of  leaf  and  bud, 
know  then  what  they  have  in  sight,  and  treat  it  accordingly.  So  a  quiet  advance  in 
goodness  is  essential  to  the  acquisition  of  power  in  character.  2.  The  existence  in 
observers  of  a  tense  of  right  is  another  condition.  The  power  which  a  holy,  consistent 
character  has  over  all  grades  of  men  implies  that  there  is  something  in  them  which, 
in  virtue  of  its  own  nature,  pays  homage  to  goodness.  Men  know  and  inwardly 
revere  the  right.  In  this  moral  necessity  of  judgment  we  have  a  clue  to  the  defer- 
ence often  paid  by  bad  men  to  the  good  ;  ■the  uneasiness  of  the  vile  and  unjust  in 
presence  of  purity ;  and  the  strong  hold  which  the  holy  gospel  of  Christ  has  secretly 
over  even  the  most  daring  of  its  opponents. 

III.  The   POWBB  OF    CHABACTER    IS    SOMETIMBS    DEVELOPED    BY  UNUSUAL    OIBCUM- 

STANCES.  It  may  exist  as  the  result  of  a  growing,  unconscious  influence  over  observers- 
Neither  party  may  be  aware  of  its  real  force.  Many  a  man  exercises  more  power  on 
society  than  either  he  or  others  contemplate.  The  degree  to  which  the  present 
condition  of  the  world  is  owing  to  this  silent,  unconscious  influence  of  holy,  consistent 
characters  is  beyond  all  conception.  The  fact  should  be  a  comfort  to  those  whose 
lives  seem  to  be  barren  of  usefulness  because  no  great  deeds  are  chronicled.  But 
now  and  then  events  transpire  which  bring  out  the  depth  of  reverence  and  respect 
cherished  for,  it  may  be,  an  ordinary  quiet  Christian  man. 

IV.  It  is  ALLOWABLE  TO  USB  OHARACTBB  AS  A  MEANS  OF  UBGINQ  IHFOBTAHT  CLAIHS. 

Samuel  was  right  in  referring  to  his  long  consistent  life.  He  could  honestly,  and 
without  self-glorying,  speak  of  his  having  never  enriched  himself  by  his  office.  He 
was  within  the  limits  of  modesty  in  claiming  some  credit  for  consistency,  for  his 
object  was  to  enforce  the  claims  of  God.  Thus  the  Apostle  Paul  referred  to  his 
mumer  of  life,  his  self-denying  labours,  in  order  to  win  among  Oorinthians  attention 

p2 


212  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  Cofi.  xn.  1—26 

to  the  message  he  delivered,  and  counteract  the  insinuations  of  false  brethren  (2  Coi» 
li.)-  There  are  occasions  when  a  pastor,  a  teacher,  and  parent_  may  fitly  refer  to 
their  general  character  as  furnishing  a  reason  for  attention  to  their  appeals.  _ 

Practical  lessons: — 1.  It  is  of  supreme  importance  to  be  well  established  in  strong 
religious  principles  early  in  life ;  roots  set  in  virgin  soil  strike  deep  and  thrive 
steadily.  2.  We  should  watch  carefully  against  tendencies  to  instability,  and  at  the 
same  time  not  think  over  much  about  what  men  think  of  us.  3.  No  man  who  is 
ambitious  to  obtain  power  of  character  will  get  it :  it  comes  to  those  who  are  con- 
■  cerned  to  be  good  rather  than  to  have  the  power  which  goodness  confers.  4.  We 
honour  God  when  we  pay  honour  to  those  who  bear  his  image.  5.  The  quality  of 
holy  self-sacrifice  is  that  in  official  persons  which  most  ini^resses  observers,  and  should, 
after  the  Saviour's  example,  be  cultivated  by  all  persons  in  things  small  and  great. 

Vers.  6 — 16. — The  immutable  condition  of  well-being.  The  facts  are — 1.  Samuel, 
having  shown  his  right  to  be  heard,  calls  on  the  people  to  hearken  to  his  argument. 
2.  He  refers  to  historic  instances  to  show  that  trouble  always  came  with  unfaithful- 
ness to  God,  and  prosperity  with  a  return  to  fidelity.  3.  He  reminds  them  that  their 
desire  for  a  king  implied  distrust  of  God.  4.  Recognising  the  new  order  of  things, 
he  insists  that  the  adversity  or  prosperity  of  the  nation  rested  where  it  always  had — 
on  their  own  disobedience  or  obedience  to  God.  Samuel,  having  gained  a  respectful 
hearing,  proceeds  to  urge  his  argument  with  the  view  to  convince  Israel  that  constant 
obedience  to  God  will  be  in  future,  on  their  part,  the  only  rational  conduct.  The 
principles  involved  are  universal,  and  they  imply  what  some  have  recklessly  denied 
or  questioned,  namely,  the  essential  reasonableness  of  religion.  Changing  the  his- 
toric allusions  for  corresponding  facts  in  modern  experience,  the  identical  argument 
could  be  urged  with  equal  force  upon  many  who  fain  would  escape  the  yoke  of 
Christ  as  being  inconsistent  with  the  claims  of  human  reason. 

I.  Conformity  to  the  will  of  God  is  the  supreme  condition  of  well-being. 
Israel  would,  as  a  people,  dwell  in  safety,  be  rich,  prosperous,  and,  in  fact,  realise  all 
the  best  ends  of  national  existence,  in  proportion  as  they  obeyed  the  Lord  God.  The 
interactions  of  material  agencies,  and  the  habits  of  irrational  beings,  in  so  far  as 
they  flow  from  necessary  physiological  laws,  are  conformed  to  the  Divine  will.  The 
possession  by  man  of  moral  freedom  renders  it  possible  for  him  to  be  resolutely  and 
knowingly  out  of  accord  with  the  same.  The  will  of  God  is  variously  expressed, 
though  always  one.  In  external  nature,  in  constitution  of  mind,  in  moral  relations, 
in  social  laws,  in  Scripture  there  are  harmonious  expressions  of  will  varying  accord- 
ing to  the  subject-matter  and  occasions.  It  being  in  the  power  of  man,  as  free,  to 
conform  in  feeling,  in  purpose,  and  actual  outward  movement  of  will  to  what  God 
reveals  of  himself,  perfect  life,  personal,  social,  and  national,  lies  in  that  conformity, 
and  that  alone.  The  continuous  act  of  obedience  is  conformity.  Observing  physical, 
mental,  and  moral  laws  in  every  detail  of  life ;  acting  in  harmony  with  the  revealed 
requirements  of  repentance  and  effort  after  holiness  ;  constant  exerciM  of  faith  in 
Christ  as  the  revealed  means  of  the  highest  spiritual  life — this  course  ife  action  is  a 
fulfilment  of  the  conditions  of  blessedness,  the  prelude  to  final  likeness  to  Christ. 

II.  That  such  conformity  is  the  condition  of  well-being  is  a  truth  attested 
BY  HISTORY.  It  could  be  shown  by  independent  lines  of  proof  that  religion,  as  con- 
sisting in  true  conformity  to  God's  will,  is  essentially  reasonable,  and  that,  conversely, 
sinful  men  are  most  irrational.  But  Samuel  knows  human  nature,  and,  therefore,  he 
deals  with  the  concrete  facts  of  history,  and  points  out  how  the  past  records  of  Israel's 
national  life  establish  his  contention.  God  gave  them  freedom  from  Egypt  by  Moses 
and  Aaron.  Disobedience  and  neglect  entailed  subjection  to  Sisera  and  the  Philistines. 
A  return  to  God  brought  deliverance  once  more.  Therefore  history  connected  pros- 
perity with  due  recognition  of  God,  adversity  with  disobedience.  Every  sinful 
nation  and  individual  is  deluded  by  fallacy.  There  is  induced,  by  the  olinding 
effect  of  moral  corruption  on  the  intellect,  a  belief  that  the  miseries  endured  are  not 
connected  with  moral  causes.  But  a  fair  induction  of  the  facts  of  public  and  private 
life  will  demonstrate  Samuel's  position,  that  when  the  soul  or  the  nation  has  been 
true  to  God  it  has  enjoyed  the  truest  prosperity.  The  very  prosperity  of  fools  is  in 
the  long  run  their  aestruction.    The  merriment  of  the  impious,  like  the  brilUant 


OB.  XII.  1—26.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  21S 

glare  of  a  rocket,  yields  to  a  more  conspicuous  reverse.  Pious  men  may  not  in  somt 
instances  be  equal,  in  power  and  general  social  usefulness,  to  men  not  pious ;  yet, 
given  men  of  equal  natural  abilities,  the  pious  will  do  more  and  better  than  the  not 
pious.  Every-day  life  is  full  of  cases  in  which  men,  by  conforming  to  the  gospel 
law  of  repentance  and  faith,  at  once  place  themselves  and  their  homes  in  a  new  and 
better  relation  to  all  material  and  mental  laws  ;  and  rise  from  poverty,  disease,  ignor- 
ance, and  shame  to  comfort,  health,  fair  attainments,  and  honour.  A  nation  of  true 
Christians  would  be  a  model  to  the  world  in  all  excellence  and  acquisitions  and 
happiness. 

III.  All  attempts  to  bvadb  thb  condition  of  well-being  aee  frhitless.  Samuel's 
reference  to  Israel's  desire  for  a  king,  in  connection  with  his  argument  and  closing 
appeal,  evidently  means  that  the  people  were  under  the  delusive  impression  that  their 
troubles  and  dangers  were  in  some  way  associated  with  the  external  form  of  govern- 
ment under  which  they  had  hitherto  lived.  But  Samuel  points  out  the  sin  involved 
in  this  thought — it  was  distrust  of  God's  all-sufficiency ;  and  he  also  indicates  that 
the  attempted  substitution  of  a  form  of  government  for  the  practice  of  righteousness 
is  utterly  vain.  Human  nature  is  constant  in  its  self-revelations.  This  attempted 
substitution  of  what  is  formal  and  outward  for  what  is  moral  and  inward  is  of  com- 
mon occurrence.  Nations  often  cry  out  for  changes  of  form  of  government  when 
the  real  need  is  a  change  in  disposition  and  conduct.  Nominal  Christians  present  an 
outward,  and,  in  emergencies,  a  more  elaborate,  form  of  worship  in  place  of  the 
sacrifice  of  the  penitent  and  contrite  heart.  It  is  hard  to  learn  the  lessons  of  history  ; 
but  all  its  testimony  confirms  what  could  he,  a  priori,  shown  to  be  true — that  however 
good  external  arrangements  may  be  per  se,  they  are  as  fruitless  to  secure  a  nation's 
highest  good,  a  Church's  truest  prosperity,  and  an  individual's  most  vigorous  and 
joyous  piety,  in  the  absence  of  a  faithful  conformity  to  the  whole  will  of  God,  as 
was  Israel's  acquisition  of  a  king  fruitless  to  insure,  apart  from  righteousness  of 
life,  safety  from  danger  and  internal  prosperity.  "  Abide  in  me."  "  For  without  me 
ye  can  do  nothing." 

IV.  The  truth  thus  vindicated  can  bb  verified  in  bfitb  of  fast  bins  and 
EBBOBS.  Samuel  admits  the  existence  of  the  king  as  a  fact,  though  having  its 
origin  in  sin  and  folly.  He  does  not  cut  Israel  off  from  the  hope  of  proving  the 
truth  of  his  contention,  that  well-being  depends  on  conformity  to  the  will  of  God. 
Under  their  new  and,  as  he  thinks,  unjustifiable  arrangements  they  may,  if  they  will, 
verify  the  correctness  of  his  teaching ;  and  hence  the  urgent  appeal.  The  sins  and 
errors  of  men,  in  the  past  have  had  the  natural  ^ect  of  placing  them  in  disadvan- 
tageous  circumstances  for  the  fullest  development  of  piety.  Even  in  so-called 
Christian  countries  the  social  arrangements  and  customs,  the  habits  of  thought,  the 
methods  and  principles  of  commerce,  the  form  and  spirit  of  legislation,  and  the 
attitude  of  class  toward  class,  are  the  expression  of  the  faults  as  well  as  of  the  virtues 
of  our  ancestors.  They  to  that  extent  impede  the  full  expression  of  the  gospel  spirit. 
The  same  holds  good  of  antecedents  in  private  and  Church  life.  Nevertheless,  God 
gives  to  nations.  Churches,  and  individuals  opportunities  fw  testing  the  value  of  eon- 
/ormity  to  his  will,  and  each  may  prove  its  sufficiency  by  new  acts  of  obedience. 
Here  we  have  a  philosophy  of  life  which  each  may  experimentally  establish. 

General  lessons : — 1.  Conformity  to  the  will  of  God  being  the  immutable  maxim 
of  life,  care  should  be  taken  to  ascertain  that  will  as  distinct  from  our  own  wishes ; 
and,  when  ascertained,  all  the  force  of  our  nature  should  be  bent  on  insuring  its 
observance.  2.  It  is  well  to  fortify  conduct  by  an  appeal  to  the  reasonableness  of 
a  religious  life,  since  in  a  struggle  reason  and  faith  are  both  helpful.  3.  In  all  times 
of  restlessness  and  dissatisfaction  deeper  search  should  be  made  than  into  the  out- 
ward forms  of  life,  for  the  outward  change  is  no  sure  cure  for  the  inward  unright- 
eousness. 4  Gratitude  to  God  for  permission  to  recover  lost  prosperity  best  shows 
itself  in  renewed  consecration  to  him. 

Vers.  18 — 25. — The  outward  tign.  The  facts  are — 1.  Samuel,  to  confirm  his  argn- 
ment,  calls  for  thunder  and  rain  during  the  wheat  harvest,  thus  imperilling  their 
property.  2.  The  people,  awed  by  the  event,  entreat  for  his  intercession.  3.  Samuel 
encourages  hope  on  the  ground  of  God's  mercy,  and  promises  to  pray  for'and  instmct 


214  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xii.  1—25. 

them.  i.  He  makes  a  final  appeal,  setting  forth  the  blessed  and  sad  alternative 
consequences.  Samuel  knew  well  with  whom  he  had  to  deal ;  and,  therefore,  besides 
secm'ing  a  deferential  hearing  in  virtue  of  age  and  cliaracter,  and  enforcing  the 
reasonableness  of  conformity  to  God's  will,  ho  now  calls  attention  to  a  display  of 
Divine  power  in  a  form  suggestive  of  the  material  disasters  that  may  come  if  they 
should,  by  disobedience,  come  into  collision  with  that  power.  Men  soon  feel  the 
force  of  an  argument  that  touches  their  property.  The  natural  force  of  his  previous 
statements  would  compel  the  assent  of  reason,  and  secure  the  echo  of  conscience. 
Bat  in  morally  weak  men  the  clear  light  of  reason  is  apt  to  become  eclipsed  by  the 
uprising  of  wilful  desires,  and  the  voice  of  conscience  dies  away  amid  the  clamouni 
of  passion.  It  was,  therefore,  great  kindness,  an  act  of  beautiful.  Divine  consideration, 
to  introduce  another  means  of  insuring  the  impressment  of  the  lessons  conveyed 

I.  OUTWAKD  SIGNS  ARE  HELPFUL  TO  RELIGION.  Manifestations  of  God's  presence 
and  power  in  impressive  forms,  in  some  instances  miraculous,  are  aids  to  faith  and 
practice.  There  is  a  modern  tendency  to  dispute  this.  Even  some  Christian  apolo- 
gists speak  of  the  miraculous  events  recorded  in  Scripture  as  rather  a  hindrance  than 
an  aid  to  faith.  The  difficulty  proceeds,  from  a  defective  comprehension  of  all  the 
facts  that  enter  into  a  consideration  of  the  question.  No  doubt  moral  truth  is  its  own 
witness  ;  no  doubt  reason  recognises  what  lies  within  the  range  of  her  vision.  The 
whole  sum  of  truth  we  have  in  Christ,  and  in  the  records  associated  with  his  name, 
enables  us  to  say,  "  This  is  the  Son  of  God."  The  personal  experience  of  the  man 
who  is  one  in  life  with  Christ  is  superior  to  all  "  external  evidences."  But  obviously 
all  this  applies  to  men  in  the  full  light  of  Christian  truth,  and  can  have  no  appreciable 
bearing  on  the  gradual  education  of  the  world  by  a  chosen  nation,  through  "  here  a 
little  and  there  a  little,"  as  men  were  morally  and  intellectually  fit  to  receive  it.  Observe 
inore  specifically — 1.  General  education  hy  outward  signs  is  universal.  By  educa- 
tion we  mean  development  of  the  entire  nature,  rational  and  moral.  We  have  to 
regulate  life  and  unfold  its  capabilities  by  means  other  than  the  mere  subjective 
effect  of  what  is  perceived  and  appreciated  as  rational  or  moral.  (1)  In  childhood 
the  mind  accepts  truth  on  external  authority.  Its  movements,  its  receptivity,  and  its 
resistance  to  certain  influences  are  often  determined  by  the  appearance  of  an  external 
power,  which  either  awakens  fear  or  insures  unquestioning  submission.  (2)  In 
mature  life  we  are  influenced  hot  by  subjective  truth  alone,  but  by  external  authority 
in  form  of  testimony  on  matters  of  importance.  This  testimony  has  sometimes 
sufficient  force  to  compel  conduct  against  inclination,  and  create  fear  as  determinant 
in  action.  Also  in  government  the  exercise  of  external  power  insures  on  the  part  of 
many  a  respect  in  practice  for  moral  truth  which  otherwise  would  not  exist.  (3) 
In  the/ormation  of  opinion  we  are  constantly  looking  out  for  an  external  confirma- 
tion. That  is,  we  do  not  live  intellectually  even  by  the  sheer  light  that  is  within. 
In  80  far  as  external  confirmations  are  necessary  for  some  of  our  opinions,  we  are 
dependent  on  powers  outside  us  for  the  direction  our  own  thought,  and,  consequently, 
conduct,  will  take.  That  these  powers,  human  it  may  be,  do  not  act  suddenly  and 
miraculously  is  not  to  the  point,  for  the  principle  contended  for  is  education  by  out- 
ward signs.  2.  Spiritual  education  of  men  hy  appropriate  outward  signs  is  a  fad 
recognised  throughout  all  time.  The  three  means,  irrespective  of  inspiration  of  the 
heart  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  of  spiritual  education — presentation  of  truth  to  the  moral 
perception,  the  convincing  of  the  judgment  by  reasons,  and  the  suggestive  power  of 
outivard  signs — are  found  in  the  whole  course  of  history,  from  the  day  when  Adam's 
conscience  recognised  the  moral  force  of  the  Divine  command  because  Divine, 
appreciated  the  argument  of  life  or  death  as  the  alternative  of  obedience  or  disobedi- 
ence, and  looked  on  the  "tree  "  as  a  visible  sign  of  a  power  worthy  to  be  feared, 
unto  the  latest  observance  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  afEording  an  outward  sign  of  a 
power  merciful  in  its  almightiness.  (1)  The  entire  dispensation  covered  by  the  Old 
and  New  Testament  was  characterised  by  the  outward  nan  in  a  miraculous  manner. 
Abraham  desired  to  know  by  some  means  that  he  should  inherit  the  land  (Gen.  xv. 
8),  and  the  sign  was  given.  Moses  haa  granted  to  him  a  sign  of  his  delegation  (Exod. 
iv.  1 — 6).  The  blackness  and  darkness  around  Sinai  were  visible  demonstrations  to 
inspire  the  too  rash  people  with  becoming  awe.  Signs  and  wonders  wei«  one  means 
by  which  Nicodemus  recognised  the  "  Teacher  comp  from  God  "  (John  iii.  1,  2  j  of. 


OH.  XII.  1—26.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  215 

A.ct8  ii.  29).  The  excision  of  the  miraculous  element  may  be  consistent  for  those 
who  exclude  God  from  direct  action  in  the  education  of  mankind^bnt  it  is  an  illogical 
act  when  done  by  believers  in  a  personal  "  living  God."  The  Bible  is  a  very  con- 
sistent book.  (2)  In  go  far  as  the  Bible  record  is  an  education  of  mankind,  it,  con- 
taining a  faithful  account  of  the  visible  signs  of  the  past,  causes  those  signs  to  be  a 
formative  infiuenee  still.  The  visible  manifestations  during  the  ages  covered  by 
Biblical  records  not  only  made  people  then  know  and  feel  the  reality  of  God's  pre- 
sence and  power  to  a  degree  that  otherwise  would  not  have  been  possible,  but  they 
cause  the  "  ends  of  the  earth  "  to  be  more  thoroughly  convinced  of  it.  It  takes  muck 
effort  to  shake  men  out  of  their  indifference  to  the  Unseen,  to  strengthen  faith  in  an 
ever-ruling  Power.  The  Bible  comes  to  the  aid  of  our  reason  and  conscience,  and 
by  these  recorded  facta  helps  us  to  live  as  though  we  saw  him  who  is  invisible.  Those 
who  object  to  the  reality  of  miracles  in  the  past  because,  forsooth,  similar  do  not 
occur  now,  and  are  not  ileeded,  forget  how  much  of  their  present  faith  in  God  is  due 
to  the  combination  of  these  ancient  miracles  with  the  spiritual  element  that  abides. 
We  may  have  a  spiritual  appreciation  of  the  truth  of  Christianity  which  amply  satis- 
.  fies  us ;  but  that  spiritual  Christianity  so  appreciated  is  impossible  apart  from  the 
stupendous  "  outward  sign  "  of  an  Incarnation  and  Resurrection.  (3)  The  facts  con- 
sequent on  the  establishment  of  Christianity  are  outward  sig/ns  which  continue  to 
furnish  aid  to  faith.  The  indirect  result,  in  the  continued  existence  of  the  Jews  as 
an  essentially  separate  people,  is  impressive.  The  direct  effects,  in  the  salvation  of 
souls,  the  pure,  elevating  spirit,  and  the  social  ameliorations  naturally  flowing  from 
Christianity,  are  signs  and  wonders  which  indicate  the  mighty  power  of  God.  3. 
Spiritual  education  by  outward  signs  is  very  reasonable.  This  will  be  admitted  so 
far  as  relates  to  our  children,  and  also  the  formation  of  character  by  outward  signs 
of  power  that  are  not  miraculous.  Therefore  the  controversy  is  limited  to  the 
reasonableness  of  the  outward  miraculous  signs  related  in  the  Bible.  Here  observe, 
those  who  admit  that  the  Incarnation,  "  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,"  was  a  reality,  and 
not  a  figure  of  speech,  have  conceded  the  principle ;  and  i£  it  was  the  Divine  intention 
by  this  miracle  to  save  men  in  Christ,  where  is  the  difficulty  of  admitting  that  by 
miracle  God  wrought  the  way  for  Christ,  and  educated  the  world  for  the  event  ?  If 
the  escape  is  sought  in  the  supposed  number  of  miracles  in  Old  Testament  times,  then 
who  is  to  tell  God  how  many  he  shall  work  ?  Where  do  wisdom  and  propriety 
begin  and  end  ?  Let  any  one  try  and  settle  what  and  how  often  God  shall  work. 
Moreover,  it  is  all  a  delusion  as  to  the  vast  number  of  miracles.  Genesis  covers  at 
least  2800  years,  and  yet  not  over  twenty-two  miracles,  or  strictly  open  manifesta- 
tions, are  recorded  during  that  period,  giving  an  average  of  one  in  127  years. 
Further,  what  more  reasonable  than,  e.  g.,  this  of  the  "thunder"?  The  people  have 
had  the  truth,  and  reason  has  been  appealed  to ;  but  they  are  weak,  as  history  proves. 
God  is  the  supreme  Power,  but  they  evidently  need  to  be  impressed,  so  that  the 
lessons  just  pven  may  abide.  Fear  thus  produced  will  act  with  consciousness  of 
moral  truth  and  force  of  reason,  and  consequently  it  is  an  act  of  great  mercy  to  render 
them  this  additional  aid,  just  as  it  is  an  act  of  kindness  to  enforce  lessons  on  children 
by  an  authority  which  they  can  appreciate. 

II.  Thbke  abb  special  encouhaqembnts  to  confobmity  to  God's  will  set  forth 
by  his  prophets,  justified  by  reason  and  conscience,  and  supported  by  outward  sig-ns. 
It  is  instructive  to  note  how  God's  methods  have  respect  to  the  whole  man.  Moral 
obligation  is  placed  before  the  conscience  (vers.  13 — 15),  reason  is  appealed  to  (vers. 
7 — 11),  fear  of  disobedience  is  aroused  by  outward  sign  of  supreme  power,  and  now 
the  hopes  of  the  soul  are  to  be  sustained  by  appropriate  considerations.  Would  that 
men  who  sneer  at  the  Old  Testament  records  had  the  heart  to  study  its  spiritual 
teaching !  They  would  see  how  beautifully  the  terrible  and  the  mild  blend  to  meet 
the  needs  of  the  real  man.  The  encouragement  is  threefold.  1.  An  assurance  of 
God's  great  rnercy.  "  Fear  not."  He  "  will  not  forsake  his  people. "  This  "  fear  not " 
comes  to  the  sintul  soul  still.  It  came  with  the  angels'  song  over  the  plains  of 
Bethlehem;  it  was  heard  by  the  "little  flock;"  and  the  conscience-smitten  jailor 
heard  the  same.  God  "  hath  not  forsaken  "  mankind.  Not  for  what  virtue  he  sees 
in  perverse,  ungrateful  men,  but "  for  his  own  sake  "  he  saves  the  penitent.  As  Israel 
had  "  for  his  own  sake  "  been  made  his  people,  with  prospective  reference  to  the 


M  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xa.  1— 2& 

introdaction  of  the'Messiah  and  the  future  education  of  the  world,  so  in  the  redemp- 
tion wrought  by  Christ  every  man  on  earth  is  embraced  in  a  covenant  of  mercy, 
sealed  wil£  the  "  blood  that  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  To  know  that  God  is  merciful 
and  gracious,  that  all  his  terrible  displays  of  power  are  in  love,  this  brings  cheer  to 
the  entire  race  of  man.  If  only  despisers  of  the  gospel  knew  the  richness  of  its 
mercy  for  all  men,  they  would  surely  not  seek  to  hinder  its  acceptance  by  this  sor- 
rowing world.  2.  The  prayer  and  sympathy  of  ihefaiihfvl.  Samuel  assures  Israel 
that  he  will  bear  them  on  his  heart.  Hia  affection  for  them  and  his  spiritual  duty 
to  them  were  such  that  not  to  continue  to  pray  would  be  sin  (ver.  23).  This  en- 
couragement has  every  one  who  is  called  on  to  conform  to  the  will  of  God.  The 
Church  pleads  "for  all  men."  The  penitent  and  struggling  are  especially  on  the 
heart  of  God's  faithful  children.  In  thousands  of  homes  daily  prayer  is  made  for 
persons  never  seen  and  unknown  by  name.  3.  Continuous  instruction.  As  long  as 
Samuel  lived  he  would  teach  them  "  the  good  and  the  right  way."  No  doubt,  like 
the  Apostle  Peter,  he  would  also  devise  means  so  that  they  should  have  his  wise 
words  "  after  "  his  "  decease."  It  requires  "  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,"  to 
keep  men  in  the  safe  and  blessed  pathway ;  and  how  fully  is  this  secured  to  us  in 
the  "  lively  oracles  "  I  By  the  written  word,  by  the  suggestions  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
by  the  wise  counsel  of  friends,  God  teaches  us  the  way  in  which  we  should  go.  We 
are  not  left  to  wander  at  our  will,  or  to  follow  the  contradictory  voices  of  men. 
There  is  "  a  sure  word  of  prophecy  which  shineth  as  a  light  in  a  dark  place." 

General  lessons: — 1.  A  study  of  the  signs  of  God's  presence  in  human  affairs  will 
prove  a  salutary  restraint  on  sinful  tendencies.  2.  It  becomes  the  true  Christian  to 
manifest  tender  sympathy  for  men  who  are  spiritually  weak  and  erring.  3.  Great 
influence  is  gained  over  men  when  we  can  convince  them  that,  though  they  are  very 
sinful,  God  is  merciful  and-  waiting  to  bless.  4.  The  element  of  fear  in  religion,  to 
be  healthful,  must  be  supplemented  by  that  of  hope  and  confidence. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS 

Vers.  1 — ^25.  (Gilgal.) — SamueTs  admonitions  to  Israel.     1.  The  oecaiion  of  his 

admonitions  was  the  full  recognition  of  the  first  king  of  Israel  -by  the  national  as- 
sembly, and  his  retirement  from  the  more  active  duties  of  his  office  as  judge.  He  was 
not  mortified  at  parting  with  power,  nor  did  he  wish  to  reverse  the  change  which  had 
been  effected.  He  cheerfully  acquiesced  in  the  will  of  God,  and  cordially  united  with 
the  people  in  giving  honour  to  the  "  Lord's  anointed  "  (vers.  3, 5).  Yet  he  might  not 
allow  them  to  suppose  that  there  was  nothing  blameworthy  in  their  desire  for  a  king, 
as  they  were  apt  to  do,  or  enter  upon  their  new  career  in  perilous  self-complacency, 
without  warning  them  of  the  rooks  ahead.  He  spoke  not  merely  as  judge,  but  also  as  a 
prophet  and  "  faithful  priest "  (ver.  19).  2.  The  form,  which  they  assumed  is  varied. 
They  consist  generally  of  a  dialogue  between  him  and  the  elders;  partly  of  an 
apology,  or  defence  of  his  official  conduct ;  partly  of  a  narration  of  the  dealings  of 
God  with  Israel ;  and  partly  of  exhortations,  warnings,  and  promises  closely  con- 
nected together.  The  whole  may  be  conceived  of  as  a  judicial  scene  occurring  before 
the  invisible  Judge,  in  which  Samuel,  having  vindicated  himself  as  against  the 
people,  sets  forth  their  sin  against  God,  who  himself  confirms  his  words  in  the  thun- 
derstorm (Job  xxxviii.  1),  which  leads  them  to  confess  their  transgression  and  seek 
the  intercession  of  the  prophet,  who  consoles  and  admonishes  them,  and  assures  them 
of  his  continued  help.  The  language  is  direct  and  rugged  and  full  of  force.  3.  The 
main  subject  is  the  course  of  sinful  perversity  which  Israel  had  pursued  in  desiring  a 
king  ;  the  chief  aim  to  produce  a  humble  and  penitent  state  of  mind,  and  lead  to  the 
maintenance  of  a  proper  relation  to  the  invisible  King.  His  former  words  may  be 
compared  (ch.  iii.  U — 14  ;  vii.  3—6  ;  viii.  10—18  ;  x.  17 — 19) ;  also  the  words  at 
Moses  (Num.  xvi.  25 — 30  ;  Deut.  xxix. ),  and  of  Joshua  (Josh.  xxiv.).  He  speaks 
of  their  course  as — 

I.  Adopted  without  sufficient  keason  (vers.  3 — 6)  in  the  light  of  his  just  admin- 
fatration.  He  sets  himself,  as  it  were,  before  the  tribunal  of  the  invisible  Judge,  and 
before  the  king, — himself,    '  old  and  grey-headed,"  on  the  one  hand,  Israel  on  th« 


ea.  XII.  1—25.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  21? 

other, — and  seeks  an  open  ■vindication  (as  public  men  are  often  under  the  necessity 
of  doing) ;  not,  however,  so  much  from  regard  to  his  own  dignity  as  to  their  welfare 
and  the  honour  of  God.  We  have  here — 1.  A  challenge,  on  the  part  of  Samuel,  to 
bear  witness  against  him.  "  Behold,  here  I  am,"  &c.  (ver.  3).  It  is  a  commott 
temptation  for  men  in  authority  and  power  to  use  their  position  for  selfish  and  unjust 
purposes,  such  as  (1)  appropriating  wrongfully  what  belongs  to  others,  (2)  defrauding 
them  of  what  is  their  due,  (3)  oppressing  the  poor  and  weak,  and  (4)  perverting  the 
proper  course  of  justice,  especially  in  the  case  of  the  rich  and  strong,  for  the  sake  of 
"  a  gift"  or  bribe.  How  have  these  evils  prevailed  in  every  age  I  But  Samuel  had 
consciously  wronged  no  one,  and  if  any  can  show  that  he  has  done  so,  he  stands 
ready  to  make  restitution  (Luke  xix.  8).  His  conscience  is  "  as  the  noontide  clear." 
"  No  doubt  he  found  himself  guilty  before  God  of  many  private  infirmities ;  but  for 
his  public  carriage  he  appeals  to  men.  A  man's  heart  can  best  judge  of  himself ; 
others  can  best  judge  of  his  actions.  Happy  is  that  man  that  can  be  acquitted  by 
himself  in  private,  in  public  by  others,  by  God  in  both  "  (Hall).  2.  A  testimony,  on 
the  part  of  the  elders,  to  his  integrity  (ver.  4)  ;  ready,  explicit,  and  with  one  voice. 
It  is  almost  impossible  for  men  in  pubhc  ofSce  to  be  faithful  without  making  enemies. 
If  Samuel  had  any,  they  now  nowhere  appear ;  and  his  character  shines  forth  "  as 
the  sun  when  he  goeth  forth  in  his  might  (Judges  v.  31).  3.  An  invocation,  on  the 
part  of  both,  to  the  Lord  and  his  anointed  to  confirm  the  testimony  (ver.  5) ;  thereby 
making  it  more  solemn  and  memorable.  Why,  then,  seeing  his  government  was  so 
unblamable,  did  they  wish  to  set  it  aside  ?  Their  testimony  to  him  was  a  sentence 
of  condemnation  on  themselves  for  their  inconsideration,  ingratitude,  and  discontent. 
The  force  of  the  testimony  was  increased  by  his  further  invocation  of  the  Lord  ai 
he  who  had  "  appointed  Moses  and  Aaron,  and  brought  their  fathers  out  of  the  land 
of  Egypt "  (ver.  6).  As  the  appointed  and  faithful  leader  of  Israel,  even  as  they, 
no  other  was  necessary,  and  his  rejection  wag  the  rejection  of  the  Lord.  With  this 
he  passes  on  to  speak  of  their  course  as — 

II.  Marked  by  aggbavated  tbansgeession  (vera.  7 — 12)  in  the  light  of  the  right- 
eous dealings  of  God  in  past  time.  "Now  therefore  stand  forth,"  &c.  (ver.  7). 
He  and  they  now  change  places ;  he  becomes  their  accuser,  and  reasons  or  contends 
with  them  (in  order  to  convict  them  of  sin)  "  concerning'  the  righteous  acts  of 
Jehovah,"  who  had  acted  justly  in  his  covenant  relation  with  them  throughout  their 
whole  history,  faithfully  fulfilled  his  promises,  inflicted  punishment  only  when  it 
was  deserved,  and  bestowed  upon  them  the  greatest  benefits  (Ezek.  xxxiii.  17 ; 
Micah  vi.  2).  These  acts  include — 1.  A  wonderful  deliverance  (ver.  8)  from  a  crush- 
ing oppression,  in  compassion  to  the  cry  of  the  needy,  through  the  instrumentality 
of  men  raised  up  for  the  purpose,  with  "  a  mighty  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm, 
and  completed  in  their  possession  of  the  land  of  promise.  This  dehverance  is  always 
regarded  as  the  foundation  of  their  history.  "  History  was  bom  in  that  night  in 
which  Moses,  with  the  law  of  God,  moral  and  spiritual,  in  his  heart,  led  the  people 
of  Israel  out  of  Egypt "  (Bunsen).  2.  Repeated  chastisememts  (ver.  9),  rendered 
necessary  by  forgetfulness  of  God,  varied  (the  Canaanites,  the  Philistines,  the 
Moabites),  and  with  a  view  to  their  moral  improvement.  "Notice  here  Samuel's 
prudence  in  reproof.  (1)  By  his  reproof  of  their  ancestors  he  prepares  their  minds 
to  receive  reproof ;  (2)  he  shows  that  their  ingratitude  is  old,  and  so  worse,  and  they 
should  take  care  that  it  grow  no  stronger ;  (3)  he  chooses  a  very  mild  word,  '  for- 
get,' to  express  their  offence  "  (Pool).  3.  Continued  help  (vers.  10,  11),  through 
penitence  and  prayer,  by  means  of  successive  "  saviours," .—  Jerubbaal  (Gideon), 
Bedan  (Barak),  Jephthah,  Samuel  (ch.  vii.  10 ;  referring  to  himself  in  the  third  person, 
because  now  speaking  as  the  advocate  of  Jehovah), — against  their  "  enemies  on  every 
side,"  and  in  their  safe  preservation  unto  the  present  time.  "  And  ye  dwelled  safe." 
But  what  return  did  they  make  for  all  his  benefits  ?  As  soon  as  they  saw  the  threat- 
ening attitude  of  Nahash  (ver.  12),  they  forgot  the  lessons  of  the  past,  lost  their  con- 
fidence in  God,  trusted  in  an  arm  of  flesh,  and  recklessly  and  persistently  demanded 
a  king,  virtually  rejecting  the  Lord  as  their  king.  Former  experience  of  the  good- 
ness and  severity  of  God  greatly  aggravates  present  transgression  (ver.  19). 

IIL  Involving  perilous  besponsibilitt  (vers.  13 — \6)  in  the  light  of  present  cir- 
cumatanoM.    "Now  therefore  behold  the  king  whom  ye  have  chosen,"  &c.    Although 


«18  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  ^ob.  xii.  1—26 

they  had  taken  the  initiative  in  the  m&tter,  he  had  reserved  to  himself  the  authority 
of  appointing  him,  and  abides  the  supreme  Bulerover  both  people  and  king  (ver.  12). 
In  the  new  order  of  things — 1.  They  are  specially  liable  to  forget  this  primary  truth,  and 
to  trust  in  man,  and  hence  he  impresses  upon  them  once  and  again  the  fact  that "  the 
Lord  God  is  their  king."  No  earthly  monarch  can  release  them  from  their  responsibility 
to  him,  and  no  human  help  can  save  them  apart  from  him.  "  It  is  better  to  trust  in 
the  Lord  than  to  put  confidence  in  princes  (Ps.  crviii.  9).  2.  They  can  prosper 
only  by  being  faithful  to  him.  "  If  ye  will  fear  the  Lord,"  &o.,  it  will  be  well  with 
you  and  your  king.  But — 3.  If  unfaithful,  they  toill  expose  themselves  to  heavt/ judg- 
ments, as  their  fathers  had  done  before  them.  Wherein,  then,  have  they  improved 
their  condition  ?  What  a  perilous  course  have  they  entered  upon  I  And  how  can 
they  hope  to  avoid  its  consequences  except  by  profound  humiliation,  and  seeking  the 
Lord  "  with  full  purpose  of  heart "  ?  • 

IV.  Necessitating  sincere  eepentance  (vers.  16 — 18)  in  the  light  of  apirroaching 
judgment.  "  Now  therefore  stand  and  see  this  great  thing, "  &o.  Hitherto  the 
words  of  Samuel  appear  to  have  produced  little  effect ;  something  further  was 
necessary  that  they  might  not  be  spoken  in  vain  ;  and,  in  response  to  his  prayer,  the 
thunder  crashed  above  the  heads  of  the  great  assembly,  and  the  rain  fell  in  torrents 
around  them — things  "incomprehensible  to  a  Hebrew"  in  time  of  harvest.  The 
miraculous  sign — 1.  Corroborates  the  word  of  truth  as  well  as  the  Divine  com- 
mission of  him  who  uttered  it,  and  confirms  the  testimony  borne  to  his  integrity. 
The  voice  of  the  supreme  Judge  answers  the  appeal  which  had  been  made  to  him 
(ver.  5),  and  there  is  "  an  end  of  all  controversy  "  (Heb.  vi.  16).  2.  Is  significant 
of  the  Divine  displeasure  at  their  sin,  and  of  terrible  judgmen's  (Exod.  ix.  28). 
"  Herebj  the  Lord  showed  his  power,  and  the  people  their  foolishness  in  not  being 
contented  to  have  such  a  mighty  God  for  their  protector,  who  could  with  thunder 
and  rain  fight  for  them  against  their  enemies,  as  he  did  for  Israel  against  the  host  of 
Pharaoh,  and  not  long  before  this  against  the  Philistines.  And,  beside,  it  appeared 
with  what  small  reason  they  should  be  weary  of  Samuel's  government,  who  by  his 
prayer  could  fetch  down  rain  and  thunder  from  heaven  "  ( Willet).  "  God  had  granted 
their  desire ;  but  upon  them  and  their  king's  bearing  toward  the  Lord,  not  upon 
the  fact  that  they  had'  now  a  king,  would  the  future  of  Israel  depend ;  and  this 
truth)  80  difficult  for  them  to  learn,  God  would,  as  it  were,  prove  before  them  in  a 
s3Tnbol.  Did  they  think  it  unlikely,  nay,  well-nigh  impossible,  to  fail  in  their  present 
circumstances  ?  God  would  bring  the  unlikely  and  seemingly  incredible  to  pass  in 
a  manner  patent  to  all.  Was  it  not  the  time  of  wheat  harvest,  when  in  the  East 
not  a  cloud  darkens  the  clear  sky  ?  God  would  send  thunder  and  rain  to  convince 
them,  by  making  the  unlikely  real,  of  the  folly  and  sin  of  their  thoughts  in 
demanding  a  king "  (Edersheim).  3.  Is  designed  to  effect  a  moral  end,  in  filling 
them  with  salutary  fear.  "  That  ye  may  perceive  that  your  wickedness  is  great 
(ver.  17).  And  it  is  not  in  vain ;  for  "  all  the  people  greatly  feared  the  Lord  and 
Samuel  (ver.  18),  thus  solemnly  avouched  to  be  his  prophet.  God  is  never  at  a  loss 
for  means  to  accomplish  his  purposes,  and  goes  beyond  his  usual  method  of  opera- 
tions when  the  occasion  demands  it.  The  end  of  his  dealings  with  men  is  to  bring 
them  to  repentance  and  make  them  holy. 

V.  Not  excluding  consolation  and  hope  (vers.  19 — 25)  in  the  light  of  the  grea* 
name  and  merciful  purposes  of  God.  By  means  of  repentance  and  faith  men  place 
themselves  within  the  circle  where  the  "  consuming  fire  "  of  Divine  wrath  (Bom.  i. 
18 ;  Heb.  xii.  29)  ia  transformed  into  the  genial  beams  of  Divme  grace  ;  and  "  he  is 
faithful  and  just  to  forgive  us  our  sins  "  (1  John  i.  9).  We  have  here — 1.  A  descrip- 
tion of  a  penitent  people  (ver.  19),  overwhelmed  with  fear,  freely  and  fully  confess- 
ing their  sin,  rendering  honour  where  they  had  formerly  shown  ingratitude  and 
disrespect,  and  seeking  Divine  mercy  in  the  way  in  which  they  had  reason  to  believe 
it  might  be  obtained.  2.  An  exhortation  to  an  amended  course  of  life  (vers.  20,  21). 
(1)  A  consoling  word.  "Fear  hot."  (2)  A  reminding  and  humbling  word.  "Ye  have 
done  all  this  wickedness."  (3)  A  restraining  word.  "  Turn  not  aside  from  following 
the  Lord"  (as  ye  have  done  in  your  distrust  and  self-will).  (4)  A  directive  word. 
"  But  serve  the  Lord  with  all  your  heart "  (in  faith,  and  love,  and  entire  consecra- 
tion).   (6)  A  warning  word.    "  And  turn  ye  not  aside  "  (from  God  to  any  false  objeol 


m.  zii.  1—26.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  tlf 

of  trust,  idols).  (6)  An  instructive  word.  "  For  they  are  vain  "  (utterly  empty  and 
disappointing).  3.  An  assurance  of  mercy  and  grace  (ver.  22),  resting  on — (1)  His 
relationship.  They  are  still  "  his  people."  (2)  His  name — ^his  revelations  of  power 
and  salvation  to  his  people,  and  his  honour  and  glory  before  all  the  nations.  (3)  His 
good-will.  "  Because  "  (he  will  not  forsake  his  people,  because)  "  it  hath  pleased  the 
Lord  to  make  you  his  people."  Whatever  benefits  he  has  conferred  have  proceeded 
from  his  pure  benevolence,  and  are  a  pledge  of  further  benefits  (Jer.  xzxi.  3).  His 
free  and  unmerited  love  is  the  sinner's  chief  hope.  4.  A  promise  of  continued  aid, 
on  the  part  of  Samuel,  in  intercession  and  instruction  (ver.  23).  "In  this  he  sets  a 
glorious  example  to  all  rulers,  showing  them  that  they  should  not  be  led  astray  by 
the  ingratitude  of  their  subordinates  or  subjects,  and  give  up  on  that  account  all 
interest  in  their  welfare ;  but  should  further  persevere  all  the  more  in  their  anxiety 
for  them."  5.  A  final  admonition  to  steadfast  obedience  (vers.  24, 25),  without  which 
both  people  and  king  will  be  overwhelmed  in  destruction.  In  keeping  with  the  tone 
which  pervades  these  admonitions,  and  as  in  foresight  of  coming  evils,  they  end  with 
a  wammg. — D. 

Ver.  2.  (GiLQAL.)— Pirfj^  in  old  age.  "  Old  and  g^ey-headed."  On  speaking  of 
himself  as  "  old  and  grey-headed,"  Samuel  immediately  afterwards  made  reference 
to  his  childhood.  "  I  have  walked  before  you  from  my  childhood  unto  this  day." 
He  loved  to  linger  (as  old  men  are  wont)  over  his  early  days ;  and  in  his  case  there 
was  every  reason  for  doing  so,  for  they  were  surpassingly  pure  and  beautiful.  One 
of  the  chief  lessons  of  his  life  is  that  a  well-spent  childhood  and  youth  conduces 
greatly  to  a  happy  and  honoured  age.  Consider  him  as  an  eminent  illustration  of 
piety  in  old  age. 

I.  Old  age  is  presumptive  of  piety,  inasmuch  as — 1.  Piety  prm«n<«  indulgence 
in  vices  that  tend  to  shorten  life.  How  many  are  brought  by  such  vices  to  a  prema- 
ture grave  1  When,  therefore,  we  see  an  old  man  we  naturally  infer  that  he  has 
been  a  good  man,  nor  can  there  be  any  doubt  that  he  has  exercised  much  self- 
control.  Samuel  was  a  Nazarite.  2.  It  has  a  direct  tendency  to  prolong  life  by 
producing  healthful  virtues.  "  The  fear  of  tho  Lord  prolongeth  days  (Prov.  x.  27). 
3.  It  has  the  promise  of  many  days.  "  With  long  life  will  I  satisfy  him  "  (Ps.  xci. 
16).  "  Even  to  old  age  I  am  ;  and  even  to  hoar  hairs  will  I  carry  you  "  (Isa.  xlvi. 
4).  "  A  good  old  age  (Gen.  xv.  15).  "  Thou  shalt  come  to  thy  grave  in  a  full  age, 
like  as  a  shock  of  com  cometh  in  his  season "  (Job  v.  26).  4.  It  is  commonly 
associated  with  long  life.  There  are,  doubtless,  exceptions,  the  causes  of  which  are 
not  far  to  seek,  but  this  is  the  rule. 

II.  Old  age  is  made  honourable  by  piety,  because  of — 1.  Its  maintaining  the 
respect  which  is  naturally  felt  for  the  aged.  Among  the  Spartans,  when  a  hoary- 
headed  man  entered  their  assemblies,  they  all  immediately  rose,  and  remained  stand- 
ing till  he  had  taken  his  place ;  and  it  is  enjoined  in  the  law  of  Moses :  "  Thou  shalt 
rise  up  before  the  hoary  head,  and  honour  the  face  of  the  old  man  "  (Levit.  xix.  32). 
But  this  injunction  assumes  the  possession  of  godliness,  without  which  old  age 
neither  deserves  nor  receives  appropriate  reverence.  2.  The  beauty  and  perfection 
of  character  which  it  develops.  There  is  beauty  in  the  fresh-springing  corn,  but 
there  is  still  greater  beauty  in  "  the  full  com  in  the  ear,"  bending  under  its  golden 
burden.  A  good  old  man,  matured  in  character  by  long  growth,  and  abounding  in 
"  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,"  is  one  of  the  noblest  sights  on  earth.  He  is  a  king 
amongst  men.  "  The  hoary  head  is  a  crown  of  glory  if  it  be  found  in  the  way  of 
righteousness"  (Prov.  xvi.  31 ;  xx.  29).  3.  The  conflicts  and  perils  that  have  been 
passed.  "An  old  disciple "  (Acts  xxi.  16),  of  "such  an  one  as  Paul  the  aged" 
(Philem.  9),  is  like  a  veteran  soldier  bearing  on  him  the  scars  of  many  a  hard-fought 
battle,  and  wearing  the  honours  conferred  by  a  grateful  country.  He  is  like  a  giant 
of  the  forest,  standing  erect  when  the  storm  has  laid  his  companions  in  the  dust. 
4.  The  good  that  has  been  done  in  past  time,  and  lives  to  bear  witness  to  the  doer, 
and  "  praise  him  in  the  gates."  We  value  'the  young  for  the  good  they  may  here- 
after effect,  the  old  for  the  good  they  have  already  accomplished.  "  Them  that 
honour  me  1  will  honour." 

III.   Old  AGS  is  bbndered  useful  by  piety,  for  thereby  it — 1.  Famishea  • 


420  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL,  [ch.  xii.  1—25 

convincing  evidence  of  the  truth  and  power  of  religion.  When  faith  survives  doubts, 
temptations,  difficulties,  its  very  existence  is  an  argument  for  the  reality  of  that 
■which  is  believed,  a  proof  of  the  practicability  of  a  religious  life,  and  a  commend- 
ation of  its  unspeakable  worth.  2.  Sets  forth  an  impressive  example  of  the  spirit  of 
religion — ^humility,  trustfulness,  calmness,  patience,  resignation,  cheerfulness  (Gen. 
xlviii.  21 ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  1 ;  Josh.  xiv.  10,  12 ;  xxiii.  14 ;  2  Sam.  xix.  32).  3.  Bears 
valuable  testimony  for  God,  and  continues  in  prayer  and  labour  on  behalf  of  men. 
"  They  shaU  still  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age,"  &o.  (Ps.  xcii.  14,  16 ;  Ixxi.  14, 17, 18). 
Although  some  services  are  no  longer  possible,  others,  often  more  valuable,  may,  and 
ought  to,  be  rendered  till  the  close  of  life.  4.  AflEords  wise  counsel  to  the  younger 
and  less  experienced.  Wisdom  is  proverbially  associated  with  age.  Those  who 
have  seen  and  heard  much  of  the  world,  and  had  long  experience  of  life,  may  be 
expected  to  know  more  than  those  who  are  just  starting  out  in  their  course.  Their 
judgment  is  less  influenced  by  passion  and  -impulse ;  they  look  at  things  in  a  clearer 
light,  and  in  a  calmer  frame  of  mind,  and  are  more  likely  to  perceive  the  truth  con- 
cerning them. 

"  Whose  ripe  experience  doth  attain 
To  somewhat  of  prophetic  strain." 

Mnch  of  the  inspired  wisdom  of  the  Scriptures  is  based  upon  the  sanctified  experi- 
ence of  the  aged.  "  Moreover  I  will  endeavour  that  ye  may  be  able  after  my  decease 
to  have  these  things  always  in  remembrance"  (2  Pet.  i.  15,  12 — 14;  1  Pet.  v.  1,  5). 
"  My  little  children,  let  us  not  love  in  word,  neither  in  tongue ;  but  in  deed  and  in 
truth  "  (1  John  iii.  18).     "  Little  children,  love  one  another, 

IV.  Old  aqe  is  greatly  comfobted  by  piety.  It  has  its  drawbacks  and 
troubles.  Bodily  infirmities  increase,  the  mental  powers  lose  their  vigour,  and 
friends  become  fewer  (Eccles.  xii.).  It  is  also  liable  to  moral  failings,  such  as  irri- 
tability, fretfulness,  despondency,  and  excessive  carefulness,  which  need  to  be 
guarded  against.  "  When  I  consider  in  my  mind,  I  find  four  causes  why  old  age  is 
thought  miserable  :  one,  that  it  calls  us  away  from  the  transactions  of  afEairs ;  the 
second,  that  it  renders  the  body  more  feeble ;  the  third,  that  it  deprives  us  of  almost  all 
pleasures ;  the  fourth,  that  it  is  not  very  far  from  death  "  (Cicero  '  on  Old  Age ').  But 
notwithstanding  such  things,  it  has,  "  with  godliness,"  abundant  compensations,  con- 
sisting of — 1.  Pleasant  recollections  of  the  past,  especially  of  the  Divine  benefits  that 
have  been  received.  "  Surely  I  will  remember  thy  wonders  of  old  "  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  11). 
2.  Wide  observation  of  the  works  and  ways  of  God.  "  I  have  been  young,  and  now 
am  old,"  &c.  (Ps.  xxxvii.  25).  3.  Inward  support  and  consolation  derived  from 
communion  with  God.  "  Though  our  outward  man  perish,  yet  the  inward  man  is 
renewed  day  by  day  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  16).  "  The  glory  of  the  old  age  of  the  godly  con- 
sists in  this,  that  while  the  faculties  for  the  sensible  no  less  than  mental  enjoyments 
gradually  decline,  and  the  hearth  of  life  gets  thus  deprived  of  its  fuel,  the  blessings 
of  godliness  not  only  continue  to  refresh  the  soul  in  old  age,  but  are  not  until  then 
most  thoroughly  enjoyed.  The  sun  of  piety  rises  the  warmer  in  proportion  as  the 
sun  of  life  declines."  4.  Bright />ros/)ec<«  of  the  heavenly  home — "  a  house  not  made 
with  hands,"  the  vision  of  God,  perpetual  youth,  reunion  with  parted  friends,  perfect 
and  endless  blessedness.  As  the  world  of  light  draws  near,  some  of  its  rays  seem  to 
shine  through  the  crevices  of  the  earthly  tabernacle  that  is  falling  into  decay  (Gen. 
xlix.  18 ;  Luke  ii.  29,  30).  "  The  state  in  which  I  am  now  is  so  delightful,  that  the 
nearer  I  approach  to  death,  I  seem,  as  it  were,  to  get  sight  of  land  ;  and  at  length, 
after  a  long  voyage,  to  be  getting  into  the  harbour.  0  glorious  day  I  when  I  shall 
depart  to  that  Divine  company  and  assemblage  of  spirits,  and  quit  this  troubled  and 
pollnted  scene ''  (Cicero).  "  If  the  mere  conception  of  the  reunion  of  good  men  in 
a  future  state  infused  a  momentary  rapture  into  the  mind  of  TuUy  ;  if  an  airy 
speculation — ^for  there  is  reason  to  fear  it  had  little  hold  on  his  convictions — could 
inspire  him  with  such  delight,  what  may  we  be  expected  to  feel  who  are  assured  of 
such  an  event  by  the  true  sayings  of  God  "  (R.  Hall).  "  I  have  a  desire  to  depart 
and  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better  "  (Phil.  i.  23 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  6 — 8) 

Observations: — 1.  Let  us  be  thankful  for  the  consolations  of  religion  in  "  the  tiiu* 
of  old  age."    2.  Let  the  aged  cherish  the  dispositions  by  which  it  is  made  beautitnl 


«m,  xn.  1—26.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  121 

and  useful,  3.  Let  the  young  honour  the  aged,  and  not  forsake  "  the  counsel  of  th« 
old  men"  (1  Kings  xii.  8).  4.  Let  them  also  remembei  that  thejr  will  grow  old,  and 
BO  live  that  they  may  then  be  honoured  and  happy. — D. 

Vers.  3 — 6.  (Gilgal.) — Integrity  in  public  office.  "  Behold,  here  I  am :  witness 
against  me  before  the  Lord."  It  is  a  noble  thing  for  a  man  in  any  position  of  life, 
but  especially  in  exalted,  public,  and  responsible  ofiSce,  to  "do  justly  and  love 
mercy  "  as  well  as  to  "  walk  humbly  with  his  God ;  "  to  continue  for  many  years  in 
the  fulfilment  of  his  duty  with  strictest  integrity  and  unselfish  devotion  to  the  public 
good.  Of  this  Samuel  was  an  illustrious  pattern.  Concerning  integrity  in  public 
ofiSce,  observe  that — 

I.  It  is  generally,  and  not  improperly,  bxpected,  because  of — 1.  The  superior 
knowledge  which  one  who  fills  such  an  office  is  assumed  to  possess  (Ezra  vii.  25). 
2.  The  important  trust  which  is  reposed  in  him.  "Moreover,  it  is  required  in 
stewards  that  a  man  be  found  faithful"  (1  Cor.  iv.  2).  3.  The  powerful  inQuence 
which  he  exerts  over  others,  for  good  or  evil  (Prov.  xxix.  2). 

II.  It  is  beset  by  numerous  temptations,  such  as — 1.  To  prefer  his  ease  and 
pleasure  to  laborious  and  self-denying  duty  (Rom.  xii.  8).  2.  To  use  his  power  for , 
the  enrichment  of  himself  and  his  family,  to  the  disregard  of  the  general  welfare,  and 
even  by  means  of  extortion,  fraud,  and  oppression  (Acts  xvi.  22 ;  xxiv.  26).  3.  To 
seek  the  praise  of  men  more  than  the  praise  of  God,  and  to  yield  to  the  evil  wishes 
of  the  multitude  for  the  sake  of  personal  advantage  (John  xix.  13). 

III.  It  lies  open  to  public  cbiticism,  for — 1.  The  conduct  of  a  public  man  cannot 
be  wholly  hidden  from  view.  2.  His  responsible  position  invites  men,  and  gives 
them  a  certain  right,  to  judge  concerning  the  course  he  pursues  ;  and,  in  many 
instances,  his  actions  directly  afEect  their  persons,  property,  or  reputation.  3.  As  it 
is  impossible  to  restrain  their  criticism,  so  it  is,  on  the  whole,  beneficial  that  it  should 
be  exercised  aa  a  salutary  restraint  upon  those  "who  are  in  authority."  Happy  is 
he  in  whom  "  none  occasion  nor  fault  can  be  found,  forasmuch  as  he  is  faithful " 
(Dan.  vi.  4). 

IV.  It  is  NOT  always  duly  appreciated,  but  is  sometimes  despised  and  suspected. 
1.  The  reasons  of  the  conduct  of  one  in  public  ofiice  are  not  always  fully  understood, 
nor  the  difficulties  of  his  position  properly  considered,  nor  the  motives  of  his  actions 
rightly  interpreted.  2.  Evil-doers,  to  whom  he  is  "  a  terror,"  may  be  expected  to 
hate  and  speak  ill  of  him.  "  What  evil  have  I  done  ?  "  said  Aristides,  when  told 
that  he  had  every  on^s  good  word.  3.  Men  are  apt  to  be  envious  of  those  who  are 
exalted  above  them,  and  to  forget  their  past  services  if  they  do  not  favour  the  grati- 
fication of  the  present  popular  feeling.  Samuel  was  not  the  only  judge  who  experi- 
enced ingratitude.  "  Neither  showed  they  kindness  to  the  house  of  Jerubbaal,  namely, 
Gideon,  according  to  all  the  goodness  which  he  showed  unto  Israel  "  (Judges  viii.  35). 

V.  It  sometimes  requires  to  be  openly  vindicated,  for  the  sake  of — 1.  Personal 
character  and  reputation.  "  I  have  not  taken  one  ass  from  them,  neither  have  I  hurt 
one  of  them  "  (Num.  xvi.  6).  2.  Truth,  and  righteousness,  and  the  honour  of  God. 
How  often,  on  this  account,  did  the  Apostle  Paul  vindicate  himself,  in  his  epistles, 
from  the  accusations  that  were  made  against  him  1  3.  The  welfare  of  the  people 
themselves,  on  whom  misrepresentation  and  unfounded  suspicions  exert  an  injurious 
influence. 

VI.  It  is  certain,  sooner  or  later,  to  be  fully  recognised.  1.  Time  and'j  circum- 
stances bring  real  worth  to  the  light.  2.  There  is  in  men  a  sense  of  truth  and 
justice  which  constrains  them  to  acknowledge  and  honour  the  good.  3.  God  takes 
care  of  the  reputation  of  those  who  take  care  of  his  honour.  There  comes  a  "  resur- 
rection of  reputations."  The  judgment  of  one  generation  concerning  public  men  is 
often  reversed  by  the  next.  "There  is  nothing  hidden  that  shall  not  be  made 
manifest."     "And  the  righteous  shall  be  had  in  everlasting  remembrance."— D. 

Vers.  8—12.  (Gilgal.) — Doctrine  in  history.  This  is  an  important  chapterin  tha 
history  of  Israel.  In  it  are  set  forth  certain  truths  of  universal  import,  which  are 
also  illustrated,  though  less  distinctly,  in  the  history  of  other  nations.  They  are 
inch  as  follows :— 


2SS  THE  FIBST  BOOK  Of  8AMUBL.  [oh.  xn.  1—25. 

I.  Thk  sovereignty  op  God  (ver.  8).  "  It  hath  pleased  the  Lord  to  make  yoc 
his  people  "  (ver.  22).  Of  his  own  free  and  gracious  will,  always  founded  in  perfect 
wisdom,  he  raises  up  a  people  from  the  lowest  condition,  confers  upon  them  special 
blessings  and  privileges,  and  exalts  them  to  the  most  eminent  place  among  the 
nations  of  the  earth  (Deut.  xxxii.  8 ;  Acts  xvii.  26,  27).  As  it  was  with  Israel,  so 
has  it  been  with  other  peoples.  His  right  so  to  deal  with  men  cannot  be  questioned, 
his  power  therein  is  manifested,  his  undeserved  goodness  should  be  acknowledged, 
and  the  gifts  bestowed  employed  not  for  selfish  ends,  but  for  his  glory  and  the 
welfare  of  mankind. 

II.  The  sinfulness  of  men.  "  They  forgat  the  Lord  their  God  "  (ver.  9).  So 
constantly  and  universally  have  men  departed  from  God  and  goodness  as  to  make  it 
evident  that  there  is  in  human  nature  an  inherited  tendency  to  sin.  "  It  is  that 
tendency  to  sinful  passions  or  unlawful  propensities  which  is  perceived  in  man 
whenever  objects  of  desire  are  placed  before  him,  and  laws  laid  upon  him."  As 
often  as  God  in  his  great  goodness  has  exalted  him  to  honour,  so  often  has  he  fallen 
away  from  his  service ;  and  left  to  himself,  without  the  continual  help  of  Divine 
grace,  his  course  is  downward.  "  In  times  past  the  Divine  nature  flourished  in  men, 
but  at  length,  being  mixed  with  mortal  custom,  it  fell  into  ruin ;  hence  an  inundation 
of  evils  in  the  race  "  (Plato.  See  other  testimonies  quoted  by  Bushnell  in  '  Natiin 
and  the  Supernatural ').  "  There  is  nothing  in  the  whole  earth  that  does  not  prove 
either  the  misery  of  man  or  the  compassion  of  God  ;  either  his  powerlessness  with- 
out, or  his  power  with  God  "  (Pascal). 

III.  The  cbbtaintt  of  eetbibution.  "  He  sold  them  into  the  hand  of  Sisera," 
&c.  (ver.  9). 

"  The  sword  of  Heaven  is  not  in  haste  to  smite, 
Nor  yet  doth  linger,  save  unto  his  seeming 
Who,  in  desire  or  fear,  doth  look  for  it" — (Dante, '  Par.'  xsiL), 

"Morning  by  morning  doth  he  bring  his  judgment  to  light;  he  faileth  not' 
(Zeph.  iii.  5).  "  History  is  a  voice  for  ever  sounding  across  the  centuries  the  laws 
of  right  and  wrong.  Opinions  alter,  manners  change,  creeds  rise  and  fall,  but  the 
moral  law  is  written  on  the  tablets  of  eternity.  For  every  false  word  or  unrighteous 
deed,  for  cruelty  and  oppression,  for  lust  or  vanity,  the  price  has  to  be  paid  £Ct  last ; 
not  always  by  the  chief  offenders,  but  paid  by  some  one.  Justice  and  truth  alone 
endure  and  live.  Injustice  and  falsehood  may  be  long-lived,  but  doomsday  comes 
at  last  to  them  in  French  revolutions  and  other  terrible  woes"  (Froude,  'Short 
Studies '). 

IV.  The  beneficence  of  buffering.  "  And  they  cried  unto  the  Lord,  and  said, 
We  have  sinned,"  &c.  (ver.  10).  Underneath  what  is  in  itself  an  evil,  and  a  result 
of  the  violation  of  law,  physical  or  moral,  there  is  ever  working  a  Divine  power 
which  makes  it  tho  means  of  convincing  men  of  sin,  turning  them  from  it,  and 
improving  their  character  and  condition.  A  state  of  deepest  humiliation  often 
precedes  one  of  highest  honour.  It  is  only  those  who  refuse  to  submit  to  discipline 
(Job  xxxvi.  10)  and  harden  themselves  in  iniquity  that  sink  into  hopeless  ruin. 

V.  The  efjicacy  of  prayer.  "And  the  Lord  sent  .  .  .  and  delivered  you," 
&c.  (ver.  11).  "  Tken  they  cried  unto  the  Lord  in  their  trouble,  and  he  delivered 
them  out  of  their  distresses"  (Ps.  cvii.  6,  13,  19,  28).  As  it  was  with  Israel 
throughout  their  history,  so  has  it  been  with  others,  even  those  who  have  had  but 
little  knowledge  of  "  the  Hearer  of  prayer." 

"  In  even  savage  bosoma 
There  are  longings,  yearnings,  strivings 
For  the  good  they  comprehend  not, 
And  the  feeble  hands  and  helpless, 
Groping  blindly  ia  the  darkness, 
Touch  God's  right  hand  in  that  darkness, 
And  are  lifted  up  and  strengthened  "  ('  The  Song  of  Hiawaths  "). 

VI.  The  prevalence  of  mediation.  "Then  the  Lord  sent  Moses  and  Aaron" 
(»er.  8).     "  And  the  Lord  sent  Jerubbaal,  and  Bedan,  and  Jephthah,  and  Samuel  " 


SH.  xn.  1—25.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  tU 

(v«r.  11).  '  He  sent  help  by  men  specially  raised  up  and  appointed,  and  deliverance 
came  through  their  labours,  conflicts,  and  sufferings.  One  people  also  has  been  often 
made  the  medium  of  blessing  to  others.  And  herein  we  see  a  shadowing  forth  of  the 
work  of  the  great  Mediator  and  Deliverer,  and  (in  an  inferior  manner)  of  his  people 
on  behalf  of  the  world. 

VII.  The  increase  op  bbbponsibilitt  on  the  part  of  those  who  have  had  the 
experience  of  former  generations  to  profit  by,  and  who  have  received  higher  privi- 
leges than  they  (vers.  12,  19).  "Now  all  these  things  were  written  for  our  admo- 
nition," &c.  (1  Cor.  z.  11).  "Two  things  we  ought  to  learn  from  history:  one,  that 
we  are  not  in  ourselves  superior  to  our  fathers  ;  another,  that  we  are  shamefully  and 
monstrously  inferior  to  them  if  we  do  not  advance  beyond  them  "  (Froude). — D. 


(Ter.  23.  (Gilgal.) — Intercessory  prayer.    "  God  forbid  that  I  should  sm  against 
I  Lord  in  ceasing  to  pray  for  you.      "  I  bless  God,"  said  Mr.  Flavel,  the  Puritan, 


Ver. 

the: 

on  the  death  of  his  father, "  for  a  religious  and  tender  father,  who  often  poured  out 
his  soul  to  God  for  me ;  and  this  stock  of  prayers  I  esteem  the  fairest  inheritance  on 
earth."  And  another  eminent  man  said  that  he  "  set  a  greater  worth  upon  the  inter- 
cessions of  the  good  than  upon  all  the  wealth  of  the  Indies."  The  people  of  Israel 
esteemed  the  prayers  of  Samuel  on  their  behalf  in  like  manner.  They  had  experience 
of  their  amazing  power  and  worth  (ch.  vii.  8,  9) ;  they  were  in  great  need  of  them  ; 
they  appear  to  have  thought  that  he  might  cease  to  offer  them  on  account  of  their 
past  treatment  of  him,  and  they  entreated  him,  saying,  "  Pray  for  thy  servants,"  &c. 
(ver.  19).  His  reply  was,  "  Moreover  as  for  me,"  &c.  Every  true  Christian,  as  "  a 
priest  unto  God,"  an  intercessor  with  God  for  his  fellow-men,  ought  to  adopt  this 
language  as  his  own.     It  expresses — 

I.  An  acknowledged  obligation,  which — 1.  Arises  out  of  the  fact  that  it  is  one  oj 
the  principal  means  of  doing  good  to  others — obtaining  invaluable  blessings  for  them. 
Of  the  fact  there  can  be  no  doubt  (James  v.  16).  Why  it  should  have  been  ordained 
as  such  a  means  we  cannot  fully  teU  ;   but  it  is  plainly  in  accordance  with  the 

"intimate  relationship  and  mutual  dependence  of  men ;  teaches  them  to  feel  a  deeper 
interest  in  each  other,  and  puts  signal  honour  upon  eminent  piety.  The  principle  of 
mediation  pervades  all  things,  human  and  Divine.  2.  Is  a»  essential  part  of  the  duty 
of  love  which  we  owe  to  others  ;  the  force  of  the  obligation  being  determined  by  the 
nearness  of  their  relationship,  and  the  extent  of  their  claims  upon  our  love  and 
service — our  kindred  and  friends,  our  country,  mankind.  3.  Is  often  expressly  enjoined 
in  the  word  of  God.  "  Pray  one  for  another  "  (Luke  xi.  5 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  1).  "  If  any 
man  see  his  brother  sin  a  sin  which  is  not  unto  death,  he  shall  ask  (of  God),  and  he 
shall  give  him  life  for  them  that  sin  not  unto  death  "  (1  John  v.  16).  4.  Is  iTunil- 
cated  by  the  example  of  the  best  men — Abraham,  Moses,  Job  (Job  xUi.  8,  10),  Samuel 
and  all  the  prophets ;  above  all,  by  the  example  of  our  Lord  himself,  who  has  prayed 
for  us  all,  and  through  whose  iiftercession  we  present  our  prayers  and  hope  for  their 
acceptance. 

II.  A  POSSIBLE  OMISSION.  Intercessory  prayer  may  cease  to  be  offered.  It  is  some- 
times omitted  from — 1.  Want  of  consideration  of  others ;  the  worth  of  their  souls, 
their  lost  condition,  the  love  of  God  to  them,  the  ransom  that  has  been  given  for 
them.  Attention  is  so  absorbed  in  other  objects  that  they  are  uncared  for.  The 
more  we  think  of  them,  the  more  we  shall  feel  and  pray  for  them.  "  Love  for  souls 
as  souls  is  not  a  passion  of  earthly  growth.  It  is  a  holy  fire  from  heaven.  But  how 
can  we  have  it ;  how  can  it  be  begotten  in  our  hard  hearts  ?  The  only  true  method  is 
to  draw  near  to  them,  and  to  look  at  them — to  look  on  them  in  the  light  of  reason 
and  revelation,  of  immortality  and  of  God"  (0.  Morris).  2.  Deficiency  of  love  and 
desire  for  their  salvation.  3.  Unbelief  4.  Delay  in  the  fulfilment  of  our  requests, 
and  apparent  denial  of  them.  But  remember  that  sincere  prayer  is  never  offered  in 
vain,  and  "pray  without  ceasing."  God  knows  best  when  and  how  to  answer  our 
petitions. 

III.  A  DEPRECATED  SIN.  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  "■  (far  be  it  from  me  to)  "  sin 
against  the  Lord,"  Ac.  The  sin  of  its  omission  is  spoken  of  in  direct  relation  to  him. 
and  consists  in — 1.  Disregarding  his  benevolent  designs  concerning  otheri.  "The 
Lord  will  not  forsake  his  people,"  &c.  (ver.  22).     If  he  loves  them  and  seeks  theij 


M4  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xii.  1—26. 

welfare,  we  should  do  the  same.  2.  Disobeying  his  declared  will  concerning  our- 
selves.  He  has  not  only  commanded  us  to  intercede  for  others,  but  the  very  position 
in  which  he  has  placed  us  is  a  plain  indication  of  his  will.  "  Ye  who  remember 
Jehovah,  leave  yourselves  no  rest,  and  give  him  no  rest,"  &c.  (Isa.  Ixii.  6,  7). 
3.  Buruiiw  in  the  earth  the  greatest  talent  thai  he  has  intrusted  to  us,  4.  Grieving 
the  Holy  Spirit,  who  is  ever  inciting  those  in  whom  he  dwells  to  "  cry  unto  God  day 
and  night.'  "  Quench  not  the  Spirit."  Whilst  the  devout  should  be  urged  by  these 
considerations  to  "  continue  instant  in  prayer,"  others  should  remember  that  it  is 
possible  to  place  an  improper  reliance  on  the  intercessions  of  the  good,  especially  in 
expecting  to  obtain  benefit  from  their  prayers  whilst  they  neglect  to  pray  for  them- 
selves or  walk  in  "  the  good  and  right  way." — D. 

Ver.  24.  (Gilgal.) — The  good  and  right  way.  "  Only  fear  the  Lord,"  &o.  Samuel 
assured  the  people  that  (as  a  priest)  he  would  continue  to  pray  for  them,  and  (as  a 
prophet)  to  show  them  the  way  of  happiness  and  righteousness  ^Acts  vii.  4).  Of 
this  way  the  text  may  be  taken  as  a  further  explanation,  and  gives — 

I.  Its  description.  1.  Filial  reverence.  Fear  not  (be  not  terrified — vers.  17, 
18,  20)  ;  but  fear  (with  a  lowly,  affectionate,  trustful  reverence),  implying  a  know- 
ledge of  his  character  and  saving  purposes,  in  so  far  as  he  has  revealed  them  to  men ; 
in  our  case,  of  him  who  is  "  the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life."  2.  Practical  obedience. 
"And  serve  him."  Becognise  yourselves  as  servants,  his  servants,  and  act  accord- 
ingly. "  Fear  God,  and  keep  his  commandments ''  (the  practical  expression  of  the 
principle)  :  "  for  this  is  the  whole  of  man  "  (Eccles.  xii.  13).  The  two  may  not  be  dis- 
joined (Josh.  xxiv.  14;  Pa.  ii,  11).  "The  life  of  service  is  work;  the  work  of  a 
Christian  is  obedience  to  the  law  of  God  "  (Hall).  3.  Thorough  sincerity  and  whole- 
heartedness.  "  In  truth,  with  all  your  heart."  Do  not  suppose  that  it  is  sufficient  to 
render  an  outward  and  formal  service ;  or  a  partial  service,  in  which  the  love  of 
idols  may  be  united  with  the  love  of  God.  "  Serve  him  only  "  (ch.  vii.  3).  "  God 
will  put  up  with  many  things  in  the  human  heart ;  but  there  is  one  thing  he  will  not 
put  up  with  in  it — a  second  place.  He  who  offers  God  a  second  place  offers  him 
no  place ;  and  he  who  makes  religion  his  first  object  makes  it  his  whole  object " 
(Ruskin). 

II.  Its  necessity.  "  Only."  You  must  walk  in  it,  whatever  else  you  do ;  for  it  is 
only  by  doing  so  that  you  can — 1.  Avoid  walking  in  the  evil  and  wrong  way.  The 
"  vision  of  life  "  which  the  great  Teacher  saw  and  described  contained  only  two  ways, 
the  broad  and  the  narrow,  and  there  is  no  other.  2.  Escape  the  destructive  cotir 
sequences  of  that  way.  You  have  already  entered  on  a  perilous  course,  only  (in  order 
that  you  may  escape  the  end  to  which  it  naturally  conducts),  "fear  the  Lord,"  &c. 
"If  ye  still  do  wickedly,  ye  shall  be  consumed,  both  you  and  j^our  king"  (ver.  25). 
"  The  way  of  transgressors  is  hard."  "  It  leadeth  to  destruction."  3.  Beceive,  and 
continue  to  receive,  the  blessings  that  have  been  promised.  "  The  Lord  will  not  forsake 
his  people,"  only  (in  order  that  you  may  enjoy  his  favour),  "  fear,*  &c.  "  I  will  pray 
for  you,  and  teach  you,''  only  (in  order  that  you  may  be  really  benefited  thereby), 
"  fear,"  &c.  (Jer.  vi.  16 ;  Isa.  i.  19). 

III.  Its  incentive.  "  For  consider  how  great  things  he  hath  done  for  you." 
The  motive  here  is  not  fear  of  punishment,  nor  hope  of  reward,  nor  even  the  sense 
of  right,  but  gratitude  and  love.  1.  What  benefits  ;  so  great,  so  numerous,  so  long 
continued — temporal  and  spiritual  (vers.  6 — 11).  2.  ^owart^yoM,  in  comparison  wilh 
others  (ver.  22).  3.  He  hath  wrougM.  He,  and  no  other ;  freely  and  graciously. 
"  Free  love  is  that  which  has  never  been  deserved,  which  has  never  been  desired,  and 
which  never  can  be  requited."  "  We  have  known  and  believed  the  love  that  God 
hath  to  us.  God  is  love  "  (1  John  iv.  17).  But  in  order  that  his  love  may  be  per- 
ceived and  its  influence  felt,  in  awakening  love,  we  must  consider,  fix  attention 
upon  it,  especially  as  manifested  in  "his  unspeakable  gift"  (1  John  iv.  10).  Our 
responsibility  in  regard  to  "  salvation"  depends  directly  on  the  power  we  possess  of 
directing  attention  to  Divine  truth,  and  considering  it  with  a  real  and  earnest  desire 
to  know  it,  and  live  according  to  it ;  and  by  this  means,  as  ice  is  melted  by  the  sun- 
beams, so  the  heart  is  softened,  renewed,  and  sanctified  by  the  Spirit  of  truth.  "O 
that  they  would  consider  I " — D. 


OH.  xu.  1—25.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  22fi 

Ver.  23. — The  good  man's  weapons.  There  was  a  vein  of  misgiving  evident  in  the 
words  of  Samuel.  Perhaps  the  new  king  and  his  triumphant  soldiers  ascribed  it  to 
the  tiraorousness  of  old  age  ;  but  the  seer  looked  further  into  the  future  than  they, 
and  if  he  felt  bound  to  warn  them  of  the  danger  they  would  incur  by  rebelling 
against  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,  he  gave  them  at  the  same  time  an  assurance 
that  he  would  do  all  in  his  power  to  preserve  them  from  such  wickedness  and  its  in- 
evitable consequences.  The  man  of  God  could  never  forget  Israel.  But  what  could 
he  do  in  old  age  for  this  intractable  people  ?  The  reins  of  government  had  been 
taken  out  of  his  hands ;  and  it  had  never  been  his  duty,  now  less  than  ever,  to  go 
out  to  battle.  What  remained  for  him  to  do  ?  Must  he  not  lot  king  and  people  take 
their  own  course — sow  as  they  pleased,  and  then  reap  what  they  sowed  ?  Nay. 
Samuel  would  not,  under  a  plea  of  helplessness,  withdraw  himself  from  all  care  for 
Israel's  future.  There  remained  to  him  the  two  greatest  weapons  for  moral  efEeot — 
prayer  and  teaching.  The  one  points  to  God  in  heaven,  the  other  to  men  on  the 
earth.  Such  are  a  prophet's  weapons,  and  they  are  mightier  than  a  king's  sceptre  or 
a  warrior's  sword.  That  the  intellectual  and  the  moral  are  the  highest  forms  of 
greatness  and  usefulness  is  a  truth  which  has  established  itself  throughout  all  history. 
The  most  illustrious  and  influential  of  the  Hebrew  race  were  the  prophets.  Moses, 
Samuel,  Elijah,  Elisha,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  and  Ezekiel,  none  of  the  kings  compare 
with  these,  except  David  and  Solomon,  and  they  because  they  had  qualities  resem- 
bling those  of  the  prophets — the  one  of  them  a  poet,  and  the  other  a  sage.  In  like 
manner  the  greatest  of  the  Greeks  were  not  their  warriors  or  rulers,  but  such  as 
Socrates,  Plato,  and  Aristotle — the  men  who  thought  and  who  taught.  That  unique 
and  ancient  people,  the  Chinese,  regard  as  by  far  their  most  important  man  the  sage 
Confucius.  Their  most  powerful  emperors  have  been  comparatively  little  men. 
Our  modem  nations  too  have  had  their  characters  moulded  by  their  thinkers  ami 
teachers  far  more  than  by  their  princes  and  soldiers ;  and  a  nation's  character  makes 
its  history  as  much  as  its  history  shapes  its  character.  There  is  a  supreme  illustration 
of  this  truth.  Unspeakably  the  greatest  efiect  ever  produced  by  one  personality  on 
the  human  race  has  been  exerted  by  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  The  widest,  deepest,  and 
most  beneficial  influence  has  issued  from  him  ;  and  he  began  that  mighty  movement, 
which  has  outlasted  many  governments,  and  shows  no  symptom  of  weakness  or  decay, 
by  the  very  instruments  or  weapons  which  were  named  and  used  by  the  prophet 
Samuel,  viz.,  prayer  and  instruction.  Jesus  prayed  ;  Jesus  taught.  How  weak  in 
comparison  were  the  men  of  the  sword — Herod,  and  Pontius  Pilate,  and  Pilate's 
imperial  master  at  Bome  1  Jesus  had  no  worldly  title,  and  used  no  carnal  weapon. 
If  he  was  a  king,  it  was  to  bear  witness  to  the  truth.  The  weapons  by  which  he 
overcame  were  these — he  prayed,  and  so  prevailed  with  God  ;  he  taught,  and  so  pre- 
vailed with  men.  In  the  same  manner  he  continues  to  animate  and  strengthen  the 
Clmrch.  He  makes  continual  intercession  in  heaven  ;  and  by  the  abiding  of  his  words 
and  the  living  guidance  of  his  Spirit  he  gives  continual  instruction  on  earth.  In  the 
very  beginning  of  the  Church  the  apostles  showed  their  deep  appreciation  of  this 
truth,  and  refused  to  be  drawn  aside  from  that  way  of  highest  usefulness  which  their 
Master  had  shown  to  them.  They  would  concentrate  their  energies  on  moral  and 
spiritual  work.  "We  will  give  ourselves  to  the  word  of  God  and  to  prayer."  Paul 
was  of  the  same  mind  in  his  apostolate.  He  relied  on  weapons  "  not  carnal,  but  mighty 
through  God."  He  foresaw,  and  it  is  evident  from  the  writings  of  Peter  and  John 
that  they  too  in  old  age  foreboded,  evil  days,  as  Samuel  did  in  his  declining  years  ; 
but  those  apostles  knew  no  better  course  to  recommend  to  the  faithful  than  that 
which  Samuel  followed — to  pray  always,  and  to  teach  sound  doctrine.  Evil  might 
come,  even  apostasy  might  ensue  ;  but  the  elect  would  be  proved  and  purified,  and 
after  troubled  days  the  kingdom  would  ultimately  be  set  up  in  "  the  sure  mercies  of 
David,"  and  the  confusion  of  the  time  of  Saul  would  be  past  for  ever.  No  emphasis  is 
laid  on  rite  or  ceremony.  Samuel  was  a  priest,  and  lived  in  a  dispensation  of  religion 
which  gave  great  scope  for  ritual.  But  we  are  left  to  assume  that  the  rites  prescribed 
through  Moses  were  observed  at  this  period.  We  hear  wonderfully  little  about  them. 
Samuel  was  intent  on  teaching  that  "to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to  hearken 
Uian  the  fat  of  rams."  How  weak  and  puerile  to  lay  the  stress  of  our  religion  on  the 
observance  of  ritual,  or  the  performances  of  a  priesthood  I  T:  e  way  to  makt  and 
1  BAM.  Q 


128 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[OH.  XIII.  1 — 23. 


keep  a  people  Christian  is  not  to  sing  masses  for  them,  or  multiply  altar  ceremonies 
and  celebrations,  but  to  pray,  and  to  "  teach  the  good  and  the  nght  way,"  of  obedi- 
ence to  conscience  and  to  God.  Whoso  would  serve  his  own  generation  well,  let  him 
pray,  and  let  him  by  example,  and  persuasive  speech  or  writing,  preach  righteousness. 
These  are  the  good  man's  weapons,  and  these  through  God  are  mighty.  Mischief 
may  go  on,  as  Saul  went  on  to  distress  the  people  of  God ;  but  prayer  and  teaching 
quietly  counteract  the  mischief,  and  prepare  the  way  for  a  revival  of  piety  and  the 
reign  of  the  "  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords." — F. 


EXPOSITION. 
Baui-'b  Pbobation  and  Failure  (chs.  xm. — xv.). 


CHAPTER  xni. 
Wab  against  the  Philistines  (ver.  1 — 
ch.  sdiv.  46).  Ver.  1.— Saul's  age  and  length 
of  reign.  SanI  reigned  one  year.  This  verse 
literally  translated  is,  "  Saul  was  one  year 
old  when  he  began  to  reign,  and  he  reigned 
two  years  over  Israel "  In  its  form  it  exactly 
follows  the  usual  statement  prefixed  to  each 
king's  reign,  of  his  age  at  his  accession,  and 
the  years  of  his  kingdom  (2  Sam.  ii.  10 ; 
V.  4 ;  1  Kings  xiv.  21 ;  xxiL  42,  &c.).  The 
rendering  of  the  A.  Y.  is  too  forced  and 
untenable  to  be  worth  discussing.  As  we 
have  seen  before,  the  numerals  in  the  Books 
of  Samuel  are  not  trustworthy ;  but  the  diffi- 
culty here  is  an  old  one.  The  Vulgate  trans- 
lates the  Hebrew  literally,  as  we  have  given 
it ;  the  Septuagint  omits  the  verse,  and  the 
Syriao  paraphrases  as  boldly  as  the  A.  V.  : 
"  When  Saul  had  reigned  one  or  two  years." 
The  Chaldee  renders,  "  Saul  was  as  innocent 
B«  a  one-year-old  child  when  he  began  to 
reign. "  In  the  Hexaplar  version  some  anony- 
mous writer  has  inserted  the  word  thirty, 
rashly  enough ;  for  as  Jonathan  was  old 
enough  to  have  an  important  command  (ver. 
2),  and  was  capable  of  the  acts  of  a  strong 
man  (ch.  xiv.  14),  his  father's  age  must  have 
been  at  least  thirty-five,  and  perhaps  was 
even  more.  As  regards  the  length  of  Saul's 
reign,  St.  Paul  makes  it  forty  years  (Acts 
xiii.  21),  exactly  the  same  as  that  of  David 
(1  Kings  ii  11)  and  of  Solomon  (ibid.  xL 
42) ;  and  Josephus  testifies  that  such  was  the 
traditional  belief  of  the  Jews  ('Antiq.,'  vl 
14,  9).  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  remarkable 
that  the  word  hero  for  years  is  that  used 
where  the  whole  number  is  less  than  ten. 
The  events,  however,  recorded  in  the  rest  of 
the  book  seem  to  roquire  a  longer  period  than 
ten  years  for  the  duration  of  Saul's  reign ; 
thirfy-two  would  be  a  more  probable  number, 
and,  added  to  the  seven  and  a  half  years'  reign 
of  Ishbosheth  (see  2  Sam.  v.  5),  they  womd 
make  up  the  whole  sum  of  forty  years  ascribed 
by  St.  Paul  to  Saul's  dynasty.  It  is  quite 
possible,  however,  that  uiese  forty  years  may 
•Tin  include  the  fifteen  or  sixteen  yean  of 
SmuwI'i  jodgeihip.   Bat  the  two  facts,  tbat 


all  the  three  sons  of  Saul  mentioned  in  ch. 
xiv.  49  were  old  enough  to  go  with  him  to 
the  battle  of  Mount  Gilboa,  where  they  were 
slain ;  and  that  Ishbosheth,  his  successor, 
was  forty  years  of  age  when  his  father  died, 
efiectuaUy  dispose  of  the  idea  that  Saul's  was 
a  very  short  reign. 

Occasion  of  the  fiest  wae  against 
THE  Philistines  (vers.  2 — 7).  Ver.  2. — Saul 
chose  him.  Literally,  "And  Saul  chose 
him,"  the  usual  way  of  commencing  the 
narrative  of  a  king's  reign.  He  probably 
selected  these  3000  men  at  the  end  of  the 
war  with  the  Ammonites,  to  strengthen  the 
small  body-guard  which  he  had  gathered 
round  him  at  Gibeah  (ch.  i.  26).  As  being 
always  in  arms,  they  would  become  highly 
disciplined,  and  form  the  nucleus  and  centre 
of  all  future  military  operations  (see  on  ch. 
xiv.  52).  He  stationed  these  on  either  side 
of  the  defile  in  the  mountain  range  of  Bethel, 
so  exactly  described  in  Isa.  x.  28,  29,  where 
Sennacherib,  as  we  read,  leaves  his  carriage,. 
i.  e.  his  baggage,  at  Michmash,  and  after 
defiling  through  the  pass,  arrives  at  Geba. 
Gibeah,  where  Jonathan  was  posted  with  1000 
of  these  picked  warriors,  was  Saul's  home,  and 
his  son  would  have  the  benefit  there  of  the  aid 
of  Kish  and  Abner,  while  Michmash  was  the 
more  exposed  place,  situate  about  seven  miles 
north-east  of  Jerusalem.  Conder  ('Tent 
Work,'  ii  110)  describes  this  defile  as  "a 
narrow  gorge  with  vertical  precipices  some 
800  feet  high — a  great  crack  or  fissure  in  the 
country,  which  is  peculiar  in  this  respect,  that 
you  only  become  aware  of  its  existence  when 
close  to  the  brink ;  for  on  the  north  the 
narrow  spur  of  hOls  hides  it,  and  on  the 
south  a  flat  plateau  extends  to  the  top  of  the 
crags.  On  the  south  side  of  this  great  chasm 
stands  Geba  of  Benjamin,  on  a  rocky  knoll, 
with  caverns  beneath  the  houses,  and  arable 
land  to  the  east ;  and  on  the  opposite  side, 
considerably  lower  than  Oeba,  m  the  little 
village  of  Michmash,  on  a  sort  of  saddle, 
backed  by  an  open  and  fertile  com  valley." 
This  valley  was  famous  for  producing  excel- 
lent barley.  Every  man  to  his  teat  This 
with  us  would  be  a  warlike  phrase ;  but  H 
the  mass  of  the  Israelites  then  dwelt  in  tentt, 


OB.  xm.  1—23.] 


THE  I'IBST  BOOK  Of  SAMtJKL. 


m 


It  means  simply  their  dispersion  home- 
wards ;  and  so  the  Syriao  translates,  "  He 
dismissed  them  each  to  hia  house "  (see  Fa. 
Izix.  25). 

Yer.  8. — ^In  Oeba.  By  this  garrison  the 
Philistines  commanded  the  farther  end  of 
the  defile,  and  they  had  also  another  outpost 
heyond  it  near  Gibeah  itself  (ch.  x.  8).  Pro- 
bably neither  of  these  garrisons  was  very 
strong,  and  Sanl  may  have  intended  that 
Jonathan  should  attack  them  while  he  held 
the  northern  end  of  the  pass,  which  would 
be  the  first  place  assailed  by  the  Philistines 
in  force.  As  regards  the  word  translated 
garrison,  attempts  have  been  made  to  render 
it  pillar,  and  to  represent  it  as  a  token  of 
Philistine  supremacy  which  Jonathan  threw 
down,  while  others,  with  the  Septuagint,  take 
it  as  a  proper  name  ;  but  the  word  smote  is 
strongly  in  favour  of  the  rendering  of  the 
A.  v.  Let  the  Hebrews  hear.  Saul  must 
have  intended  war  when  he  thus  posted  him- 
self and  Jonathan  in  such  commanding  spots, 
and  probably  all  this  had  been  sketched  out 
by  Samuel  (see  on  ch.  i.  8).  He  now  sum- 
mons all  Israel  to  the  war.  It  is  strange 
that  he  should  call  the  people  "Hebrews," 
the  Philistine  title  of  contempt ;  but  it  is 
used  again  in  ver.  7,  and  of  course  in  ver. 
19.  The  Septuagint  reads,  "  Let  the  slaves 
revolt,"  but  though  followed  by  Josephms, 
the  change  of  text  is  not  probable. 

Ver.  4. — That  Saul  had  smitten.  Though 
the  achievement  was  actually  Jonathan  s, 
^st  it  belonged  ^to  Saul  as  the  commander- 
m-chief,  and  probably  had  been  done  under 
his  instructions.  Israel  was  had  in  abomin- 
ation with  the  Philistines.  They  must  have 
viewed  with  grave  displeasure  Israel's  gather- 
ing together  to  choose  a  king,  and  Saul's  sub- 
sequent defeat  of  the  Ammonites,  and  reten- 
tion with  him  of  a  large  body  of  men,  and  so 
probably  they  had  been  for  some  time  making 
preparations  for  war.  Saul,  therefore,  know- 
mg  that  they  were  collecting  their  forces, 
does  the  same,  and  the  people  were  called 
together  after  Saul.  Literally,  "were  cried 
after  him,"  i.  e.  were  summoned  by  proclam- 
ation (comp.  Judges  vii.  23,  24 ;  x.  17, 
where  see  margin).  For  Gilgal  see  ch.  vii.  16 ; 
xi.  14.  This  place  had  been  selected  because, 
as  the  valley  opens  there  into  the  plain  of 
Jordan,  it  was  a  fit  spot  for  the  assembling 
of  a  large  host.  For  its  identification  see 
Conder,  '  Tent  Work,'  ii.  7—12. 

Ver.  6. — Long  before  Saul  could  gather 
Israel  the  Philistines  had  completed  their 
preparations,  and  invaded  the  country  in 
overwhelming  numbers  ;  but  thirty  thousand 
chariots  compared  with  six  thousand  horse- 
men is  out  of  all  proportion.  Possibly  the 
final  I  in  Israel  has  been  taken  by  some  copy- 
ist for  a  nnmeral,  and  as  it  signifies  thirty,  it 
haa  changed  1000  Into  80,000.    Or,  simpler 


still,  sMn,  the  numeral  for  800,  haa  been 
read  with  two  dots,  and  ao  changed  into 
80,000.  They  came  np,  and  pitched  in  Uioh- 
mash.  Saul  had  withdrawn  eastward  to 
Gilgal,  and  the  Philistines  had  thus  placed 
themselves  between  him  and  Jonathan. 
There  is  a  difficulty,  however,  in  the  words 
eastward  from  Beth-aven ;  for  as  this,  again, 
was  east  of  Bethel,  it  puts  the  Philistines' 
camp  too  much  to  the  east  As  it  is  not, 
however,  the  regular  phrase  for  eastward, 
some  commentators  render,  "in  front  of 
Beth-aven."  "It  means  'the  house  of 
naught,'  and  was  the  name  originally  given 
to  the  desert  east  of  Bethel,  because  of  its 
barren  character  "  (Conder,  '  Tent  Work,'  11 
108).  The  Philistines,  however,  had  come  In 
such  numbers  that  their  camp  must  have 
occupied  a  large  extent  of  ground. 

Ver.  6. — The  people  were  distressed. 
Literally,  were  squeezed,  pressed  together, 
were  in  difficulties.  The  Philistines  had  so 
promptly  answered  Saul's  challenge,  that  the 
Israelites,  forgetting  their  victory  over  Na- 
hash,  whose  men,  however,  had  probably 
very  inferior  arms  to  those  worn  by  the 
Philistines,  lost  courage ;  and  even  the  picked 
band  of  2000  men  dwindled  to  600.  As  for 
the  mass  of  the  people,  they  acted  with  the 
most  abject  cowardice,  hiding  themselves  in 
caves,  of  which  there  are  very  many  in  the 
limestone  ranges  of  Palestine.  David  sub- 
sequently found  safety  in  them  when  hunted 
by  Saul.  Also  in  thickets.  The  word  as 
spelt  here  occurs  nowhere  else,  nor  do  the 
versions  agree  as  to  its  meaning.  Most  pro- 
bably it  signifies  clefts,  rifts  or  fissures  in  the 
rocks.  The  next  word,  rocks,  certainly  means 
precipitous  cliffs;  and  thickets  or  thorn- 
bushes  would  scarcely  be  placed  between 
caverns  and  cliffs,  both  of  which  belong  to 
mountains.  In  high  places.  This  word 
occurs  elsewhere  only  in  Judges  ix.  46,  49, 
where  it  is  rendered  hold.  But  this  mean- 
ing is  not  supported  by  the  ancient  versions, 
and  it  more  probably  signifies  a  vault  or 
ciypt,  which  better  suits  the  hiding-place 
next  mentioned,  pits,  i.  e.  tanks,  artificial 
reservoirs  for  water,  with  which  most  dis- 
tricts were  well  supplied  in  Palestine,  even 
before  its  conquest  by  IsraeL  They  were 
absolutely  necessary,  as  the  rains  fall  only  at 
stated  periods,  and  the  chalky  soil  will  not 
hold  water ;  when  dry  they  would  form  fit 
places  for  concealment. 

Ver.  7. — Some  of  the  Hebrews.  A  con- 
temptuous name  for  Israel  (see  ver.  8).  If 
the  reading  is  correct,  it  must  be  used  hen 
of  a  cowardly  portion  of  the  people  (as  in  ch. 
xiv.  21),  for  the  insertion  of  some  of  in  the 
A.V.  is  unjustifiable.  But  by  a  veiy  slight 
change,  simply  lengthening  the  stalk  of  one 
letter,  we  get  a  very  good  sense :  "  And  they 
went  over  the/ordi  of  the  Jordan  to  tha  lui 


228 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  xm.  1— 2& 


of  Oad  and  OiI«ad,"  t.  e.  to  the  moantainous 
district  in  which  the  Jordan  rises. 

Saul's  kabh  saobipiob  (vers.  8  — 14). 
Ver.  8. — Seven  days,  accoTdiu|r  to  the  set 
time.  See  on  ch.  z.  8.  The  lapse  of  time 
between  Samuel's  appointment  of  the  seven 
days  during  which  Saul  was  to  wait  for  him 
to  inaugurate  the  war  of  independence,  and 
the  present  occasion,  was  probably  not  so 
great  as  many  commentators  suppose ;  for  ch. 
xiii.  1  is,  as  we  have  seen,  wrongly  trans- 
lated, and  everything  else  leads  to  the  con- 
clusion that  the  defeat  of  the  Ammonites, 
the  choice  of  the  3000,  and  Jonathan's  attack 
on  the  garrison  at  Geba  followed  rapidly 
upon  one  another.  As  the  Philistines  would 
nghtly  regard  Israel's  choice  of  a  king  as  an 
act  of  rebellion,  we  cannot  suppose  them  to 
have  been  so  supine  and  negligent  as  not 
at  once  to  have  prepared  for  war.  Had  ap- 
pointed. The  Hebrew  word  for  this  has 
been  omitted  by  some  accident.  It  is  given 
in  the  Septuagint  and  Chaldee  and  some 
MSS.  The  whole  importance  of  the  occur- 
rence arose  out  of  its  having  been  appointed 
by  Samuel  on  his  selection  of  Saul  as  king. 

Ver.  9. — A  burnt  oifering,  &c.  The  He- 
brew has  the  definite  article,  the  burnt 
offering  cind  the  peace  offerings,  which  were 
there  ready  for  Samuel  to  offer,  He  oflfered. 
Not  with  his  own  hand,  but  by  the  hand  of 
the  attendant  priest,  Ahiah,  who  was,  we 
know,  mth  him.  Possibly,  nevertheless,  the 
Levitical  law  was  not  at  this  period  strictly 
observed. 

Ver.  10.  —  That  he  might  salute  him. 
Literally,  "  bless  him,"  but  the  word  is  often 
used  of  a  solemn  salutation  (2  Kings  iv.  29). 
It  is  evident  that  Samuel  came  on  the  seventh 
day,  and  that  Saul  in  his  impetuosity  could 
not  stay  the  whole  day  out. 

Ver.  11.— What  hast  thou  donel  The 
question  implies  rebuke,  which  Saul  answers 
by  pleading  his  danger.  Each  day's  delay 
made  his  small  force  dwindle  rapidly  away, 
and  the  Philistines  might  at  any  hour  move 
down  from  Michmash  upon  him  at  Gilgal 
and  destroy  him.  But  it  was  the  reality  of 
the  danger  which  put  his  faith  and  obedience 
to  the  trial. 

Ver.  12. — I  have  not  made  supplication 
unto  Jehovah.  Literally,  "I  have  not 
stroked  the  face  of  Jehovah,"  but  used  of 
making  him  propitious  by  prayer  (Exod. 
xxxii.  11  ;  Jer.  xxvi.  19).  I  forced  myselt 
Saul  pleads  in  his  justification  the  imminence 
of  the  danger,  and  perhaps  there  are  few  who 
have  faith  enough  to  "stand  still  and  see 
the  salvation  of  Jehovah  "  (Exod.  xiv.  13). 

Ver.  13. — Thou  hast  done  foolishly.  Saul 
had  not  only  received  an  express  command 
to  wait  seven  days,  but  it  had  been  given 
him  under  special  circumstances,  and  con- 
finned  by  the  fulfilment  of  the  appointed 


signs.  He  knew,  moreover,  how  much  de- 
pended upon  his  waiting,  and  that  obedience 
to  the  prophet's  command  was  an  essential 
condition  of  his  appointment.  Nevertheless, 
in  his  impatience  and  distrust  of  Jehovah,  he 
cannot  bide  the  set  time  ;  not  really  because 
of  any  wish  to  propitiate  God,  but  because 
of  the  effect  to  be  produced  upon  the  mind 
of  the  people.  It  was  tedious  to  remain 
inactive ;  his  position  in  the  plains  was 
untenable  ;  at  any  moment  his  retoeat  to  the 
mountains  might  be  cut  off ;  and  so  he  prefers 
the  part  of  a  prudent  genwral  to  that  of  an 
obedient  and  trustful  servant  of  God.  And 
we  may  notice  that  there  is  no  confession  of 
wrong  on  his  part.  His  mind  rather  seems 
entirely  occupied  with  his  duty  as  a  king, 
without  having  regard  to  the  higher  King, 
whom  it  ought  to  have  been  his  first  duty  to 
obey. 

Ver.  14. — Jehovah  hath  sought  him  • 
man  after  his  own  heart.  The  language  of 
prophecy  constantly  describes  that  as  already 
done  which  is  but  just  determined  upon. 
As  David  was  but  twenty-three  years  of  age 
at  Saul's  death,  he  must  now  have  been  a 
mere  child,  even  if  he  was  bom,  (see  ver.  1). 
But  the  Divine  choice  of  Saul,  which  upon 
his  obedience  would  that  day  have  been  con- 
firmed, was  now  annulled,  and  the  succession 
transferred  elsewhere.  Years  might  elapse 
before  the  first  earthly  step  was  taken  to 
appoint  his  successor  (ch.  xvi.  13) ;  nay,  had 
Saul  repented,  we  gather  from  ch.  xv.  26 
that  he  might  h^ve  been  forgiven :  for  God's 
threatenings,  like  his  promises,  are  con- 
ditionaL  There  is  no  fatalism  in  the  Bible, 
but  a  loving  discipline  for  man's  recovery. 
But  behind  it  stands  the  Divine  foreknow- 
ledge and  omnipotence  ;  and  so  to  the  pro- 
phetic view  Saul's  refusal  to  repent,  his 
repeated  disobedience,  and  the  succession  of 
David  were  all  revealed  as  accomplished 
facts. 

CONTINTTANOK    OP   THE  WAK    (verS.    16 — 

18).  Ver.  15. — Samuel  .  .  .  gat  him  up 
from  Qilgal  to  Glbeah  of  Benjamin.  Samuel 
would  pass  by  Gibeah  on  his  way  to  his  own 
home  at  Ramah  ;  but  he  seems  to  have  tarried 
there  to  encourage  the  people  ;  and  probably 
he  carried  instructions  from  Saul  to  Jonathan 
to  unite  his  forces  with  him,  as  we  next 
find  the  father  and  son  there  in  company. 
Even  if  this  be  not  so,  yet  friendly  relations 
must  have  continued  between  Saul  and 
Samuel,  as  the  latter  would  otherwise  cer- 
tainly not  have  chosen  Saul's  home  for  his 
halting  -  place ;  nor  would  he  go  thither 
without  seeing  Jonathan,  and  giving  him 
aid  and  counsel.  Saul  numbered.  See  on 
ch.  xi.  8.  After  summoning  the  whole 
nation  there  did  not  remain  wi-th  him  even 
as  many  as  a  third  of  his  selected  band. 
Ter.  16.— In  Gibeah  of  Senjamia.     TUi 


CH.  xni.  1—23.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


22S 


is  an  arbitrary  change  of  the  A.  Y.  (in 
company  with  the  Septuagint  and  Vulgate) 
for  Geha,  which  ,is  the  word  in  the  Hebrew 
text.  Cor  translators  no  doubt  considered 
that  as  Gibeah  of  Benjamin  occurs  in  the 
preyious  Terse,  this  must  be  the  same  place. 
But  our  greater  knowledge  of  the  geography 
of  the  Holy  Land  enables  us  to  say  that 
Geha  is  right ;  for,  as  we  have  seen,  it  was  at 
one  end  of  the  defile,  at  the  other  end  of 
which  was  Michmash  ;  and  here  alone  could 
the  small  army  of  Saul  have  any  chance  of 
defending  itself  against  the  vast  host  of  the 
Philistines.  However  much  we  mwr  blame 
Saul's  disobedience,  he  was  a  skilful  soldier 
and  a  brave  man,  and  his  going  with  his 
little  band  to  the  end  of  the  pass  to  make  a 
last  desperate  stand  was  an  act  worthy  of  a 
king. 

Vers.  17,18—  The  spoilers.  The  conduct  of 
the  Philistines  is  that  of  men  over-confident 
in  their  strength.  They  ought  to  have 
pounced  at  once  upon  Saul  in  the  plain  of 
Jordan,  where  their  cavalry  would  have  se- 
cured for  them  the  victory,  and  then,  follow- 
ing Samuel's  and  Saul's  route,  have  seized 
the  other  end  of  the  defile,  and  overpowered 
Jonathan.  But  they  despised  them  both, 
and  regarding  the  country  as  conquered, 
proceed  to  punish  it,  as  probably  they  had 
done  on  previous  occasions,  when  no  one  had 
dared  to  make  resistance.  Leaving  then  the 
main  army  to  guard  the  camp  at  Michmash, 
they  sent  out  light-armed  troops  to  plunder 
the  whole  land.  One  company  turned  unto 
the  way  ...  to  Ophrah,  unto  the  land  of 
ShuaL  This  company  went  northward,  to- 
wards Ophrah,  a  place  five  miles  east  of 
BetheL  The  land  of  Shual,  i.  e.  fox-land, 
was  probably  the  same  as  the  land  of  Shalim 
in  ch.  ix.  4.  Another  company,  &c  This 
went  eastward,  towards  Beth-horon,  for 
which  see  Josh.  x.  11.  The  third  went  to 
the  south-east,  towards  the  wilderness  of 
Judsea.  Zeboim,  and  all  the  places  men- 
tioned, are  in  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  which 
had  committed  the  offence  of  making  for 
itself  a  king.  To  the  south  Saul  held  the 
mountain  fastnesses  towards  Jerusalem. 

Desoriftiok  of  Israel's  extbeme  state 
OF  OPPRESSION  (vers.  19 — 23).  Ver.  19. — 
There  was  no  smith.  This  accounts  for  the 
contemptuous  disregard  of  Saul  by  the  Philis- 
tines. The  people  were  disarmed,  and  resist- 
ance impossible.  Apparently  this  policy  had 
been  long  followed ;  but  we  need  fuller  inform- 
ation of  what  had  happened  between  Samuel's 
victory  at  Mizpah  and  Saul's  appointment  as 
king,  to  enable  us  to  understand  the  evident 
weakness  of  Israel  at  this  time.  But  pro- 
bably this  descrh)tion  applies  fully  only  to 
the  districts  of  Benjamin,  near  the  Philis- 
tines. The  people  further  away  had  arms 
with  which  they  defeated  the  Ammonites, 


and  Saul  and  his  men  would  have  secured 
all  the  weapons  which  the  enemy  then  threw 
away.  But  evidently  no  manufacture  oi 
weapons  was  allowed,  and  no  one  as  far  aa 
possible  permitted  either  to  wear  or  possess 
arms. 

Ver.  20.— The  Israelites  went  down  to 
the  Philistines.  /.  e.  to  their  land.  This 
could  only  have  applied  to  the  districts  near 
the  Philistines,  unless  we  suppose  that  they  set 
up  forges  also  at  their  garrisons.  To  sharpen. 
The  verb  chiefly  refers  to  such  work  as  re- 
quired an  anvil  and  hammer.  As  regards 
the  implements,  not  only  do  the  versions 
disagree  in  their  renderings,  but  the  Sept- 
uagint has  a  very  curious  different  reading, 
to  the  effect  that  at  harvest-time  the  Isra^- 
ites  had  to  pay  the  Philistines  three  shekels 
■for  repairing  and  whetting  their  tools.  The 
share  is  more  probably  a  sickle.  The  coul- 
ter is  certainly  a  ploughshare,  as  rendered 
in  Isa.  ii.  4  ;  Joel  iiL  10.  Of  the  az  there 
is  no  doubt ;  and  the  mattock  is  a  heavy  hoe 
for  turning  up  the  ground,  as  spades  for  that 
purpose  are  scarcely  anywhere  used,  except  in 
our  own  country. 

Ver.  21.  —  A  file.  Margin,  a  file  with 
mouths.  The  word  only  occurs  here,  and  is 
translated  a  file  on  the  authority  of  Bashi. 
Almost  all  modern  commentators  agree  that 
it  means  bluntness,  and  that  this  verse  should 
be  joined  on  to  the  preceding,  and  the  two 
be  translated,  "  But  all  the  Israelites  went 
down  to  the  Philistines  to  sharpen  his  sickle, 
and  bis  ploughshare,  and  his  axe,  and  his 
mattock,  whenever  the  edges  of  the  mat- 
tocks, and  the  ploughshares,  and  the  forks, 
and  the  axes  were  blunt,  and  also  to  set  (so 
the  margin  rightly)  the  goads."  The  Israel- 
ites wore  thus  in  a  state  of  complete  depend- 
ence upon  the  Philistines,  even  for  carrying 
on  their  agriculture,  and  probably  retained 
only  the  hill  countir,  while  their  enemies 
were  masters  of  the  plains. 

Ver.  22. — There  was  neither  sword,  &c 
Armed  only  with  clubs  and  their  farming 
implements,  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  people 
were  afraid  of  fighting  the  Philistines,  who, 
as  we  gather  from  the  description  of  Goliath's 
armour,  were  clad  in  mail ;  nor  is  it  surpris- 
ing that  they  despised  and  neglected  Saul 
and  his  few  men,  whom  probably  they  re- 
garded as  an  unarmed  mob  of  rustics.  The 
Ammonites  probably  were  far  leas  efficiently 
armed  than  uie  Philistines,  who,  as  command- 
ing the  sea-coast,  could  import  weapons  from 
Greece. 

Ver.  23.— And  the  garrison,  &&  T?lieii 
the  Philistines  heard  that  Saul  with  his  six 
hundred  men  had  joined  the  small  forca 
already  at  Geba  with  Jonathan,  they  sent  a 
body  of  men  to  occupy  an  eminence  highet 
up  in  the  defile  which  lay  between  Cw» 
and  Michmash  (see  on  oh.  zUL  >).     Th« 


210 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMDBL. 


[OH.  XIII.  1—23 


purpose  of  this  was  to  keep  the  route  open, 
that  so,  when  they  pleased,  they  might  send 
a  larger  body  of  troops  np  the  defile  in  order 
to  attack  Saul.  It  would  also  keep  a  watch 
npou  hia  moTemeutSi   though   they  could 


hare  had  no  expectation  that  he  would  ven- 
ture to  attack  them.  It  was  this  garrison 
which  Jonathan  so  bravely  attacked,  and  by 
his  success  prepared  the  way  for  the  utt<"» 
defeat  of  the  enemy. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — ^7. — The  great  antagonism.  The  facts  are— 1.  Saul,  entering  on  the  mili- 
tary organisation  of  his  kingdom,  forms  a  select  force  under  the  command  of  himself 
and  Jonathan.  2.  The  defeat  of  the  Philistine  garrison  by  Jonathan  is  announced  to 
all  Israel.  3.  This  first  success  arouses  the  hostility  of  the  Philistines,  who  threaten 
Israel  with  overwhelming  numbers.  4.  The  effect  of  this  display  of  force  is  to  dis- 
hearten the  followers  of  Saul  who  waited  at  Gilgal.  The  presence  of  the  Philistines 
within  the  borders  of  Israel  was  inconsistent  with  the  privileges  originally  panted, 
and  was  a  perpetual  source  of  danger  and  annoyance.  One  of  the  ends  contemplated 
in  seeking  a  king  was  to  clear  the  promised  land  of  foes.  The  normal  state  of  the 
people  of  God  was  only  realised  when  the  land  was  the  exclusive  home  of  the  descend- 
ants of  Abraham.  The  reformation,  in  slow  yet  steady  progress,  created  the  ambi- 
tion and  effort  to  cast  out  the  enemy.  Saul's  movements,  therefore,  were  a  correct 
expression  of  national  feeling,  and  in  harmony  with  the  high  purpose  of  Israel's  exist- 
ence. In  this  attempt  to  subdue  the  great  enemy  of  the  kingdom  we  have  an  historic 
representation  of  the  great  conflict  which  is  ever  being  waged  between  the  spiritual 
kingdom  and  the  evils  which  largely  hold  possession  of  the  world  ;  and  in  the  vary- 
ing experience  of  Israel  we  see  shadows  of  truths  that  find  expression  in  Christian 
times. 

I.  The  EXISTENCE  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  CHRIST  INVOLVES  A  CONFLICT  WITH  A  WATCHFUL, 

POWERFUL  FOB  FOB  THE  POSSESSION  OF  THE  EARTH.  The  Separate  existence  of  Israel, 
combined  with  the  promise  made  to  Abraham  (Gen.  xv.  7),  and  the  spiritual  purpose 
to  be  wrought  out  for  the  glory  of  God,  rendered  war  with  the  Philistines  at  this 
time  inevitable.  The  existence  of  Christ's  kingdom  in  the  actual  separation  to  him- 
self of  those  who  form  his  Church,  combined  with  his  right  to  be  King  of  every  land 
and  heart,  and  the  prediction  that  he  shall  have  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for 
his  possession,  involves  ceaseless  strife  with  men,  spirits,  customs,  laws,  principles, 
purposes,  and  all  else,  visible  and  invisible,  that  is  incompatible  with  his  full  and 
blessed  sway.  Light  is  not  more  opposed  to  darkness,  life  to  death,  piuity  to 
corruption,  than  Christ  and  his  holy  rule  are  opposed  to  much  that  now  governs 
human  society. 

II.  The  EARLY  EFFORTS  OF  THE  FAITHFUL  ARE  ENSAMPLE8  FOR  PUTUBB  CONDUCT,  AND 
Tna  TRIUMPHS  WON  ARE  AN  EARNEST  OF  WHAT  MAT  BE  ON  A  LARGER  SCALE.      The  early 

efforts  of  S;uil  and  his  followers  were  characterised  by  faith  in  their  mission  as 
people  of  God,  loyalty  to  the  Divine  cause  they  represented,  courage  and  self-denial 
for  the  good  of  the  land,  iinity  of  aim  and  concentration  of  strength.  They  had  -a 
right  to  believe  in  success,  because  the  promised  land  was  for  Israel,  and  not  for  the 
idolatrous  Philistine.  The  victory  at  Geba  was  a  pledge  of  coming  events.  The 
war  against  sin  has  been  carried  on  ever  since  the  first  promise  cheered  the  heart  of 
our  fallen  ancestor.  But  we  may  regard  the  exertions  of  the  early  Christian  Church 
as  the  first  organised  effort,  under  the  laws  of  the  kingdom  of  O^t,  for  the  extirpa- 
tion of  all  sin  and  evil.  The  early  Christians  were  fine  examples  of  clear  and  deep 
conviction  that  they  were  the  servants  of  Christ,  and  had  a  Divine  mission  to  work 
out  in  an  antagonistic  world.  And  the  splendid  triumphs  won,  though,  compared 
with  the  area  of  sin,  as  small  as  .was  the  capture  of  Geba  relatively  to  the  whole  po»- 
sessions  of  the  Philistines,  are  an  indication  of  what  awaits  the  Church  if  only,  laying 
aside  internal  strifes,  worldly  policies,  self-indulgence,  she  will  but  brace  her  energies 
to  th*  perfecting  of  the  conquests  already  made.  Novelties  we  need  not ;  the  old 
weapcu,  the  old  spirit,  the  old  consecration,  the  old  singleness  of  aim,  will  pull  down 
■toongliold*  still. 

III.  The  AKTAOONISH  HAT  OBOW  IN  IKTENSITT  AS  A  CONBEQUBNOK  OF  BUOOUS.      Up 


OH.  XIII.  1— 23.J  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  gSl 

to  a  given  point  success  in  war  arouses  more  thoroughly  the  energies  of  the  defeated, 
The  acquisition  of  Geba  made  Israel  more  than  ever  detestable  to  the  Philistines, 
and  developed  their  resources.  The  same  effect  was  produced  by  the  triumphs  ol 
Pentecost  (Acts  iv,).  Subsequently  rulers  took  counsel,  being  aifraid  "whereunto 
this  would  grow  "  (Acts  v.  24),  unless  more  severe  measures  were  taken  to  suppress 
it  It  was  the  necessarily  aggressive  spirit  of  Christianity,  combined  with  its  grow- 
ing influence,  that  aroused  the  fierce,  persecuting  spirit  of  ancient  Bome.  The  more 
a  pure  Christianity  ia  urged  on  men,  the  more  do  evil  passions  arise  in  resistance. 
It  is  probable  that  there  are  seasons  when  the  "  principalities  and  powers "  of  the 
unseen  world  combine  in  all  fierceness  to  arouse  human  antagonism  to  the  gospel. 
The  bitter  hostility  and  outspoken  defiance  of  the  present  day  are  in  instructive 
coexistence  with  Christian  efforts  and  triumphs  surpassing  in  range  any  recorded  in 
history. 

IV.    HOFB  OF  riNAL  TIOTORT  DEFENDS  MOBK  OH  OUB  FAITH  IN  GOD  THAN  OH  THE 

WEAKNESS  OF  THE  FOE.  The  followers  of  Saul  became  disheartened  when  they  heard 
of  the  tremendous  efforts  of  the  Philistines.  As  Peter  on  the  sea  looked  away  from 
Christ  at  the  waves,  and  began  to  sink,  so  these  men  lost  hope  when,  forgetting  the 
"mighty  God  of  Jacob,"  they  fixed  attention  on  the  forces  of  the  enemy.  It  was 
not  a  question  of  few  or  many  Philistines,  but  of  faith  in  their  God.  The  faint- 
hearteSiesi  of_  Israel  finds  its  counterpart  in  modem  times.  The  vast  area  over 
which  evil  reigns,  the  desperate  vices  that  enchain  thousands,  the  extent  to  which 
society  is  impregnated  with  principles  alien  to  the  gospel,  the  utter  absorption  of 
millions  in  matters  purely  material,  the  fierce  assaults  made  on  the  supernatural 
character  of  Christianity,  and  the  growing  positiveness  and  intellectual  licence  of 
many  who  fight  under  the  stolen  banner  of  "  science " — these  signs  of  power  are 
brooded  over,  and  the  heart  sinks  for  fear.  This  faint-heartedness  is  as  irraiumal 
cuitii  tinful.  Is  Christ  a  living  Saviour  ?  Is  he  the  Lord  of  all  f  It  is  a  simple 
question  otfact.  If  not,  then  our  Christianity  is  a  delusion ;  we  are  without  hope  in 
the  world,  and  life  is  an  insoluble,  awful,  heart-piercing  enigma.  But  ^  he  is,  then 
who  are  men,  or  what  are  their  resources  ?  They  are  but  creatures  of  a  day,  and 
their  strength  perishes.  He  mtcst  reign.  On  his  own  head  his  crown  shall  flourish. 
General  lessotu: — 1.  Every  Christian  should  inquire  how  far  he,  in  loyalty  to 
Christ  and  full  conviction  of  his  triumph,  is  doing  his  part  in  the  common  work  of 
the  Church.  2.  It  is  a  matter  of  inquiry  how  far  we  may  be  impeding  the  progress 
of  Christianity  by  compromising  with  the  world  in  hope  of  lessening  antagonism. 
h.  It  should  guide  our  conduct  to  remember  that  the  severest  holiness  of  life,  blended 
with  the  tenderest  love,  has  ever  accomplished  the  most  enduring  spiritual  work. 
4.  It  will  tend  to  nourish  faith  in  the  sufficiency  of  God  if  we,  by  thought  and 
prayerfulness,  habituate  ourselves  to  actual  fellowship  with  him. 

Vers.  8 — 18. — Eepresentative  temptoMons.  The  facts  ar^r-l.  Saul,  waiting  at 
Gilgal  for  Samuel,  gives  orders  for  the  observance  of  sacrificial  worship.  2.  Towards 
the  close  of  the  ceremony,  and  before  the  full  time  was  expired,  Samuel  makes  his 
appearance.  3.  In  reply  to  Samuel's  remonstrance,  Saul  assigns  the  reasons  for  his 
conduct — ^the  discouragement  of  the  people,  the  non-arrival  of  Samuel,  and  the 
threatening  attitude  of  the  foe.  4.  Samuel  charges  Saul  with  having  failed  to  keep 
the  commandment  of  God,  and  declares  that  his  family  shall  not  succeed  to  the 
throne.  6.  Samuel  retires  to  Gibeah,  whither  Saul  and  his  son  also  go  with  their 
followers.  Whether  the  appointment  to  meet  at  Gilgal  was  that  mentioned  in  ch.  x. 
8,  or  a  subsequent  arrangement,  does  not  affect  the  fact  that,  in  view  of  measures  to 
be  token  conjointly,  Saul  had  been  distinctly  commanded  hy  God,  through  the 
prophet,  to  wait  seven  days  till  Samuel  came.  Evidently  it  was  a  distinct  under- 
standing that  in  the  coming  effort  to  rid  the  land  of  the  Philistines  the  spiritual 
power,  represented  by  the  prophet  of  God,  was  to  be  prominent.  Thus  would  the 
"  manner  of  the  kingdom  "  (ch.  x.  25)  be  recognised,  and  Israel's  ruler,  though  a  king, 
would  still  be  the  agent  for  working  out  a  spiritual  destiny.  It  was  of  immense 
importance  that,  having  a  king  like  unto  other  nations,  Israel  and  the  monarch  should 
stiU  be  made  to  feel  that,  not  the  form  of  government,  but  the  blessing  of  God 
granted  in  answer  to  prayer,  and  on  due  recognition  of  the  spiritual  institutions,  was 


132  THE  FifiST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oH.  xm.  1—28. 

the  moat  important  thing.  And  the  command  to  wait  for  the  spiritual  guide  and 
ruler  was  eminently  fitted  to  impress  Saul  and  the  people  with  the  undiminished 
authority  and  value  of  the  spiritual  head.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  end  of  the 
seven  days  had  come,  only  that  it  was  nigh.  Even  had  it  come,  the  Author  of  the 
command  was  responsible  for  consequences,  not  Saul.  The  first  duty  of  a  subject  is 
to  obey  law.  Saul  had  no  right  to  break  the  commandment  of  his  King.  The 
assumption  of  the  control  of  spiritual  functions  violated  a  great  principle  in  the  eyes 
of  the  people.  It  would  mean,  the  prophet  of  God  can  be  dispensed  with ;  the  king 
can  invent  ways  other  than  God's  of  meeting  pressing  dangers  ;  rigid  obedience  to 
God's  command  is  not  expedient  at  all  times ;  the  religious  arrangements  in  the 
recent  settlement  of  the  kingdom,  impeding  as  they  do  the  military  movements,  are 
defective  ;  all  must,  by  pressure  of  events,  come  into  the  monarch's  hands.  d?hu8 
the  very  essence  of  the  constitution,  as  approved  by  God  and  explained  in  act  and 
word  by  Samuel  (ch.  ix.  26,  27 ;  x.  1,  8,  26 ;  xii.  13,  14),  was  set  aside. 

I.  Life  inevitably  brings  with  it  temptations  to  sacrifice  clear  duty  to 
SINFUL  EXPEDIENCY.  The  difficulties  surrounding  Saul  seemed  to  rise  from  the  natural 
course  of  events.  The  defection  of  many  of  his  followers  was  as  readily  accounted 
for,  by  the  overwhelming  force  of  the  enemy  and  the  inactivity  enforced  by  the 
absence  of  Samuel,  as  it  was,  from  a  heathen  point  of  view,  pregnant  with  disaster. 
The  military  power  of  the  nation,  in  being  thus  subject  to  spiritual  arrangements, 
was  less  an  arm  of  strength  than  a  monarch  might  desire.  The  first  operation  of 
the  subordination  of  man  s  skill  and  force  to  the  religious  element  of  the  national  life 
was  by  no  means  promising.  Was  it  not  expedient  to  act  without  the  spiritual 
authority  as  at  present  constituted  ?  Now  this  temptation  was  no  "strange  thing." 
It  was  just  an  early  and  sharply-defined  form  of  what  Saul  would  be  liable  to  all  his 
days ;  for  events  and  his  own  imperfect  nature  would  constantly  conspire  to  raise 
the  question  as  to  whether  he  would  not  better  hold  his  own  in  war  if  he  were  not 
troubled  by  more-military  considerations.  The  spiritual  character  of  the  kingdom 
would  continually  test  his  loyalty  to  God.  His  case  was  not  singular.  1.  Moral 
life  en  earth  involves  trial.  Created  moral  existence  is  not  possible  apart  from 
liability  to  the  rival  claims  of  duty  to  God  and  regard  for  self,  in  some  form  sup- 
posed to  be  more  or  less  expedient.  Temptation  grows  out  of  the  conditions  under 
which  we  live.  2.  Every  special  course  of  life  is  attended  with  temptations  peculiar 
to  its  nature.  Saul  as  king  would  feel  the  pressure  of  what,  as  a  man  Uving  in 
obscurity,  he  would  not  have  known.  Israel  chosen  of  God  to  traverse  the  desert 
and  attain  to  freedom  and  rest  in  Canaan  were  open  to  trials  of  faith  which,  as 
bondmen  in  Egypt,  would  not  have  come  to  them.  Our  Saviour  himself  endured 
temptations  in  virtue  of  his  unique  position  as  Founder  of  a  spiritual  kingdom. 

II.  It  is  A  merciful  PROVIDENCE  WHEN  REPRESENTATIVE  TEMPTATIONS  COMING 
EARLY   IN  life's  CAREER  ARE  UNDER  CIRCUMSTANCES  MOST  FAVOURABLE  TO  RESISTANCE. 

The  circumstances  of  a  temptation  tell  wonderfully  in  the  act  of  resisting.  Should 
it  find  the  mind  predisposed  by  dallying  with  evil,  or  should  it  come  in  the  absence 
of  clear  and  recent  indications  of  duty,  with  a  sudden  impulse,  or  insinuating  itself 
into  intricate  considerations  and  engagements,  the  chances  of  its  success  would  be 
increased  as  compared  with  opposite  conditions.  This  temptation  to  sin  came  on 
Saul  when  he  was  free  from  the  entanglements  of  a  court  and  domestic  politics ;  it 
was  in  sharp  contrast  unth  a  most  explicit  command;  it  was  counter  to  the  recent- 
instance  of  God's  help  in  presence  of  a  great  danger  (ch.  xi.  4 — 14) ;  and  it  came 
when  his  moral  sense  was  at  its  best.  Inasmuch  as  during  coming  years  Saul  would 
inevitably  feel  the  force  of  temptations  to  assert  his  own  methods  and  will  as  being 
apparently  better  than  those  indicated  by  the  spiritual  requirements  of  the  kingdom, 
it  was  really  a  mercy  that  this  representative  temptation  came  when  it  did,  and  in  a 
form  most  easy  to  resist.  If  resisted,  a  principle  would  assume  an  incipient  form  of 
habit.  The  moral  strength  of  the  man  would  be  developed  by  exercise.  Success 
over  the  foe,  consequent  on  the  first  triumph  of  faith  in  God  and  suhmission  to  hi* 
spiritual^  order,  would  be  a  memorial  for  future  inspiration.  We  have  here  a  clue  to 
the  solution  of  other  trials.  It  is  too  often  imagined  that  the  trial  of  Adam,  of  the 
Israelites  at  the  Red  Sea,  of  Christ  in  the  desert,  and  of  the  apostles  during  the  dark 
days  of  the  crucifixion  and  death,  were  arbitrary,  severe,  and,  at  least,  without  a  clear 


ca.  xuh  1—28.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  233 

trace  of  kindness.  But  consider — 1 .  Life  in  each  case  was  liable  to  mani/  temptations 
It  was  inseparable  from  Adam's  existence  as  a  man  on  earth,  from  Israel's  march  ta 
and  occupation  of  Canaan,  from  our  Saviour's  position  among  men  and  the  evil  spirits 
who  would  act  upon  his  soul,  and  from  the  apostolic  career  in  face  of  Jewish  and 
Gentile  antagonism,  that  temptation  again  and  again,  in  forms  peculiar  to  each,  would 
arise.  So,  also,  with  every  man's  life.  2.  In  each  case  the  conditions  for  resisting 
representative  temptation  of  what  was  coming  were  most  favourable  at  the  entrance  on 
the  career.  Man  in  Eden  was  pure,  free  from  bad  impulse,  independent  of  entangle- 
ments and  want,  familiar  with  the  emphatic  and  recent  command.  Israel  at  the  Red 
Sea  had  just  seen  marvellous  and  repeated  tokens  of  the  sufficiency  of  God  to  shelter 
them  and  ward  ofE  danger,  and  the  command  to  go  forward  to  the  sea  was  explicit. 
Our  Saviour  when  tempted  of  the  devil  was  fresh  from  the  baptism  of  the  Holy 
Spirit,  as  yet  not  worn  down  by  ingratitude  and  scorn,  filled  with  the  call  to  enter  on 
his  work  in  founding  a  spiritual  kingdom.  So,  likewise,  when  a  monarch,  or  pastor, 
or  Church,  or  any  individual  first  enters  on  an  ofSce  or  work,  there  is  a  freedom  from 
the  entanglements  which  spring  from  mixed  relationships,  an  iclat  which  inspires 
hope,  a  sense  of  responsibility  which  makes  the  spirit  sober  and  watchful,  and  a  fame 
to  win  which  appeals  to  the  noblest  sentiments  of  duty  and  honour.  3.  Resistance 
in  each  case  would  impart  a  moral  force  which  would  he  of  great  advantage  in  all 
subsequent  conflicts.  Had  Adam  said  a  final  "  nay  "  to  the  tempter,  his  moral  con-  ■ 
quest  over  all  other  temptations  would  have  been  comparatively  insured.  Imperfect 
as  Israel  were  in  the  desert,  their  moral  power  was  greatly  strengthened  both  by  the 
act  of  faith  at  the  Red  Sea  and  the  consequent  victory  over  Pharaoh.  As  One  who 
had  conquered  in  the  desert,  our  Lord  would  doubtless  confront  the  later  temptations 
to  exchange  poverty  and  want  and  spiritual  rulership  for  the  pomp  and  outward  splen- 
dour of  an  earthly  kingdom  with  a  more  equable  spirit.  Aad  the  endurance  of  the 
apostles  during  those  dark  and  harrowing  hours  prior  to  the  resurrection  would  only 
render  their  faith  a  mightier  power  wherewith  to  face  the  persecution  of  men  and  the 
seeming  tardiness  of  the  world's  subjugation  to  Christ.  So,  likewise,  those  who  are 
brought  by  Providence  to  bear  temptation  under  favourable  conditions  when  entering 
on  a  career  actually  receive  a  great  mercy.  They  are  enabled  thereby,  if  they  will, 
to  gain  power  for  life  and  to  qualify  for  higher  service.  TMs  will  find  illustration 
also  with  the  young.  Their  early  trials,  under  good  conditions,  make  them  more 
competent  to  cope  with  all  that  is  sure  to  follow. 

III.  Sin  committed  ondeb  conditions  favourable  to  the  resistance  of  tempt- 
ation BECOMES  THEREBY  AGGRAVATED  IN  CHARACTER.      Savl's  sin  was  great.      It  Was 

marked  by  deliberation  and  yet  by  extreme  folly.  He  "  forced  himself."  The  com- 
mand was  so  clear,  the  risks  of  disobedience  so  palpable,  that  only  a  perverse 
ingenuity  could  persuade  him  to  disobey.  The  effort  to  silence  the  conscience  always 
aggravates  a  crime.  Prompt,  unquestioning  obedience  is  due  to  clear  commands. 
Man  is  not  responsible  for  anything  but  duty.  The  folly  was  conspicuous.  To  break 
a  clear  command  in  order  to  offer  an  act  of  worship  is  the  perfection  of  foolishness. 
Only  a  "  lying  spirit "  could  induce  a  man  to  honour  God  by  dishonouring  him.  The 
blind  reasoning  of  the  heart  when  once  clear  duty  is  trifled  with  is  extraordinary.  It 
would  be  a  wonderful  revelation  of  perverted  intellect  if  we  could  read  the  processes 
of  thought  by  which  men  are  led  to  force  themselves  to  deliberate  acts  of  sin. 

IV.  The  PUNISHMENT  FOLLOWING  ON  SIN  INCLUDES  THE  LOSS  OF  THAT   FOR  WHICH 

THE  SIN  WAS  COMMITTED.  Two  consequences  ensued  on  Samuel's  exposure  of  Saul's 
sin — the  forfeiture  of  his  family's  permanent  possession  of  the  throne  of  Israel,  and 
the  withholding  of  immediate  interposition  on  behalf  of  the  nation.  Now  it  is 
obvious  that  Saul  had  yielded  to  the  temptation  in  hope  thereby  of  inspiring  his  fol- 
lowers to  action,  and  of  insuring  the  stability  of  his  throne  for  himself  and  family 
in  the  subjugation  of  his  foes.  There  was  an  eminent  propriety  in  Saul's  sin  being 
visited  by  a  loss  of  the  kingdom  to  his  family.  He  was  the  people's  king — chosen 
because  they  desired  a  monarch.  Therefore  it  was  in  harmony  with  the  usual  course 
of  Providence  that,  though  he  sinned,  he  should  be  allowed  to  rale,  and  thus  by  hig 
infirmities  be  the  rod  for  their  chastisement  Although  representing  in  his  virtue* 
and  failings  the  people  who  demanded  a  king,  he  was  afforded  by  the  recent  trial  • 
g;ood  opportunity  of  oonfomung  to  the  higher  spiritual  order,  and  of  thu  boooning 


234  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [cH.  xin.  1—23. 

by  degrees  educated  into  the  loftier  spiritual  aims  of  the  national  life.  Therefore, 
failing  to  rise  to  the  level  essential  to  the  Messianic  conception  of  the  kingdom,  he 
proved  the  moral  unfitness  of  his  principles  and  methods  for  transmittal  to  successors. 
Have  we  not  here  a  truth  of  constant  recurrence  t  Sin  is  committed  to  realise  a 
purpose,  and  the  purpose  is  not  realised,  but  is  missed  by  the  very  act  of  sin.  Our 
first  parents  sought  the  rest  of  satisfaction  in  taking  the  forbidden  fruit ;  but  what- 
ever rest  they  had  before  was  lost  in  the  act  of  disobedience,  as  also  the  kind  of  rest 
sought  by  the  deed.  The  unhappy  man  who,  under  pressure  of  circumstances  as  trying 
to  him  as  the  hosts  of  Pliilistia  were  to  Saul,  forces  himself  to  commit  a  fraud  in 
order  to  insure  relief  and  final  success  in  his  enterprise,  learns  to  his  cost,  when  once 
the  act  is  committed,  that  mental  relief  is  further  ofE  than  ever,  and  a  remoi-seless 
course  of  events  ultimately  brings  on  ruin  to  the  enterprise.  "  He  that  seebeth  his 
life  shall  lose  it." 

General  lessons : — 1.  When  pursuing  a  path  of  duty,  impatience  with  God's  ways 
should  be  strictly  suppressed,  or  it  will  lay  us  open  to  the  pressure  of  strong  tempta- 
tions. 2.  In  the  high  service  of  God  we  may  be  placed  in  circumstances  of  extreme 
peril,  but  these  should  never  shake  confidence  in  his  all-sufficiency.  3.  Sometimes 
the  loftiest  path  of  duty  is  "  to  be  still,"  and  pray  for  grace  "  to  enter  not  into  tempt- 
ation." 4.  The  Christian  is  warranted,  by  the  fact  of  the  existence  of  "the  kingdom," 
as  also  by  the  experiences  of  the  past,  to  believe  that  above  all  the  forces  that  threaten 
the  Church  there  is  a  Power  that  sometimes  restrains  its  manifestation  for  purposes 
of  discipline.  5.  It  is  a  profitable  study  for  the  Church  to  consider  how  far  prayer 
is  not  effectual  in  consequence  of  the  constant  breach  of  plain  commands.  6.  It  is 
the  sign  of  a  guilty  conscience,  and  of  the  hardening  effect  of  even  one  sin,  that 
plausible  reasons  are  ready  at  hand  to  justify  conduct.  7.  If  we  prove  ourselves 
unfit  for  service  by  our  lack  of  spirituality,  Providence  will  sooner  or  later  remove 
us  for  others  more  spiritual. 

Vers.  17 — 23. — The  ramifications  of  evil.  The  facts  are^l.  In  the  absence. of 
Divine  interposition,  and  consequent  on  Saul's  inability  to  resist  advance,  the  Philis- 
tines develop  their  forces  and  plunder  certain  districts  of  country.  2.  As  a  matter 
of  policy  on  their  part,  and  as  one  result  of  Saul's  transgression,  the  Philistines 
deprive  the  people  of  the  ordinary  means  of  conducting  warfare.  8.  This  state  of 
thmgs  necessitates  Saul's  protracted  inactivity,  and  inflicts  considerable  inconveni- 
ence on  the  people  with  respect  to  their  daily  pursuits  in  agriculture.  Although  we 
cannot  say  precisely  what  course  events  would  have  taken  had  Saul,  in  loyalty  to 
God,  awaited  the  arrival  of  Samuel  (vers.  8 — 10),  yet  the  whole  history  of  Israel 
and  the  recent  promises  made  through  Samuel  (ch.  xii.  20 — 25)  lead  to  the  belief 
that,  as  when  Jabesh-Gilead  was  in  danger  help  came  from  God  (ch.  xi.  6),  so  now 
the  Philistines  would  have  been  scattered  by  a  Power  more  than  human.  'The  facts 
given  in  this  paragraph  appear  to  be  designed  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  narrative 
of  Jonathan's  heroism  in  the  following  chapter  ;  at  the  same  time  they  illustrate,  in 
themselves,  some  truths  of  wider  range  than  Israel's  political  and  social  condition. 
We  have  here  an  instance  of — 

I.  Thb  depressing  influence  of  a  sense  of  guilt  on  the  conduct  op  affairs. 
The  military  inactivity  and  general  helplessness  of  Saul  after  Samuel's  interview 
with  him  (vers.  11 — 14)  are  in  striking  contrast  with  his  energy  at  other  times,  and  are 
not  altogether  to  he  ascribed  to  the  absence  of  special  Divine  interposition.  The 
explanation  is  to  be  sought  in  his  personal  conviction  of  sin.  There  was  no  joy,  no 
hope,  no  spring  in  his  soul,  no  eagerness  for  a  close  conflict  with  the  foe ;  and  that, 
too,  because  a  sense  of  sin  brought  moral  paralysis  upon  his  entire  nature.  The 
sense  of  guilt  is  not  always  present  in  men,  but  when  it  is  brought  home  to  a  m/m  it 
exercises  a  depressing  influence  on  his  entire  life,  and  seriously  affects  the  transaction 
of  affairs.  Conscience,  when  guilty,  not  only  "  makes  cowards  of  us  all,"  but  it  robs 
life  of  brightness,  drains  the  springs  of  hope,  fetters  the  operation  of  the  faculties, 
and  impairs  the  sum  total  of  energy.  No  man's  life  is  made  the  most  of  as  long  as 
some  unrepented  and  unforgiven  sin  haunts  his  spirit.  This  is  the  reverse  side  of 
another  fact,  namely,  that  the  soul  possessed  of  the  peace  and  joy  of  the  reconciled 


oa.  XIII.  1—23.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  SSI 

Ib  in  a  condition  to  render  its  best  service  to  the  world,  and  to  attain  to  the  most 
perfect  development  of  its  powers.  The  wisdom  of  every  one  oppressed  with  a 
sense  of  guilt  is  to  humble  himself  before  God,  and  seek  in  Christ  forgiveness  and 
power  for  a  truer  life  in  future. 

II.  TiiR  MANIFOLD  RAMIFICATIONS  OF  EVIL.  The  sin  of  Saul  did  not  begin  and 
end  with  liimself.  His  failure  in  duty  affected  the  general  interests  of  his  kingdom. 
Even  the  brief  narrative  before  us  enables  us  to  see  how  directly  and  indirectly  the 
following  circumstances  were  connected  with  his  disobedience — namely,  the  inability 
of  Israel  to  assail  the  threatening  host ;  the  depredations  of  the  three  divisions  of 
the  Philistine  army ;  the  private  and  social  misery  over  a  considerable  area  insepar- 
able from  the  raids  of  the  invader ;  the  cutting  off  of  the  ordinary  means  for  waging 
successful  war;  the  impediments  to  the  pursuits  of  trade  and  agriculture;  the 
general  humiliation  and  dread  brought  on  the  »o»»-combatants  of  the  land ;  and  the 
withdrawal  for  a  while  of  the  counsels  and  encouragements  of  the  prophet  of  God. 
The  truth  thus  exemplified  in  the  instance  of  a  monarch's  sin  findi  expresiwn  also 
in  every  dn,  and  especially  in  sins  of  persons  in  responsible  positions.  No  sin  can 
end  in  the  act  or  in  the  person  of  the  sinner.  It  impairs  the  tone  and  force  of  the 
entire  man ;  it  adds  another  item  to  the  germs  of  future  sorrow  and  shame ;  it 
further  disqualifies  for  conferring  on  the  world  spiritual  good ;  it  gives  a  stronger 
taint  of  evil  to  the  current  of  thought  and  feeling  which  flows  out  from  the  inner 
man  to  the  world.  Sin  in  us  is  as  a  wave  of  influence  that  spreads  out,  by  laws  of 
association  and  impulse,  over  the  whole  area  of  the  spirit,  and  modifies  all  conduct 
for  the  worse.  Especially  is  this  true  of  persons  in  office  and  of  parents.  A 
monarch's  ofBcial  acts  reach  all  classes.  A  parent's  sin  ramifies  through  the  home — 
inducing,  it  may  be,  loss  of  peace,  certainly  loss  of  hallowed  influence  over  children, 
and  possibly  ruin  to  health  in  offspring. 

III.  Dnfaithfulnbss  in  the  service  of  God  deprives  ub  of  a  most  important 

MBANB  OF  ACCOMPLISHING  OUR  MISSION  AS  CHRISTIANS  IN  THE  WORLD.     The  Scarcity 

of  smiths  and  weapons  of  war  is  evidently  associated  by  the  historian  with  the  dis- 
obedience of  Saul.  •  It  is  possible  for  Christian  men  engaged  in  the  endeavour  to 
maintain  and  extend  the  kingdom  of  Christ  to  be  brought  into  an  analogous  condi- 
tion as  a  consequence  of  their  manifest  unfaithfulness.  In  our  conflict  with  the 
world  it  is  of  supreme  importance  that  we  make  use  of  the  ever  available  and  potent 
instrument — influence  of  character.  With  this  as  a  weapon  we  can  accomplish  much, 
by  the  blessing  of  God.  If  this  be  lost,  if  by  our  manifest  inconsistencies  before  the 
world  we  virtually  place  this  instrument  of  war  at  the  feet  of  the  men  whom  we 
seek  to  bring  to  Christ,  then  we  shall  be  as  powerless  with  them  as  was  Saul  and  his 
people  when  the  Philistines  had  control  of  their  smiths  and  weapons  of  war. 

General  lessons : — 1.  The  general  spiritual  power  of  our  Hf e  will  be  in  proportion 
as  we  keep  pure,  or,  in  case  of  falling  into  sin,  at  once  humble  ourselves  before  God 
and  seek  for  pardon  and  a  right  spirit  (Ps.  li.  6 — 13).  2.  It  is  an  encouragement  to 
holiness  and  obedience  to  know  that  the  ramifications  of  righteousness  may  become 
as  wide  as  are  those  of  sin.  3.  It  is  a  mercy  to  know  that,  though  the  enemy  may 
sometimes  triumph  over  the  servants  of  Christ  because  of  their  weakness  of  character, 
yet  the  eternal  Source  of  strength  is  in  reserve,  and  will  manifest  himselL 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 7.  (Michmash,  Gibeah,  Geba,  Gilgal.) — The  trumpet  sounded.  "And 
Saul  blew  the  trumpet  throughout  all  the  land,  saying,  Let  the  Hebrews  hear." 
1.  The  great  conflict  between  good  and  evil  which  has  been  waged  from  the  first 
(Gen.  iii.  15)  has  been  concentrated  in  every  age  on  some  particular  issue.  At  this 
time  it  was  whether  Israel  and  the  worship  of  the  true  God  or  the  Philistines  and 
the  worship  of  idols  should  prevail.  It  was  thus  of  the  highest  importance  in 
relation  to  the  kingdom  of  God  upon  earth.  2.  The  Philistines  were  old  enemies 
and  powerful  oppressors  (Judges  iii.  3 ;  x.  7 ;  xiii.  1 ;  1  Sam.  vii.  2).  During  th« 
administration  of  Samuel  they  were  held  in  check  (oh.  vii.  13),  although  they 
appear  to  h»ve  h»<1  military  posts  or  garrisons  in  the  land  (ch.  x.  5 ;  ver.  3),  and  tht 


SM  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xiu.  1—28. 

overthrow  of  one  of  these  by  Jonathan  (at  Geba,  four  miles  north  of  Giheah,  and 
opposite  Michmash)  gave  the  signal  for  renewed  conflict.  Having  evacuated 
Michmash,  where  he  had  stationed  himself  with  an  army  of  2000,  Saul  sum- 
moned all  the  men  of  Israel  to  gather  to  him  at  Gilgal ;  but  the  advancing  hosts 
of  the  enemy  filled  the  country  with  terror,  so  that  he  was  left  with  only  600 
followers,  and  found  it  necessary,  after  his  interview  with  Samuel,  to-  join  his  son 
Jonathan  at  Gibeah  (Geba)  (vers.  2, 16 ;  ch.  xiv.  2).  Meanwhile  the  enemy  occupied 
Michmash,  whence  three  companies  of  spoilers  issued,  plundering  the  plains  and 
valleys.  A  second  and  greater  exploit  of  Jonathan,  however,  drove  them  out  of 
Michmash,  and  it  was  followed  by  a  general  engagement,  in  which  large  numbers  of 
them  were  slain,  and  the  rest  "went  to  their  own  place"  (ch.  xiv.  23,  31,  46). 
3.  The  conflict  to  which  Israel  was  summoned  represents  that  to  which  Christians 
are  called.  It  is  a  conflict  with  physical  and  moral  evil,  with  the  world,  the  flesh, 
and  the  devil  (John  xv.  19 ;  2  Cor.  x.  4 ;  Ephes.  vi.  12  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  11 ;  2  Pet.  v.  8 ; 
1  John  ii.  16),  and  with  men  only  in  so  far  as  they  are  ruled  by  sin,  and  in  order  to 
their  salvation ;  a  conflict  which  is  good  ("  the  good  fight  of  faith  " — 1  Tim.  vi.  12) 
and  necessary,  and  afEords  full  scope  for  whatever  warlike  instincts  and  energies  are 
possessed.    What  does  the  sound  of  the  trumpet  signify?  (1  Cor.  xiv.  8). 

I.  A  BLOW  HAS  BEEN  STHUCK  AGAINST  THE  FOE.  The  greatest  blow  that  was  ever 
inflicted  upon  the  "  power  of  darkness  "  was  struck  by  "  the  Captain  of  our  salvation  " 
in  his  life  and  death  and  glorious  resurrection  (John  xii.  31 ;  xvi.  33 ;  1  John  iii,  8)  ; 
and  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  his  victory  his  followers  carry  on  the  conflict  (Matt. 
X.  34).  At  times  there  seems  to  be  something  like  a  truce,  but  it  never  lasts  long ; 
and  when  a  fresh  blow  is  struck  by  "  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ'  it — 1.  Reveals 
the  essential  difference  between  the  spirit  that  is  in  "  the  Israel  of  God  "  and  "  the 
ipirit  that  is  in  the  world."  2.  Intensifies  their  antagonism  (ver.  4).  3.  Commits 
them  to  more  definite  and  decisive  action.  And  to  this  end  the  fact  should  be  pro- 
claimed. "  When  Saul  the  king  of  the  Hebrews  was  informed  of  this  (ver.  3),  he 
went  down  to  the  city  of  Gilgal,  and  made  proclamation  of  it  over  all  "the  country, 
summoning  them  to  freedom  "  (Josephus). 

II.  The  ENEMY  IS  MUSTERING  HIS  FOKCES  (ver.  5),  which  are — 1.  Exceedingly 
numerous,  "  as  the  sand  which  is  on  the  sea-shore."  2.  Skilful,  crafty,  and  deceit- 
ful (2  Cor.  xi.  14).  3.  Yery  powerful.  There  is  at  the  present  day  an  extraordinary 
combination  of  anti-christian  agencies  (2  Tim.  iii.  1 — 9 ;  Rev.  xiii.  11 — 18),  threaten- 
ing Christian  faith  and  practice,  which  might  well  fill  us  with  fear,  did  we  not  believe 
that  "they  that  be  with  us  are  more  than  they  that  be  with  them"  (2  Kings  vi.  16). 
"  The  spirits  of  the  unseen  world  seem  to  be  approaching  us.  Times  of  trouble  there 
have  been  before ;  but  such  a  time,  in  which  everything,  everywhere,  tends  in  one 
direction  to  one  mighty  struggle  of  one  sort — of  faith  with  infidelity,  lawlessness 
with  rule,  Christ  with  antichrist — there  seems  never  to  have  been  till  now"  (Pusey). 

III.  The  faithful  must  rally  around  their  leader.  The  gathering  forces  of 
the  enemy  should  constrain  us  to  closer  union,  and  the  proper  centre  of  union  is  he 
of  whom  the  greatest  kings  and  heroes  were  feeble  types  and  shadows.  1.  He  has 
been  Divinely  am)ointed,  and  claims  our  obedience  and  co-operation.  2.  He  is  fully 
qualified  as  "  a  Leader  and  Commander  of  the  people."  8.  He  is  the  only  hope  of 
safety  and  success.    "God  is  with  him"  (ch.  x.  7). 

"  AVith  force  of  arras  we  nothing  can, 
Full  soon  were  we  down-ridden, 
But  for  us  fights  the  proper  man, 
Whom  God  himself  hath  bidden. 
Ask  ye,  Who  is  this  same ! 
Christ  Jesus  is  his  name ; 

The  Lord  Sabaoth's  Son  ; 
He,  and  no  other  one, 
Shall  conquer  in  the  battle  "  (Luther). 

IV.  The  success  already  achieved  gives  assubanob  op  victory  (ch.  xi.  11 ; 
rer.  3).     1.  What  triumphs  has  he  gained  in  former  days  I     2.  They  are  an  earnest 


OH.  Mil.  1—23.]  THE  FIUST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  237 

of  "  still  greater  things  than  these."  3.  And  they  should  inspire  us  with  the  con- 
fidence and  courage  which  are  needful  to  participation  in  his  victory  and  glory 
(Rev.  xvii.  14 ;  xix.  11).  "This  is  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world,  even  our 
faith."— D. 

Vers.  8 — 15.  (GiLOAt.) — The  first  wrong  step.  All  men  are  subjected  in  life  to 
various  tests  which  prove  "what  spirit  they  are  of."  These  tests  may  appear 
insignificant  in  themselves  (like  that  which  was  applied  to  Adam  and  Eve — Gen. 
ii.  17),  but  they  involve  important  principles,  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are 
endured  is  followed  by  serious  consequences.  The  position  of  Saul  necessitated  a 
trial  of  his  fidelity  to  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  theocratic  kingdom,  viz., 
unconditional  obedience  on  the  part  of  the  king  to  the  will  of  God  as  declared  by  his 
prophets ,_  He  was  directed  (1)  to  wait  for  Samuel  seven  days,  and  (2)  to  attempt 
nothing  till  he  came  (ch.  x.  8).  He  omitted  the  former  and  did  the  latter,  and  thus 
took  hia  first  wrong  step — a  step  never  retraced,  and  leading  to  a  course  which  ended 
on  the  fatal  field  of  Gilboa.     Observe — 

I.  Its  apparent  expediency.  His  conscience  told  him  that  it  was  not  right,  as 
he  virtually  acknowledged  in  the  defence  he  offered  for  his  conduct  (vers.  11,  H). 
Yet  he  persuaded  himself  (as  others  are  accustomed  to  do)  that  it  was  venial, 
expedient,  and  even  necessary,  because  of — 1.  The  pressure  of  worldly  circumstances. 
"  Because  I  saw  that  the  people  were  scattered  from  me,"  &c.  Resources  diminish, 
and  danger  is  imminent.  When  they  are  considered  in  themselves  alone,  anxiety  and 
fear  increase,  and  temptation  becomes  strong  to  make  use  of  any  means  of  relief 
that  may  be  presented.  How  often  are  men  tempted  by  the  plea  of  necessity  to 
disobey  the  voice  of  conscience  I  The  tempter  says,  "  It  is  better  to  steal  than  starve, 
better  to  sin  than  perish."  2.  The  disappointmmt  of  religious  expectations.  "And 
that  thou  camest  not  at  the  appointed  time."  "  Help  has  been  long  waited  for,  but  it 
comes  not ;  nor  is  it  likely,  now  that  the  seventh  day  is  drawing  to  a  close,  that  it 
will  come  at  all.  The  promise  has  not  been  fulfilled.  The  time  for  action  has 
arrived,  and  the  long  delay  indicates  that  the  most  expedient  course  must  be  taken. 
Nothing  else  remains.  If  there  be  any  blame,  it  cannot  be  attributed  to  one  who  has 
waited  so  long,  has  been  left  in  such  extremity,  and  acts  for  the  best."  3.  The 
efitcacy  of  ceremonial  observances.  "  And  I  forced  myself,  and  offered  a  burnt  ofEering." 
Inasmuch  as  such  an  offering  was  required  on  entering  upon  his  enterprise  against 
the  Philistines,  he  could  not  hope  to  succeed  without  it,  and  he  had  at  all  times 
great  regard,  for  the  external  ceremonies  enjoined  by  the  law  (ch.  xiv.  33,  35).  A 
doubtful  or  wrong  act  is  often  supposed  to  be  blameless  when  performed  in  con- 
nection with  sacred  rites,  or  with  a  righteous  end  in  view  (John  xvi.  2)  ;  and  dis- 
obedience is  sometimes  clothed  in  a  religious  guise,  its  real  nature  being  thereby 
obscured  to  the  view  of  conscience,  and  its  commission  rendered  easy.  4.  The 
prospect  of  immediate  advantages.  Apparent  and  immediate  good  is  the  first  and 
last  and  most  powerful  incentive  to  departure  from  the  path  of  duty.  "  The  tree 
was  good  for  food,  and  pleasant  to  the  eyes,"  &o.  (Gen.  iii.  6).  "  And  the  history  of 
Adam  is  as  ancient  as  the  world,  but  is  fresh  in  practice,  and  is  still  revived  in  the 
sons  of  Adam." 

II.  Its  real  ciilpabiutt.  "  What  hast  thou  done  ?  "  said  Samuel,  speaking  as 
with  the  voice  of  God,  and  seeking  to  arouse  his  conscience  and  lead  him  to  repent- 
ance. He  had  been  guilty  of — 1.  Disobedience  to  a  plain  commandTnent.  "Thou  hast 
not  kept  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  thy  God  "  (ver.  13).  The  fact  could  not  be 
denied.  He  had  not  waited  all  the  appointed  time,  and  he  had  acted  without  Divine 
direction.  He  had  rejected  the  supreme  authority  of  the  Divine  King,  and  no 
excuse  that  might  be  made  could  do  away  with  his  guilt  "  Sin  is  not  estimated  '<>y 
God  according  to  its  outward  form,  but  according  to  the  amount  and  extent  of  the 
principle  of  evil  embodied  in  that  form."  2.  Distrust  of  promised'  help.  Men  some- 
times wait  long  for  the  fulfilment  of  Divine  promises,  out  not  long  enough ;  and 
their  lack  of  perseverance  shows  weakness  or  absence  of  faith.  The  force  of  adverse 
circnmstances  is  exaggerated  by  being  exclusively  dwelt  upon ;  doubt  of  the  power 
of  Gtod  prevails  through  disregard  of  preservation  from  harm  hitherto  afforded; 
and  u  faith  unites  the  soul  to  God,  so  unbelief  severs  it  from  him,  leaves  it  i  prey 


238  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xiii.  1— 23,. 

to  disquiet  and  impatience,  and  leads  it  to  adopt  worldly  and  godless  expedients. 
Unbelief  was  the  root  of  the  transgression  of  Savu,  as  it  is  of  the  transgression  of  men 
generally.  3.  FormalUy  in  religious  service.  A  burnt  offering  was  a  symbol  and 
expression  of  consecration,  and  when  offered  aright,  in  a  spirit  of  obedience,  it 
honoured  God  and  obtained  his  blessing ;  but  when  wrongly  offered  it  was  worthless, 
dishonoured  him,  and  was  abomination  in  his  sight  (ch.  xv.  22 ;  Prov.  xxi.  27 ;. 
Isa.  i.  13).  It  is  the  same  with  other  outward  forms  of  service.  "  Saul  is  a  specimen 
of  that  class  of  persons  who  show  a  certain  reverence  and  zeal  for  the  outward  forms 
of  religion,  and  even  a  superstitious  reliance  on  them,  but  are  not  careful  to  cherish 
the  inner  spirit  of  vital  religion"  (Wordsworth's  'Com.'^.  4.  Self-will, pride,  and 
presumption.  In  disobeying  the  will  of  God  he  set  up  his  own  will  as  supreme,  and 
was  guilty  of  pride,  "  by  which  sin  fell  the  angels."  It  is  not  said  that  he  offered 
sacrifice  with  his  own  hand,  and  he  may  have  simply  directed  it  to  be  done  by  the 
priest  who  was  with  him  (ch.  xiv.  18)  ;  nor  is  it  certain  that  if  he  had  done  so  he 
would  have  gone  beyond  the  privilege  and  prerogative  possessed  by  other  kings.  His 
sin  did  not  consist  of  intrusion  into  the  priestly  oflSce.  It  was  nevertheless  very 
great.  "  He  had  cast  away  his  obedience  to  God.  The  crown  he  thought  was  his 
own.  From  that  moment  he  fell ;  for  all  our  good  qualities  retain  their  ascendancy 
over  our  evil  passions  by  the  presence  and  power  of  God  claiming  them  as  his." 
"  Samuel,  according  to  modem  expositors  of  the  story,  was  angry  because  he  felt 
that  he  was  losing  his  own  influence  over  the  mind  of  the  king.  No ;  he  was  angry 
because  the  king  was  so  much  the  slave  of  his  influence,  or  of  any  influence  that  was 
exerted  over  him  for  a  moment ;  because  he  was  losing  the  sense  of  responsibility  to 
One  higher  than  a  prophet,  to  One  who  had  appointed  him  to  rule  not  in  his  own 
name,  but  as  the  minister  and  executor  of  the  Divine  righteousness  "  (Maurice). 

III.  Its  rxoeedinq  follt.  "  Thou  hast  done  foolishly  "  (ver.  13).  The  folly  of 
the  sinner  appears  in  his — 1.  Being  deceived  by  the  appearances  of  things — the 
magnitude  of  danger,  the  false  promises  of  advantage,  the  specious  arguments  of 
expediency.  He  is  like  the  foolish  man  who  built  his  house  upon  the  sand,  instead 
of  "digging  deep  and  laying  the  foundation  on  a  rock"  (Luke  vi.  48).  He  is 
infatuated,  fascinated,  and  under  a  glamour  cast  over  his  mind  by  his  own  evil 
desires  and  the  spell  of  the  tempter.  2.  Making  light  of  the  enormous  evil  of  sin. 
It  is  the  only  real  evil.  But  he  is  thoughtless,  ignorant,  and  foolish  enough  to 
account  it  a  trivial  thing,  which  may  be  easily  excused  and  passed  by.  As  he  who 
says  in  his  heart  "  No  God  "  is  called  a  "  fool,"  so  he  who  deems  it  a  little  matter  to 
offend  him  is  appropriately  designated  by  the  same  name.  "  Fools  make  a  mock  at 
sin  "  (Prov.  xiv.  9)  ;  and  he  who  makes  light  of  sin  makes  light  of  God.  3.  Leaving 
the  only  path  of  safety  and  honour.  "  For  now  "  (if  thou  hadst  obeyed  his  command- 
ment) "the  Lord  would  have  established  thy  sovereignty  over  Israel  for  ever." 
4.  Entering  on  a  course  of  certain  loss  and  misery.  (1)  Inward — weakened  moral 
power,  increased  tendency  to  sin,  unsteadiness,  rashness,  &o.  What  a  man  does 
once  he  is  almost  certain  under  similar  circumstances  to  do  again.  Saul's  subsequent 
course  was  a  continuation  and  complete  development  of  the  same  kind  of  transgression 
as  he  now  committed.  He  was  already  so  blinded  by  sin  as  not  to  repent.  (2)  Out- 
ward. "  But  now  thy  sovereignty  shall  not  continue,"  &c.  (ver.  14).  The  sentence 
"  embodied  the  principle  that  no  monarchy  could  be  enduring  in  Israel  which  did  not 
own  the  supreme  authority  of  God,"  and  it  declared  that  Saul's  crown  would  not  be 
transmitted  to  his  descendants ;  but  not  until  afterwards  was  he  personally  rejected 
from  being  king  (ch.  xv.  23).  Having  failed  to  endure  the  trial  to  which  he  was  sub- 
jected, he  was  left  by  Samuel  (ver.  15),  and  nothing  is  further  recorded  of  his  inter- 
course with  the  prophet  for  some  years.  "  He  had  not  even  accomplished  the  object 
of  his  unseasonable  sacrifice,  viz.,  to  prevent  the  dispersion  of  the  people"  (Eeil). 
0  that  he  had  waited  a  little  longer  1  "Saul  lost  his  kingdom  for  want  of  two 
or  three  hours'  patience." 

1.  Beware  of  the  first  wrong  step.  "  It  is  always  marked  by  a  peculiarity  of  evil 
which  does  not  attach  to  any  subsequent  offences  "  (Miller).  Principiis  obsta.  2.  If 
yon  have  taken  such  a  step,  instantly  repent  of  it.  "  It  is  not  sinning  tiiat  rain* 
men,  bat  sinnini^  and  not  repenting,  falling  and  not  getting  up  again." — P. 


OB.  XIII.  1—23.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  28» 

Ver.  14._  (GiLQAL.) — A  man  after  God's  own  heart.  This  expression  occurs  only 
here  and  in  the  quotation  (Acts  xiii.  22),  "  I  have  found  David  the  son  of  Jesse 
(Ps.  Ixxzix.  20),  a  man  after  mine  own  heart,  which  shall  fulfil  all  my  will."  1.  It 
was  uttered  by  Samuel  on  the  occasion  of  his  reproving  Saul  for  not  obeying  the 
commandment  of  the  Lord  (ver.  13).  2.  It  formed  a  part  of  the  announcement  of 
the  purpose  of  God  to  appoint  another  man  to  be  "  captain  over  hia  people  "  in  con- 
sequence thereof.  The  time  of  its  fulfilment  was  not  defined,  nor  was  it  known  to  the 
prophet  who  he  should  be ;  it  is  uncertain  even  whether  David  was  yet  born.  3.  It 
was  descriptive  of  his  character  in  contrast  to  that  of  Saul,  and  it  had  respect  to 
him  in  his  public  ofScial  capacity  as  theocratic  sovereign  rather  than  in  his  private 
moral  life,  although  it  is  impossible  wholly  to  separate  the  one  from  the  other.  He 
would  obey  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,  and,  as  it  was  predicted  of  "  a  faithful 
priest"  (ch.  ii.  35 ;  iii.  10),  "  do  according  to  that  which  was  in  his, heart  and  in  his 
mind  ; "  he  would  "  serve  the  will  of  God  in  his  lifetime  "  (Acts  xiii.  36),  and  second 
and  carry  out  his  purposes  concerning  his  people  (Isa.  xliv.  28) ;  he  would  be  truly 
"  his  servant,"  and  therefore  his  throne  would  continue  and  (in  the  full  realisation 
of  the  theocratic  idea  it  represented)  be  established  for  ever  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  19 — 37). 
In  "  a  man  after  God's  own  heart"  (such  as  David  was)  there  is — 

I.  The  rbcoonition  of  the  will  of  God  as  supreme.  His  will  is  above  that  of 
king  and  people;  declared  in  manifold  ways,  it  is  the  rule  of  human  life;  and  he 
who  perceives  it  most  clearly  and  observes  it  most  humbly  and  constantly  approaches 
nearest  to  perfection.  Saul  paid  but  little  regard  to  it,  and,  when  it  was  opposed  to 
his  own  inclination  or  judgment,  set  it  aside  and  went  his  own  way.  With  David  it 
was  otherwise.  In  his  royal  office  espedally  he  embodied  the  spirit  of  loyalty  to 
the  invisible  King  of  Israel,  and  of  zeal  for  his  law  and  ordinances.  "  The  vain 
carils  of  infidels  appear  to  have  arisen  from  not  considering  that  the  phrase  to  which 
they  object  may  be  interpreted  with  equal  propriety  as  referring  to  the  Divine 
purpose,  design,  or  intention  as  to  designate  peculiar  favour  and  afEection.  The 
latter  undoubtedly  was  true,  yet  the  fornjer  is  most  clearly  the  meaning  intende4 
here  "  (Poole). 

II.  The  convict  :on  of  thb  call  of  God  to  his  service.  Unlike  Saul,  he  felt 
deeply  and  constantly  that  he  was  individually  an  object  of  Divine  regard,  and 
appointed  to  do  a  certain  work  from  which  he  neither  desired  nor  dared  to  shrink. 
And  a  similar  feeling  exists  in  every  true  servant  of  God.  "The  life  of  David  is 
the  life  neither  of  a  mere  ofEcial  fulfilling  a  purpose  in  which  he  has  no  interest,  nor 
of  a  hero  without  fear  and  without  reproach ;  but  of  a  man  inspired  by  a  Divine 
purpose  under  the  guidance  of  "a  Divine  teacher  "  (Maurice). 

III.  Devotion  to  the  honodr  of  God  from  the  heart.  Although  Saul  possessed 
many  admirable  qualties,  he  sought  to  honour  God  by  outward  sacrifices  rather  than 
real  obedience,  his  noblest  deeds  were  the  offspring  of  sudden  and  transient  impulses, 
and  his  predominant  motive  was  his  own  honour  and  glory.  "  He  had  none  of  the 
work  of  Divine  grace  upon  the  heart,  turning  impulses  into  principles,  ruling  all 
actions  by  the  law  of  an  unseen  Judge.  He  never  experienced  what  the  apostle 
calls  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,  that  is  to  say,  the  sense  of  God,  of  another 
world,  smiting  upon  his  soul  through  the  veil  of  visible  things,  and  making  him  feel 
the  presence  and  the  real,  awful  personality  of  his  Maker.  His  soul  was  not  like 
David's,  a  harp  touched  by  the  hand  of  the  Almighty,  and  attuned  to  celestial 
melodies.  It  was  only  an  instrument  over  which  the  wind  swept  wildly,  waking 
a  fitful  and  irregular  music  which  soon  died  away  into  the  confused  murmurs  of  a 
harsh  and  tuneless  discord  "  (A.  Blomfield). 

IV.  Dependence  on  the  help  of  God  for  success.  Saul  was  proud  of  his  own 
strength,  and  both  in  ruling  the  people  and  contending  against  their  enemies  he 
relied  on  his  own  skill  and  prudence,  and  "  an  arm  of  llesh."  David  trusted  in  God 
for  everything.  "  He  never  represents  himself  as  a  compound  of  strength  and 
weakness.  He  represents  himself  as  weakness  itself  —  as  incapacity  utter  and 
complete.  The  Lord  is  his  strength.  He  has  faith  in  God  as  his  physical  Inspirer 
or  Protector.  He  has  a  deeper,  a  far  deeper  instinct  than  even  that — the  instinct  of 
a  communion,  personal,  practical,  loving;  between  God,  the  Fount  of  light  and  good- 
ness, and  his  own  soul,  with  its  capacity  of  darkness  as  well  as  light,  of  evil  as  well 


MO  THE  JflKST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oH.  xin.  1— 2& 

as  good.  In  one  word,  David  is  a  man  of  faith  and  a  man  of  prayer  "  (Eingsley, 
'  Four  Sennons '). 

V.  Repentance  at  the  reproof  op  God  on  account  of  sin,  Th«  heart  of  Saul 
trembled  not  at  the  word  of  the  Lord.  When  the  prophet  said,  "  What  hast  thou 
done  ?  "  he  ofiered  excuses  for  his  conduct,  and  when  on  a  subsequent  occasion  he 
was  constrained  to  say,  "  I  have  sinned,"  his  confession  was  insincere  and  hypocritical. 
How  different  was  it  with  David  wlien  Nathan  said  to  him,  "  Thou  art  tne  man." 
"Never  was  repentance  more  severe,  or  sorrow  more  sincere;  so  that  he  may  justly 
be  said  (his  repentance  included,  though  not  his  fall)  to  be  a  man  after  God's  o^vn 
heart "  fYonge). 

VI.  Sympathy  with  thk  people  of  God  in  their  experience.  He  identified  him- 
self with  them,  made  theii  varied  joys  and  sorrows  his  own,  and  thereby  (as 
well  as  by  other  means)  promoted  their  highest  good.  His  character  "gathered 
into  itself — so  far  as  might  be — all  the  various  workings  of  the  heart  of  man.  This 
is  the  special  attribute  of  the  life  and  character  of  the  son  of  Jesse.  There  is  a 
hard,  narrow  separateness  of  soul  marked  in  every  line  of  the  character  of  Saul.  He 
is  a  wayward,  wilful,  self-determined  man,  well-nigh  incapable  of  any  real  sympathy 
with  others.  Such  an  one  could  learn  little  of  the  workings  of  the  human  heart,  which 
is  so  immeasurable  in  the  multitude  and  compassion  of  its  tones.  Deep  as  were  his 
sorrows,  he  never  knew  the  grace  of  contrition.  Thus  his  dark  heart  is  full  of 
suUenness  and  suspicion,  inviting  the  entrance  of  the  evil  one,  who  came  at  his  bid- 
ding, and  closed  with  yet  sterner  bars  all  the  avenues  of  his  soul.  In  every  one  of 
these  particulars  David  is  the  most  complete  contrast  to  Saul "  (Wilberforce, '  Heroes 
of  Heb.  Hist.'). 

VII.  Sincerity  in  his  whole  relation  to  God  and  in  the  main  course  of  his  life. 
"  What  are  faults — what  are  the  outward  details  of  life,  if  the  inner  spirit  of  it,  the 
remorse,  temptations,  true,  often-baffled,  never-ended  struggle  of  it  be  forgotten  ? 
.  .  .  David's  life  and  history,  as  written  for  us  in  those  Psalms  of  his,  I  consider  to 
be  the  truest  emblem  ever  given  of  a  man's  moral  progress  and  warfare  here  below. 
All  earnest  souls  will  ever  discern  in  it  the  faithful  struggle  of  an  earnest  human  soul 
towards  what  is  good  and  best ;  struggle  often  bafiled,  down  as  into  entire  wreck, 
yet  a  struggle  never  ended  ;  ever  with  tears,  repentance,  true,  unconquerable  purpose 
begun  anew  "  (Carlyle,  '  Heroes '). — D. 

Vers.  16 — 23.  (MicsMASn.)— Under  the  ked  of  the  oppressor.     "Now  there  was 

no  smith  found  throughout  all  the  land  of  Israel"  (ver.  19).  The  invasion  of  the 
Philistines  produced  great  fear  and  distress  among  the  people.  Many  hid  themselves 
in  caves,  and  thickets,  and  cliffs,  and  vaults,  and  pits ;  others  fled  across  the  Jordan  ; 
those  who  followed  Saul  did  so  with  trembling  (vers.  6, 7) ;  his  army  melted  away-— 
some  deserted  to  the  enemy,  or  were  pressed  into  their  service  (ch.  xiv.  21)  ;  their 
homes  and  fields  were  plundered  by  marauding  bands  (ver.  17 ;  ch:  xiv.  22),  which 
went  forth  from  Michmash  without  fear  of  resistance,  for  the  people  had  been  dis- 
armed and  deprived  of  the  means  of  making  weapoiis  of  war,  and  even  of  sharpening 
their  implements  of  husbandry  (2  Kings  xxiv.  14)  when  they  became  blmit 
(literally,  " there  was  bluntness  of  edges ; '  A.  V.,  "they  had  a  Jile "),  except  at  the 
pleasure  of  their  oppressors  (ver.  21).  "  The  result  of  the  burdensome  necessity  of 
going  to  the  Philistines  was,  that  many  tools  became  useless  by  dulness,  so  that  even 
this  poorer  sort  of  arms  did  the  Israelites  not  much  service  at  the  breakhig  out  of 
the  war"  (Bunsen).  How  long  this  state  of  things  continued  is  not  recorded  ;  but 
it  was  sufficiently  long  for  those  who  remained  with  Saul  and  Jonathan  (ver.  22)  to 
be  left  without  "sword  or  spear,"  or  any  regular  armament.  Their  condition  was 
thus  one  of  nelplessness,  dependence,  and  wretchedness,  and  affords  a  picture  of  that 
to  which  men  are  reduced  by  error  and  sin.     In  it  we  see — 

I.  The  manifest  FAiLnitE  of  a  self-chosen  way.  "  Nay ;  but  we  will  have  a  king 
over  us "  (ch.  viii.  19).  They  have  a  king  self-willed  like  themselves ;  but  their 
way  fails,  as  the  way  of  those  who  prefer  their  own  plans  to  the  guidance  of  God 
must  ever  fail.  1.  In  delivering  them  from  the  evils  of  which  they  complain 
(ch.  viii.  6),  or  which  they  fear  (ch.  ix.  16).  2.  In  preserving  to  them  the  advantages 
which  they  possess.     "  Ye  dwelled  safe     (ch.  xii.  11).     Where  is  their  safety  now} 


OH.  XIII.  1—23.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  241 

3.  In  procuring  for  them  the  good  which  they  desire — liberty,  power,  victory,  pros- 
perity, honour,  and  glory  (John  xi.  47,  48 ;  Rom.  x.  2,  3).  How  coinpIeLely  do  the 
prospects  that  lure  men  onward  in  their  self-chosen  way  vanish  before  them  as  they 
advance  I 

II.  The  miserable  subjection  of  those  who  forsake  God.  "  They  have  rejected 
me"  (ch.  viii.  7).  With  what  result?  They  are  "delivered  unto  the  will  of  them 
that  hate  them"  (Ezek.  xvi.  27  ;  Deut.  xxviii.  48),  and  endure — 1.  Oppression  that 
cannot  be  effectually  resisted.  "  Of  whom  a  man  is  overcome,  of  the  same  is  he 
brought  in  bondage  "  (2  Pet.  ii.  19),  and  without  the  means  of  freeing  himself. 
2.  Increased  difficulty,  toil,  and  trouble  in  the  necessary  pursuits  of  life.  Life  itseH 
without  the  friendship  of  God  is  a  burden  too  heavy  to  be  borne.  3.  Shame  and 
contempt  continually  (ver.  4).  "  Is  this  the  grandeur  and  power  which  they  fondly 
expected  under  their  king  ?  Was  it  for  this  they  rejected  the  Shield  of  their  help 
and  the  Sword  of  their  excellency  ?  " 

III.  The  mekciful  purpose  to  which  trial  is  subservient.  "  The  Lord  will  not 
forsake  his  people"  (ch.  xii.  22).  Their  distress  has  some  alleviation,  and  it  is 
designed  (in  his  abounding  goodness) — 1.  To  convince  them  of  the  evil  of  their  way. 

2.  To  teach  them  to  put  their  trust  in  God,  and  serve  him  in  truth  (ch,  xIt.  6). 

3.  To  prepare  them  for  help  and  salvation. 

Learn  that — 1.  The  highest  wisdom  of  man  is  to  submit  to  the  wisdom  of  God. 
2.  The  service  of  God  is  the  only  true  freedom  ;  the  way  of  honour  and  happiness. 
"  To  serve  God  is  to  reign."  3.  They  who  refuse  the  free  service  of  God  fall  into 
the  forced  service  of  their  enemies.  4.  In  the  greatest  of  earthly  calamities  there  is 
no  room  for  despair.  "  If  from  thence  thou  shalt  seek  the  Lord  thy  God,  thou  ehalt 
find  him  "  (Deut.  iv.  29).— D. 

Ver.  13. — Tried  and  found  wanting.  I.  The  story.  Saul's  bright  morning  was 
a  very  short  one,  and  his  sky  soon  gathered  blackness.  Beginning  with  popular 
icclamation,  succeeded  after  the  exploit  in  Gilead  by  popular  enthusiasm,  he  lost  in 
a  rery  short  time  the  respect  of  his  subjects.  Beginning  with  a  Divine  sanction 
signified  through  the  prophet  Samuel,  and  with  appearances  of  religious  fervour,  he 
quickly  forfeited  the  favour  of  the  Lord  and  the  good  opinion  of  the  prophet.  The 
ship  of  his  fortunes  had  hardly  left  the  harbour,  with  sails  set  and  flags  flying,  before 
it  ran  aground  on  a  rock  of  wilfulness,  and  though  it  kept  afloat  for  years,  it  ever 
afterwards  laboured  uneasily  in  a  troubled  sea.  The  critical  question  for  Saul  was 
whether  or  not  he  would  be  content  to  act  simply  as  executant  of  the  Divine  will. 
Samuel  had  pressed  this  upon  him  again  and  again.  Would  he  wait  on  God,  and  act 
for  him  ;  or  would  he  act  for  and  from  himself?  Would  he  lead  the  people  still  to 
look  up  to  Jehovah  as  their  real  King  and  Lawgiver ;  or  would  he  imitate  the  heathen 
kings,  who  themselves  took  the  initiative,  and  then  called  on  their  gods  to  be  propi- 
tious to  them,  giving  them  success  in  their  expeditions  and  victory  in  their  combats  ? 
Would  Saul  do  his  own  will,  expecting  the  Lord  to  follow  and  favour  him ;  or  would 
he  set  the  Lord  always  before  him,  follow  and  obey  his  voice  ?  It  is  a  great  mistake 
to  think  that  Saul  was  hardly  dealt  with  on  a  point  of  small  importance.  The  prin- 
ciple at  stake  was  great,  was  fundamental.  The  test  was  definite,  and  was  applied 
in  the  most  public  manner  before  all  the  army  of  Israel.  The  courage  which  had 
been  roused  against  the  Ammonite  invaders  of  Gilead  was  now  turned  against  the 
still  more  formidable  Philistines.  The  gallant  Jonathan  struck  the  first  blow,  and 
then  his  royal  father,  knowing  that  the  Pbihstine  army  could  and  would  be  very  soon 
mobilised  (as  the  modern  phrase  is)  and  hurled  against  Israel,  summoned  his  people 
to  arms.  But,  alas,  the  greater  part  of  them  were  afraid  to  come,  and  in  the  threat- 
ened districts  hid  themselves.  So  the  king  found  himself  at  Gilgal  in  a  terrible 
plight,  at  the  head  of  a  small  and  dispirited  force.  He  must  have  known  that,  unless 
Jehovah  came  to  their  help,  all  was  lost.  Let  it  not  be  said  that  it  was  unreasonable 
to  judge  and  punish  a  man  for  anything  done  by  him  in  such  an  emergency.  Saul 
had  received  long  notice  of  this  week  of  patience.  On  the  morning  when  Samuel 
anointed  him  three  signs  were  given  him,  all  of  which  had  been  exactly  fulfilled. 
Then  he  had  been  told  that  he  would  have  to  tarry  seven  days  at  Gilgal  for  the 
coming  of  Samuel  to  offer  sacrifice.     But  he  had  forgotten  this.    The  word  of  the 

1    SAV  B 


ta  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xui.  1—23. 

prophet  had  made  no  lasting  impresBion  on  his  mind.  There  was  nothing  profound 
about  the  man.  He  had  no  controlling  reverence  for  God,  no  ahiding  faith;  So  he 
acted  from  himself,  only  calling  on  God  to  help  him  in  what  he  was  going  to  do, 
'Jistead  of  waiting  to  know  what  the  Lord  would  have  him  to  do,  and  acting  as  his 
servant.  He  bore  the  strain  of  anxiety  for  days,  hut  not  till  the  end  of  the  time 
appointed.  The  troops  (if  one  may  give  such  a  designation  to  hastily-collected 
and  ill-armed  levies)  were  faint-hearted,  and  but  loosely  attached  to  the  standard  of 
their  king.  Tliey  wondered  why  the  sacrifice  was  delayed.  They  feared  that  God 
would  be  displeased,  and  not  fight  for  them.  Then  Saul,  impulsive  and  unwise 
ordered  that  the  sacrifice  should  proceed.  Bather  than  wait  a  few  hours  more,  hf 
violated  the  direction  he  had  received  from  the  prophet  of  the  Lord,  and  betrayed 
once  for  all  an  unreliable  character  and  presumptuous  heart. 

II.  Tee  lessons.  1.  God  rules  men  on  large  principles,  but  proves  them  by  spe- 
cific tests.  His  law  is  great  and  equitable ;  the  trial  of  obedience  to  it  is  sometimes 
quite  minute.  In  the  garden  within  the  land  of  Eden  man  and  woman  were  put 
under  a  rule  of  universal  obedience  to  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  and  they  were  tested 
by  this  specific  requirement,  to  abstain  from  the  fruit  of  one  of  the  trees  in  the 
garden.  Lot,  his  wife,  and  daughters  were  rescued  by  angels  from  a  doomed  city, 
and  enjoined  to  flee  to  the  mountains ;  "  but  his  wife  looked  back  from  behind  him, 
and  she  became  a  pillar  of  salt."  Hezekiah,  devoutly  referring  everything  to  God, 
had  great  deliverances,  and  a  prosperous  reign  ;  but  failing  to  consult  the  Lord  when 
a  flattering  embassy  came  to  him  from  Babylon,  he  revealed  vain-glory  lurking  in  his 
heart,  and  broke  down  the  wall  of  defence  which  his  previous  piety  had  reared  round 
his  throne.  Saul  was  tested  more  than  once,  but  this  one  trial  at  Gilgal  was  enough 
to  prove  his  unfitness  to  rule  over  God's  heritage.  The  fact  is,  that  one  act  may 
show  character  as  clearly  and  decisively  as  a  score  or  a  hundred  could  do ;  not,  indeed, 
an  incidental  act  of  inadvertence  or  error,  but  a  thing  done  after  explicit  instruction 
and  warning.  He  who  breaks  through  the  line  of  obedience  at  one. point,  out  of 
self-will,  is  not  to  be  depended  on  at  any  point.  He  disentitles  himself  to  confidence 
by  one  instance  of  misconduct,  not  because  of  its  intrinsic  importance,  but  on  account 
of  the  key  which  it  gives  to  his  inward  tone  of  character.  2.  One  action,  hastily 
performed,  may  carry  irremediable  consequences.  Adam  ate  of  the  forbidden  fruit, 
and  he  could  never  reverse  that  fatal  act.  Cain  struck  down  his  brother,  and  was 
from  that  day  a  wanderer  and  an  outlaw  on  the  earth.  Esau  sold  his  birthright,  and 
never  could  recover  it.  Moses  erred  once  at  the  rock  in  Kadesh,  and  forfeited  his 
entrance  into  the  promised  land.  The  sins  of  those  who  are  penitent  are  forgiven  ; 
but  there  are  consequences  of  sinful  habits,  nay,  even  of  one  sinful  act,  which  have  no 
cure  or  corrective.  It  is  well  that  this  should  be  kept  sternly  before  the  eyes  of  men ; 
for  the  moral  nature  of  many  is  slippery  and  self-excusing,  and  they  are  too  ready 
to  count  on  impunity,  or  on  finding  some  easy  corrective  for  what  they  do  amiss. 
The  truth  is,  that  one  action  may  spoil  a  whole  life,  and,  indeed,  may  hurt  not  oneself 
only,  but  many  others  also ;  just  as  Saul's  impatience  at  Gilgal  injured  not  himself 
alone,  but  the  nation  of  Israel  during  all  his  unhappy  reign.  3.  He  whom  God 
will  exalt  must  first  learn  patience.  For  want  of  this  was  Saul  rejected  from 
being  king.  By  means  of  this  was  David  educated  for  the  throne.  The  son  of 
Jesse  was  privately  anointed  by  Samuel,  as  the  son  of  Kish  had  been.  Thereafter  he 
came  into  public  notice  by  his  promptitude  and  bravery  against  Goliath,  just  as  Saul 
had  come  into  public  favour  by  similar  qualities  against  Nahash.  So  far  their  paths 
may  be  said  to  have  corresponded ;  but  then  they  quite  diverged.  Saul,  impatient, 
behaved  foolishly,  and  fell.  David,  when  tried,  "  behaved  himself  wisely,"  made  no 
haste  to  grasp  the  sceptre,  waited  patiently  till  God  should  lift  him  up.  So  when 
the  time  at  last  came  for  his  elevation,  he  knew  how  to  reign  as  God's  king  on  the 
hill  of  Zion.  How  beautiful  is  this  in  the  Son  of  David,  the  meek  and  lowly  One, 
who,  because  he  patiently  observed  the  will  of  God,  has  now  a  name  above  every 
name !  Jesus  pleased  not  himself.  He  always  spoke  and  acted  as  in  behalf  and  by 
direction  of  his  Father  in  heaven.  Therefore  has  God  highly  exalted  him.  4.  It  is  a 
dangerous  thing  to  ask  for,  or  accept,  a  vicegerent  of  God  on  earth.  It  betrays  unbelief 
rather  than  faith,  and  it  entails  tyranny  and  confusion.  What  a  calamity  it  has  been 
to  tL'  L»tin  Church  to  have  an  alleged  vicar  of  Christ  on  earth  I     The  ttrrangement 


CH.  xnr.  1—86.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


Ml 


quite  falls  in  with  the  craving  for  a  spiritual  ruler  who  may  be  seen,  and  the  nneasi- 
nesB  of  really  unspiritual  men  under  the  control  of  One  who  is  invisible.  So  thers 
is  a  Popedom,  which  began  indeed  with  good  intentions  and  impulses,  as  did  the 
monarchy  of  Saul,  but  has  long  ago  fallen  under  God's  displeasure  through  arrogance, 
and  brought  nothing  but  confusion  and  oppression  on  Christendom.  We  are  a  hun- 
dred times  better  without  any  such  vicegerent.  Enough  in  the  spiritual  sphere  that 
the  Lord  is  King.  Our  Divine  Saviour,  now  unseen,  but  in  due  time  to  appear  in  his 
glory,  is  the  only  as  well  as  the  blcBsed  Potentate,  Head  of  the  Church,  Captain  of 
the  host,  Lord  <^  alL— F. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


JONATHAI?  SMITES  THE   PHILISTINE  GAB- 

SI80N  (vers.  1 — 16).  Ver.  1. — Now  it  came 
to  pass  upon  a  day.  Literally,  "And  there 
was  a  day,  and  Jonathan,"  &c. ;  or,  as  we 
should  say,  And  it  happened  one  day  that 
Jonathan.  The  phrase  means  that  Jonathan's 
brave  feat  took  place  not  many  days  after 
the  garrison  had  occupied  the  cliff,  probably 
only  two  or  three,  but  without  definitely 
stating  how  many.  He  told  not  his  father. 
Not  only  because  Saul  would  have  forbidden 
BO  rash  an  enterprise,  but  because  secrecy 
was  essential  to  any  chance  of  success  :  pro- 
bably too  the  purpose  came  upon  him  as  an 
inspiration  from  above. 

Ver.  2. — Saul  tarried  in  the  uttermost 
part  of  Gibeah.  /.  e.  the  part  nearest  Geba. 
Under,  not  a,  but  the  pomegranate  tree, 
the  well-known  tree  at  Migron.  Saul  evi- 
dently shared  to  the  full  in  the  love  of  trees 
common  among  the  Israelites  (see  ch.  xxil 
6).  The  Hebrew  word  for  pomegranate  is 
Rimmon,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  tree 
is  here  meant,  and  not  the  rock  Rimmon 
(Judges  XX.  45,  47),  so  called  probably  from 
a  fancied  resemblance  to  the  fruit.  Migron, 
said  to  maan  a  clfff,  was  apparently  a  com- 
mon name  for  localities  in  this  mountainous 
district,  as  in  Isa.  x.  28  we  read  of  one  lying 
to  the  north  of  Michmash,  whereas  this  is  to 
the  south. 

Ver.  3. — Ahiah,  the  son  of  Ahitub.  (See 
on  ch.  xiiL  9.)  It  is  interesting  to  find  the 
house  of  Eli  recovering  at  last  from  its 
disaster,  and  one  of  its  members  duly  minis- 
tering in  his  office  before  the  king.  It  has 
been  debated  whether  he  was  the  same  per- 
son as  Ahimelech,  mentioned  in  ch.  xxi.  1, 
&C.,  the  supposition  being  grounded  on  the 
fact  that  Ahiah  is  never  spoken  of  again. 
But  he  may  have  died  ;  and  with  regard  to 
the  argument  drawn  from  the  similarity  of 
the  names,  we  must  notice  that  names  com- 
pounded with  Ah  (or  Ach),  brother,  were 
common  in  Eli's  family,  while  compounds 
with46,  father,  were  most  in  use  among  Saul's 
relatives.  Ahiah  or  Ahijah  means  Jah  is 
\rothtri  Ui  father  ia  Ahitub,  tht  brother  U 


good;  why  should  he  not  call  another  son 
Ahimelech,  the  brother  is  kiiig  I  Jehovah's 
priest  in  SMloh.  This  refers  to  Eli,  the 
regular  rule  in  Hebrew  being  that  all  such 
statements  belong,  not  to  the  son,  but  to 
the  father.  Wearing  an  ephod.  Literally, 
ephod-bearing.  The  ephod,  as  we  have  seen 
on  ch.  ii  18,  was  the  usual  ministerial 
garment ;  but  what  is  meant  here  is  not  an 
ordinary  ephod  of  linen,  but  that  described 
in  Levit.  viii.  7, 8,  wherein  was  the  breastplate, 
by  which  Jehovah's  will  was  made  known  to 
his  people,  until  prophecy  took  its  place. 
All  this,  the  former  part  of  the  verse,  must 
be  regarded  as  a  parentliesis. 

Ver.  4. — Between  the  passage*.  7.  «.  the 
passes.  A  sharp  rook.  Literally,  "  a  tooth 
of  rock."  Conder('Tent  Work,'  il.  112)  says, 
"  The  site  of  the  Philistine  camp  at  Mich- 
mash, which  Jonathan  and  his  armour- 
bearer  attacked,  is  very  minutely  described 
by  Josephus.  It  was,  he  says,  a  precipice 
with  three  tops,  ending  in  a  long,  sharp 
tongue,  and  protected  by  surrounding  cliffs. 
Exactly  such  a  natural  fortress  exists  imme- 
diately east  of  the  village  of  Michmash,  and 
is  still  called  '  the  fort '  by  the  peasantry.  It 
is  a  ridge  rising  in  three  rounded  knolls  above 
a  perpendicular  crag,  ending  in  a  narrow 
tongue  to  the  east,  with  cliffs  below,  and  hav- 
ing an  open  vaUey  behind  it,  and  a  saddle  to- 
wards the  west,  on  which  Michmash  itself  is 
situate.  Opposite  this  fortress,  on  the  south, 
there  is  a  crag  of  equal  height,  and  seem- 
ingly impassable.  Thus  the  description  of 
the  Old  Testament  is  fully  borne  out — '  a 
sharp  rock  on  one  side,  and  a  sharp  rock  on 
the  other.'  The  southern  cliff  was  called 
Seneh,  or  'the  acacia,'  and  the  same  name 
still  applies  to  the  modem  valley,  due  to 
the  acacia-trees  which  dot  its  course.  The 
northern  cliff  was  called  Bozez,  or  'shining,' 
and  the  true  explanation  of  the  name  only 
presents  itself  on  the  spot."  Conder  then 
describes  how,  "treading  perhaps  almost  in 
the  steps  of  Jonathan,"  after  arriving  on  the 
brink  of  the  chasm,  or  defile  of  Michmash, 
they  were  able  to  descend  Seneh,  even  with 
horses  and  mules.  "I  noticed,"  he  says, 
"that  the  dip  of  the  strata  down  eastward 
l2 


tu 


itiE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[CH.  XIV.  1 — 35 


gave  hopes  that  by  one  of  the  long  ledges  we 
might  be  able  to  slide,  as  it  were,  towards  the 
bottom.     It  is  not  likely  that  horses  had 
ever  before  been  led  along  this  ledge,  or  will 
perhaps  ever  again  cross  the  pathless  chasm, 
but  it  was  just  possible,  and  by  jumping 
them  down  one  or  two  steps  some  three  feet 
high,  we  succeeded  in  making  the  passage. 
.  ,  .  Though  we  got  down  Seneh,  we  did  not 
attempt  to  climb  up  Bozez.   .   .  .  Horses 
could  scarcely  find  a  footing  anywhere  on  the 
sides  of  the  northern  precipice  ;  but  judging 
from  the  descent,   it   seems  possible    that 
Jonathan,  with  immense  labour,  could  have 
'  climbed  up  upon  his  hands  and  upon  his 
feet,  and  his  armour-bearer  after  him '  (ver. 
13).   That  a  man  exhausted  by  such  an  effort 
coiUd  have  fought  successfully  on  arriving  at 
the  top  can  only  be  accounted  for  on  the 
supposition  of  a  sudden  panic  among  the 
Philistines,  when  they  found  the  enemy  act- 
ually within  their  apparently  impregnable 
fortress." 

Ver.  5.— Was  situate,  &c.  The  word  thus 
translated  is  that  rendered  pillar  in  ch.  iL 
8,  and  the  verse  should  possibly  be  trans- 
lated, "And  the  one  tooth  (or  crag)  was  a 
rocky  mass  on  the  north  over  against  Mich- 
mash,  and  the  other  was  on  the  south  over 
against  Geba"  (not  Gibeah,  as  the  A.  V. ; 
see  ch.  xiii.  16).  But  the  word  is  omitted  in 
the  versions,  and  may  be  an  interpolation. 

Ver.  6. — TTncircumcised.  An  epithet  of 
dislike  almost  confined  to  the  Philistines. 
But  underneath  the  whole  speech  of  Jona- 
than lies  the  conviction  of  the  covenant 
relation  of  Israel  to  Jehovah,  of  which  cir- 
cumcision was  the  outward  sign.  Notice 
also  Jonathan's  humble  reliance  upon  God. 
It  may  he  that  Jehovah  will  work  for  ns, 
&c. 

Yer.  7. — Tnm  thee.  The  Hebrew  seems 
to  have  preserved  the  very  words  of  the 
young  man,  and  the  difficulty  in  rendering 
this  phrase  arises  from  its  being  a  colloquial 
expression.  "Face  about"  would  be  our 
phrase  ;  but  the  sense  is,  "On  with  you  ;  I 
will  follow." 

Ver.  .9.  — Tarry.  Hebrew,  "be  still," 
"  stand  still,"  the  word  used  by  Joshua  of 
the  sun  (Josh.  x.  12,  13) ;  but  not  the  word 
rendered  stand  still  just  below,  where  the 
Hebrew  has,  "  We  will  stand  under  us,"  i.  e. 
we  will  stop  just  where  we  were. 

Ver.  10.  —  A  sign.  The  waiting  of  the 
garrison  for  Jonathan  and  his  armour-bearer 
to  mount  up  to  them  would  be  a  sign  of 
great  indifference  and  supineness  on  their 
part ;  but  what  he  rather  meant  was  that  they 
were  to  regard  it  as  an  omen.  Kim'hi  has  a 
long  digression  in  his  commentary  on  this 
place  to  show  that  there  was  nothing  super- 
stitious in  their  looking  for  a  prognostic  to 
tncourage  them  in  their  hazardous  under- 


taking. God,  he  says,  bade  Gideon  go  to 
the  camp  of  the  Midianites  to  obtain  such  a 
sign  as  Jonathan  looked  for  here  (see  Judges 
vu.  11). 

Ver.  11. — Both  of  them  discovered  them- 
selves. They  had  crept  up  the  precipice 
unseen,  but  at  some  convenient  spot  near  the 
top  they  BO  placed  themselves  that  the  gar- 
rison must  see  them,  and  waited  there  till 
their  presence  was  observed.  Behold,  the 
Hebrews.  There  is  no  article  in  the  He- 
brew. What  the  Philistines  say  is,  See  ! 
Hebrews  come  out  of  the  holes  wherein  they 
had  hid  themselves. 

Ver.  12. — Come  up  to  us,  and  wa  will 
show  you  a  thing.  The  Philistines  thus 
give  Jonathan  the  very  omen  he  had  desired. 
The  last  clause  Is  a  popular  phrase,  and 
expresses  a  sort  of  amused  contempt  for  the 
two  adventurers.  EaiUery  of  this  sort  is 
not  at  all  uncommon  between  the  outposts 
of  two  armies. 

Ver.  13. — Upon  his  hands  and  upon  his 
feet.     Of  course  a  single  stone  rolled  down 
upon  them  while  thus  clambering,  np  the 
precipitous  side  of  the  cliff  would  have  sent 
them  to  the  bottom  ;  but  the  Philistmes, 
apparently  considering  the  ascent  impossible, 
seem  entirely  to  have  neglected  them.    The 
youthful  appearance  of  the  two  no  doubt 
contributed  to  throw  them  off  their  guard. 
And  they  fell  before  Jonathan.    The  brevity 
of   the    Hebrew   very    well    expresses   the 
rapidity    of   Jonathan's   action.      Used   to 
mouutaineering,  he  was  ready,  as  soon  as  he 
had  reached  the  summit,  to  commence  the 
attack,  and  the  Philistines,  little  expecting 
so  vigorous  an  onslaught  from  so  feeble  a 
force,  were  surprised,  and  made  but  a  slight 
resistance.     The  armour-beaier  also  behaved 
with  a  bravery  like  his  master's. 

Ver.  14.— Within  as  it  were  an  half  acre 
of  land,  which  a  yoke  of  oxen  might  plow. 
The  Hebrew  for  this  long  circumlocution  is, 
"within  about  a  half  furrow  of  a  yoke  of 
land."  The  Septuagint  translates,  "with 
darts  and  slings  and  stones  of  the  field,"  but 
the  other  versions  give  no  support  to  this  ren- 
dering. The  Israelites,  like  most  ancient 
nations,  were  accustomed  to  measure  land  by 
the  quantity  which  a  yoke  of  oxen  could 
plough  in  a  day,— something  really  less  than 
an  acre,— so  that  the  A.  V.  gives  the  right 
sense.  When  Jonathan  made  his  attack,  the 
garrison  probably,  not  knowing  how  few  their 
assailants  were,  ran  in  confusion  to  the 
narrow  tongue  of  land  where  the  exit  was, 
and  getting  in  one  another's  way,  were  soon 
panic-stricken  and  helpless. 

Ver.    15.  —  Trembling.     /.  e.     "  terror," 

"fright."     In  the  host.     Hebrew,  "in  tne 

camp,"  i.  e.  the  main  camp  at  Michmash, 

contrasted  with  the  fle'd,  i.  e.   the  open 

1  country,  in  which  the  soldiers  were  f  .rafring 


cfi.  XIV.  1 — 36.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


24i 


for  supplies.  The  people.  /.  e.  the  camp 
followers,  as  opposed  to  the  soldiers.  All 
these  were  temfled  by  the  garrison  rushing 
down  the  pass,  with  tidings  of  the  attack 
magnified  by  their  fears,  and  who  communi- 
cated the  alarm  to  the  spoilers,  who,  having 
now  for  a  fortnight  met  with  no  resistance, 
had  probably  discontinued  all  measures  of 

Erecaution.  The  earth  quaked.  This  may 
e  taken  literally,  but  is  more  probably  a 
poetical  description  of  the  widespread  terror 
and  confusion  which  prevailed  far  and  near. 
So  it  was  a  very  great  trembling.  Literally, 
' '  and  it  became  a  terror  of  God  ; "  but  the 
name  of  the  deity  (Eloliim,  not  Jehovah)  is 
constantly  used  in  Hebrew  to  express  vast- 
ness. 

Defeat  op  the  Philistines  (vers.  16 — 
23).  Ver.  16. — The  watchmen,  &c.  Conder 
says  ('Tent  Work,'  ii.  115),  "The  watch- 
men of  Saul  in  Gibeah  of  Benjamin  must 
have  seen  clearly  across  the  chasm  the  extra- 
ordinary conflict  of  two  men  against  a  host, 
as  the  '  multitude  melted  away,  and  they 
we&t  on  beating  down  one  another.'  The 
noise  in  the  host  was  also,  no  doubt,  clearly 
heard  at  the  distance  of  only  two  miles,  and 
the  army  would  have  crossed  the  passage 
with  comparatively  little  difficulty  by  the 
narrow  path  which  leads  down  direct  from 
Geba  to  Michmash,  west  of  the  Philistine 
camp.  Thence  the  pursuit  was  towards 
Bethel,  across  the  watershed,  and  headlong 
down  the  steep  descent  of  Aijalon  —  that 
same  pass  where  the  first  great  victory 
of  Joshua  had  been  gained,  and  where  the 
valiant  Judas  was  once  more,  in  later  times, 
to  drive  back  the  enemies  of  Israel  to  the 
plains."  The  multitude.  The  Hebrew  is, 
"And  behold  the  tumult  (the  word  is  so 
rendered  in  ver.  19,  margin)  was  reeling  and 
going  .  .  .  and  thither.  Of  course  hither 
has  dropped  out  of  the  text  before  and 
thither  (comp.  ch.  xiii.  8).  The  Septuagint 
and  Vulgate  both  read  "  hither  and  thither. " 
Tumult  means  the  din  made  by  a  coniiised 
mass  of  people,  and  so  the  crowd  itself. 
Melted  away  does  not  give  the  exact  mean- 
ing. The  Philistines  were  not  dispersing,  but 
were  reding,  moving  to  and  fro  purposeless, 
and  in  confusion.  It  may  mean,  nowe ver,  to 
shake  or  melt  with  terror,  as  in  Isa.  xiv.  31, 
where  it  is  rendered  art  dissolved. 

Vers.  17,  18. — Nnmbernow.  On  hearing 
from  the  watchmen  that  fighting  was  seen  on 
the  other  side  of  the  ravine,  Saul  commands 
the  roll  to  be  called,  that  he  may  learn  who 
has  made  the  attack,  and  finds  only  his  son 
and  the  armour-bearer  missing.  Uncertain 
what  their  absence  might  mean,  he  said  unto 
Ahiah,  Bring  hither  the  ark  of  God.  The 
Syriac  Vulgate,  and  Chaldee  support  this 
reading,  but  the  Septuagint  has  ephod,  and 
than  can  be  do  doubt  that  this  is  the  right 


reading ;  for  the  verb  rendered  Bring  hi- 
ther is  never  used  of  the  ark,  but  only  of 
the  ephod ;  nor  was  the  ark  used  for  making 
inquiry  of  God,  but  the  ephod  with  the 
breastplate  inserted  in  it.  The  rest  of  the 
verse  is  a  gloss  added  by  some  scribe 
struck  at  this  strange  mention  of  the  ark, 
which  we  know  was  still  at  Kirjath-jearim. 
It  is  itself  corrupt  and  ungrammatical,  being, 
"For  the  ark  of  God  was  in  that  day  and 
the  children  of  Israel"  Still  both  the  read- 
ing ark  and  the  gloss  are  very  ancient,  being 
found  in  the  versions,  except  the  Septuagint, 
as  above, 

Ver.  19. — Withdraw  thine  hand.  Saul, 
impatient  of  delay,  cannot  wait  till  the  will 
of  God  is  made  known  to  him.  There  would 
have  been  no  real  loss  of  time,  and  he  might 
have  been  saved  from  the  errors  which  marred 
the  happiness  of  the  deliverance.  But  this 
precipitancy  very  well  shows  the  state  of 
Saul's  mind. 

Ver.  20. — Saul  and  all  the  people  .  .  . 
assembled  themselves.  Margin,  were  cried 
together,  i.  e.  summoned  by  trumpet-note. 
The  Syriac  and  Vulgate,  however,  make  the 
verb  active,  and  translate,  "And  Saul  and  all 
the  people  with  him  shouted  and  advanced 
to  the  battle."  Discomfiture.  Bather, 
"dismay,"  "consternation,"  as  in  ch.  v.  9. 

Vers.  21,  22. — Bound  about,  even.  All  the 
versions  by  a  very  slight  alteration  change 
this  into  turned,  which  the  A.  V.  is  forced 
to  supply.  With  this  necessary  correction 
the  translation  is  easy:  "And  the  Hebrews 
who  were  previously  with  the  Philistines, 
and  had  gone  up  with  them  into  the  camp, 
turned  to  be  with  the  Israelites  who  were 
with  Saul  and  Jonathan. "  It  appears,  there- 
fore, that  certain  districts  of  the  Israelite 
territory  were  so  completely  in  the  power  of 
the  Philistines  that  they  could  compel  the 
men  to  go  with  them,  not  perhaps  as  soldiers, 
as  is  our  custom  in  India,  but  as  drivers 
and  servants.  These  now  turned  upon  their 
masters,  and  were  reinforced  by  the  Israel- 
ites who  had  taken  refuge  in  Mount  Eph- 
raim.  Tt  is  noteworthy  that  these  subject 
"Hebrews"  retain  the  name  of  contempt 
given  them  by  their  masters. 

Ver.  23. — Over  unto  Beth-aven.  Hebrew, 
"  the  battle  passed  Beth-aven,"  i.  e.  no  rally 
was  made  there.  In  ver.  31  we  read  that 
the  pursuit  continued  as  far  as  Aijalon.  For 
Beth-aven  see  on  ch.  xiiL  6. 

Saul's  bash  command  (vers.  24 — 86^ 
Ver.  24. — The  men  of  Israel  were  distressed 
that  day.  The  word  is  that  used  in  ch.  xiil 
6  of  the  state  of  terror  and  alarm  to  which 
the  Israelites  were  reduced  by  the  Philistine 
invasion  :  here  it  refers  to  their  weariness 
and  faintness  for  want  of  food.  For  Saul 
had  adjured  the  people.  Hebrew,  "  had 
made  th"  people  swear."     He  had  recited 


246 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[CH.  XIV.  1 — 3S 


before  them  the  words  of  the  curse,  and 
made  them  shout  their  consent.  His  object 
was  to  prevent  any  delay  in  the  pursuit ; 
bnt  in  his  eagerness  he  forgot  that  the 
rtrength  of  his  men  would  fail  if  their  bodily 
wants  were  not  supplied.  But  though  worn 
out  and  fainting,  the  people  faithftuly  keep 
the  oath  put  to  them. 

Ver.  25— And  all  they  of  the  land. 
Hebrew,  "the  whole  land,"  or,  as  we  should 
say,  the  whole  country,  which  had  risen  to 
join  in  the  pursuit.  .  Honey  upon  the  ground. 
The  wild  bees  in  Palestine  fill  fissures  in  the 
rocks  (Dent,  xxxii.  13 ;  Ps.  Ixxxi.  16)  and 
hollow  trees  with  honey,  till  the  combs,  break- 
ing with  the  weight,  let  it  run  down  upon 
the  ground.  A  similar  abundance  of  honey 
iras  found  by  the  early  settlers  in  America. 

Ver.  26. — The  honey  dropped.  More  cor- 
rectly, "  Behold,  a  stream  (or  a  flowing)  of 
honey." 

Ver.  27. — Jonathan,  who  had  not  been 
present  when  his  father  charged  the  people 
with  the  oath,— literally,  "made  the  people 
swear," — dipped  the  end  of  his  staff  hastily, 
so  as  not  to  hinder  the  pursuit,  in  an  honey- 
comb— Hebrew,  "into  the  honey  wood,"  i.  e. 
into  the  hollow  branch  or  trunk  out  of  which 
the  honey  was  flowing  (but  see  Cant.  v.  1). 
His  eyes  ^vere  enlightened.  /.  e.  made 
fcright  and  clear,  the  dimness  caused  by  ex- 
Oessive  weariness  having  passed  away.  But 
this  is  a  correction  made  by  the  Jews  (hri),  and 
the  written  text  {c'tib)  has  "his  eyes  saw," 
which  is  more  forcible  and  poetic  When 
the  A.  V.  was  made  the  kri  was  supposed  to 
be  authoritative,  but  most  modem  comment- 
ators have  come  to  the  opposite  conclusion. 

Ver.  28.  —  And  the  people  were  faint. 
There  is  great  diversity  of  opinion  whether 
this  be  part  or  not  of  the  speech  of  the  man 
who  informed  Jonathan  of  the  oath  forced 
on  the  people  by  SauL  It  makes,  perhaps, 
the  better  sense  if  regarded  as  the  continu- 
ation of  the  history,  and  inserted  to  justify 
Jonathan's  disapproval  of  his  father's  hasty 
command.  The  right  rendering  is  were 
weary,  as  in  the  margin  and  Judges  iv.  21. 

Ver.  29.— My  father  hath  troubled  the 
land.  /.  e.  hath  brought  disaster  upon  it 
(see  Gen.  xxxiv.  80 ;  Josh,  vii  25).  This  dis- 
aster was  the  incompleteness  of  the  victory, 
owing  to  the  people  being  too  exhausted  to 
continue  the  pursuit. 

Vers.  30,  31. — For  had  there  not  been  now 
i  much  ^eater  slanghtert  This  clause  is 
really  an  indicative :  "  For  now  the  slaughter 
of  the  Philistines  is  not  very  great "    Never- 


theless, the  pursuit  was  continued  as  far  m 
the  pass  of  Aijalon,  and  though,  owing  to 
the  increasing  weariness  of  the  people,  but 
few  of  the  Philistines  were  overtaken,  never- 
theless it  would  compel  them  to  throw  away 
their  aims,  and  abandon  all  the  booty  which 
they  had  collected.  For  very  faint  the 
Hebrew  has  very  weary,  as  in  ver.  28. 

Ver.  32.— The  people  flew  upon  the  spoil. 
The  ^vritten  text  has,  "  And  the  people  set 
to  work  upon  the  spoil,  and  took  sheep,"  &c.  ^ 
but  as  the  sentence  is  not  very  grammatical 
the  kri  has  corrected  it  from  ch.  xv.  19. 
The  versions  have  either  "  greedily  desired, " 
or  "turned  themselves  unto."  The  people 
who  had  waited  until  evening,  when  the  oath 
forced  upon  them  by  Saul  was  over,  then  in 
their  hunger  broke  the  law  doubly  :  first  in 
killing  calves  with  their  dams  on  the  same 
day  (Levit.  xxii.  28),  and  secondly,  more  seri- 
ously, in  so  killing  them  "on  the  ground" 
that  the  blood  remained  in  the  carcase.  The 
law  enjoined  the  utmost  care  in  this  respect 
(ibid.  xvii.  10 — 14),  but  the  people  were  toe 
weary  and  hungry  to  trouble  about  it. 

Vers.  33,  34.  —  Te  have  transgressed. 
Better  as  in  the  margin,  "  dealt  treacher- 
ously," i.  e.  faiithlessly,  to  the  covenant  be- 
tween Israel  and  Jehovah.  Eoll  a  great 
stone  unto  me  this  day.  Or,  as  we  should 
say,  this  minute  ;  but  the  Hebrew  uses  "  this 
day  "  for  anything  to  be  done  at  once  (see  on 
ch.  ii.  16).  The  purpose  of  this  stone  was 
to  raise  up  the  carcases  of  the  slaughtered 
animals  from  the  ground,  so  that  the  blood 
might  drain  away  from  them.  On  tidings  of 
this  arrangement  being  dispersed  througli- 
out  the  army,  the  people  obey  Saul  with 
the  same  unquestioning  devotion  as  the} 
had  shown  to  his  command  to  abstain  from 
food. 

Ver.  85. — ^And  Saul  built  an  altar  unto 
Jehovah  as  a  thank  offering  for  the  Divine 
favour  in  gaining  so  great  a  victory.  The 
same  was  the  first  altar,  &c.  Literally, 
"As  to  it  he  began  to  build  an  altar  unto 
Jehovah."  On  these  words  the  question 
has  arisen  whether  the  meaning  be  that  Saul 
began  to  build  an  altar,  but  with  character- 
istic impetuosity  left  off  before  he  had  com- 
pleted it ;  or  whether  on  that  occasion  he 
commenced  the  custom  followed  by  David 
(2  Sam.  xxiv.  25)  of  erecting  altars  as  the 
patriarchs  had  done  in  old  time.  The  latter 
interpretation  is  more  in  accordance  with  the 
usage  of  the  Hebrew  language,  and  is  ap- 
proved by  the  translations  of  tJie  Septoagint 
and  Vulgate. 


HOMILETICa 


Vers.  1 — 12. — Inspit  aiion  in  Christian  enterprise.    The  facts  are — 1,  Jonathan, 
on  his  own  responsibility,  and  without  his  father's  knowledge,  resolves  on  an  attacb 


OH.  XIV.  1—35.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  241 

upon  the  Philistine  garrison.  2.  He  expresses  to  his  armour-bearer  his  hope  that 
God  will  help,  and  also  the  ground  of  that  hope.  3.  He  proposes  to  regard  the  first 
encouragement  from  the  enemy  to  ascend  the  clifE  as  a  sign  of  coming  success. 
4.  The  sign  appearing,  Jonathan  advances  in  confidence  of  victory.  The  recent 
transgression  of  Saul  was  now  bearing  some  bitter  fruit  in  his  comparative  inactivity 
and  helplessness.  It  is  not  likely  that  Jonathan  was  ignorant  of  the  displeasure  of 
the  prophet  of  Qod,  or  was  surprised  at  the  embarrassment  which  had  come  upon  his 
father's  affairs.  In  seasons  of  disaster  and  wrong  there  are  select  men  of  God  who 
mourn  the  sins  of  their  superiors  and  the  woes  of  their  country.  Being  one  of  this 
class,  Jonathan  may  be  regarded  as  exhibiting  some  of  the  highest  results  of  the 
instruction  and  influence  of  Samuel  during  the  slow  reformation  subsequent  to  the 
victory  at  Ebenezer.  It  is  in  God's  heart  to  have  pity  on  his  people  and  to  deliver 
them ;  but  at  this  juncture  can  we  not  discern  a  wise  propriety,  not  unmixed  with 
retribution  on  the  king,  in  conferring  the  honour  of  deliverance  upon  a  man  of  piety, 
whose  heart  evidently  yearned  for  the  highest  good  of  Israel  ?  Thus  do  we  see  here, 
as  in  many  other  instances,  how  readily,  and  where  not  looked  for,  God  raises  up 
instruments  to  effect  his  purposes  when  the  ordinary  instruments  fail  through  sin. 
Private  enterprise  can  often  accomplish  what,  in  consequence  of  a  loss  of  the  right 
spirit,  organised  and  official  effort  is  utterly  powerless  to  perform.  The  enforced 
inactivity  of  Saul,  the  desolations  of  the  spoilers,  and  the  multitudes  of  refugees  in 
the  caves  of  the  mountains,  must  have  produced  a  most  depressing  effect  on  the  king 
and  his  followers.  In  their  extremity,  under  an  inspiration  most  pure  and  noble, 
help  came  in  the  daring  enterprise  of  Jonathan,  as  recorded  by  the  historian.  It  is 
possible  that  a  secular  mind  on  reading  the  narrative  may  regard  the  story  as  just 
one  of  those  records  of  military  adventure  that  are  to  be  found  in  the  annals  of  all 
warlike  nations.  But  we  are  to  form  our  estimate  of  the  event  by  the  light  of 
Scripture ;  and  when  we  consider  it  in  connection  with  God's  revealed  purpose  to 
work  out  the  Messianic  covenant  through  a  chosen  race,  the  tenor  of  Jonathan's  life, 
and  especially  his  words  declaring  his  faith  in  God  (ver.  6),  we  must  then  see  here 
not  a  wild  freak  of  a  daring  soldier,  nor  even  a  clever  device  for  achieving  merely 
military  distinction,  but  a  true  and  noble  inspiration  to  accomplish  a  great  work  in 
the  name  of  God,  and  for  the  ultimate  realisation  of  the  Divine  purposes.  It  may 
be  assumed  that,  under  the  present  conditions  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ  in  the  world, 
there  is  frequent  and  full  scope  for  endeavours  corresponding,  in  their  relation  to  the 
organised  efforts  of  the  Church  and  in  their  chief  qfiaracteristics,  to  the  effort  of 
Jonathan  in  its  relation  to  the  monarchy.  Likewise  the  same  inspiration  is  needed 
for  the  more  perfect  development  and  successful  use  of  the  organised  forces  of  the 
Church.  While  nations  live  in  sin,  fearful  evils  fester  in  our  crowded  towns,  debasing 
and  dangerous  customs  hold  multitudes  in  bondage,  avenues  to  the  human  mind 
lie  untriversed  by  Christian  men,  and  possibly  propriety  degenerates  into  a  rigid, 
obstructive  conservatism,  there  is  room  for  men  and  women  who  dare  to  go  and  do 
what  seems  impossible,  and  for  a  fresh  baptism  on  the  hosts  of  God  to  inspire  them 
to  deeds  of  valour  and  self-denial.  It  is  possible  that  spurious  forms  of  enthusiasm 
may  arise,  and  may  pass  for  lieaven-created  zeal.  Contagion  of  sentiment  may 
obtain  the  force  of  a  torrent.  The  emotional  element  in  religion  may  be  abnormally 
developed,  and  incline,  under  stimulus,  to  deeds  which  no  sound  judgment  will 
justify.  But  grant  all  this,  and  more,  and  yet  it  is  true  that  there  is  a  pure  inspira- 
tion in  the  service  of  Christ  much  to  be  coveted.  Let  us  consider  the  characteristics 
of  stich  a  true  inspiration. 

I.  It  is  msTiNGUisHBD  BY  INDIVIDUALITY.  Whether  it  be  found  in  private  action 
or  in  the  combined  effort  of  the  Church,  it  does  not  appear  as  the  mere  product  of  _ 
organisation,  nor  as  a  revival  of  stereotyped  custom.  Jonathan's  inspiration  began 
in  his  own  heart.  It  was,  in  the  shape  it  took,  the  natural  outcome  of  the  man. 
Considerations  of  the  position  of  affairs  aroused  his  nature,  but  he  was  no  copyist, 
no  waiter  upon  other  men's  deeds.  Keeping  the  secret  from  his  father  was  essential 
to  the  more  perfect  individuality  of  his  feelings  and  his  enterprise.  Ideas  grow  in 
power  over  us  when  we  nourish  them.  Sometimes,  like  the  Apostle  Paul  and  Jonathan, 
we  do  better  not  to  "  confer  with  flssh  and  blood,"  but  brood  over  our  thought  and 
purpose,  by  the  aid  of  the  Spirit  of  Ciofi,  till  they  become  a  power  which  must  work 


248  THE  PlRS't  BOOS  Oi*  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xiv.  1—^ 

outwards  in  forms  true  to  our  own  personality.  There  is  far  more  individuality  in 
the  Christian  Church  than  is  at  present  developed.  When  a  Christian  is,  as  the  result 
of  brooding  over  things,  so  permeated  with  a  conviction  of  his  obligation  to  Christ, 
a  yearning  to  save  men  from  sin,  and  a  spirit  of  self-sacrifice,  as  to  be  mastered  by 
these  forces,  he  will  find  out  some  way  in  which  his  natural  aptitudes  and  capabilitien 
may  be  turned  to  account  in  Christ's  service.  All  great  and  beneficial  movements 
have  borne  the  stamp  of  individuality,  from  the  labours  of  the  Apostle  Paul  on,  by 
Luther,  up  to  the  latest  endeavours  to  save  the  waifs  of  our  city  population. 

II.  It  contemplates  an  end  conformable  to  the  end  fob  which  Christ  died. 
Jonathan  reveals  his  piety  and  his  intelligence  in  using  language  to  his  armour-bearer 
to  the  efBect  that  he  thought  it  probable  that  the  Lord  might  save  through  his  instru- 
mentality. He  sought  the  salvation  which  God  loves  to  accomplish,  and  for  which 
the  order  of  Providence  was  working.  It  is  our  privilege  to  take  a  wider  and  more 
spiritual  view  than  even  a  devout  Hebrew.  There  is  an  end  contemplated  by  God, 
and  being  wrought  out  by  the  great  sacrifice  on  the  cross,  with  its  concomitant 
influences — a  multitude  that  no  man  can  number  redeemed  out  of  every  nation, 
kindred,  and  tribe  from  the  bondage  and  _pollution  of  sin.  Whoever  sets  his  heart 
on  any  good  work,  conformable,  and  therefore  tributary,  to  that  issue, — be  it  social 
amelioration,  rescue  of  lost  ones  from  vice,  sanitary  improvements,  diffusion  of 
knowledge, — is  so  far  sharer  in  the  true  inspiration.  But  especially  is  that  a  true  and 
noble  inspiration  which  not  only  aims  at  ends  which,  being  good  and  moral,  are 
so  far  conformable  and  helpful  to  the  end  for  which  Christ  died,  but  aims  at  that 
spiritual  salvation  on  which  the  heart  of  Christ  was  supremely  set  when  he  gave 
himself  a  ransom  for  us.  This  is  the  longed-for  issue  of  all  those  noble  workers  at 
home  or  abroad  who  visit  the  abodes  of  sin,  and  seek,  as  though  they  cannot  refrain 
from  it,  to  gather  the  poor  degraded  ones  into  the  Saviour's  blessed  fold. 

III.  It  is  characterised  by  freedom  from  personal  vanity.  Jonathan*! 
taotives  were  transparently  pure.  There  was  none  of  the  restlessness  of  the  inactive 
soldier  craving  for  opportunity  to  display  prowess ;  no  regard  for  self  in  his  self- 
denial  and  risks.  His  references  to  the  Lord  and  the  saving  of  the  people  he  loved 
reveal  a  true,  generous,  self-sacrificing  spirit.  It  is  when  works  of  benevolence, 
and  especially  works  strictly  spiritual,  are  devised  and  carried  through  in  this  spirit 
that  we  are  under  the  influence  of  a  true  inspiration.  A  love  of  praise,  a  desire 
for  prominence,  fondness  for  being  counted  a  great  and  successful  worker,  an 
unreasonable  sensitiveness  to  apparent  neglect,  and  kindred  feelings,  are  the  "  little 
foxes  "  that  steal  the  grapes. 

IV.  It  is  marked  by  implicit  dependence  on  the  power  of  God.  Jonathan 
showed  prudence  and  skill  in  the  ascent  of  the  precipice  and  in  the  encouragement 
he  sought  for  advancing  by  means  of  the  "  sign ; "  but  the  feat  passes  out  of  the 
category  of  "  reckless,"  or  even,  in  the  common  usage  of  the  term,  "  daring,"  when 
we  note  that,  having  the  sign  as  a  kind  of  answer  to  the  prayer  of  his  heart,  he  rested 
his  success  not  on  his  skill  or  strength,  but  on  the  Lord,  with  whom  there  "  is  no 
restraint  to  save  by  many  or  by  few."  He  was  inspired  every  step  of  the  way  up 
the  rocks  by  trust  in  the  ever-present  Power  which  shields  the  faithful  and  works  the 
wonders  of  redemption  for  his  people.  Here  lies  the,seeret  of  the  true  inspiration 
that  has  wrought  so  powerfully  in  the  Church  of  God  in  its  purest  and  most  success- 
ful eras.  The  apostles  felt  that  it  was  not  of  man,  but  of  God,  to  save.  A  few 
feeble  Jews  were  mighty,  through  God,  to  the  pulling  down  of  many  a  stronghold. 
It  is  this  which  enables  the  missionary  to  toil  on  amidst  the  loathsome  vices  of  the 
•avage,  and  the  friend  of  the  outcast  at  home  to  attempt  what  none  others  dare. 

V.  It  is  marked  also  by  the  buoyancy  of  hope.  When  Jonathan  said,  "It  may 
be  that  the  Lord  will  work  for  us,"  it  was  not  to  express  uncertainty,  but  to  cheer  a 
man  of  less  faith,  and  to  indicate  the  belief  that  God  was  about  to  use  him  in  his 
service.  He  rightly  interpreted  his  yearning  to  be  used  as  an  inspiration  of  God, 
and  when  the  "  sign  "  came  that  assured  him  that  his  heart's  desire  was  accepted,  he 
moved  on  with  a  cheerful  spirit  "  Come  up  after  me :  for  the  Lord  hath  delivered 
them  into  the  hand  of  Israel."  The  modesty  of  the  assurance  I  "The  hand  of 
Israel ;"  not  " my  hsLixd."  This  buoyant  spirit  that  looks  on  in  hope  founded  on 
deep  conviction  of  God's  faithfulness  inspires  every  one  who  is  truly  called  to  laboui 


CH.  XIV.  1—35.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  24S 

for  Christ.  The  tone  of  the  apostles  all  through  their  toils  is  one  of  cheer.  The 
golden  gates  of  the  eternal  city  seem  ever  to  shine  before  them,  and  they  heai 
already  the  new  song.  Every  one  on  whom  this  true  apostolic  succession  has  come 
enters  into  sympathy  with  them,  and  no  longer  toils  with  dejected  brow  and 
despaiiing  heart. 

General  lessons : — 1.  There  is  abundant  encouragement  for  Christian  work  in  tin 
historically  illustrated  fact  that  God  does  accomplish  great  results  through  feeble  anil 
varied  means.     2.  It  is  a  question  with  each  of  us  whether  we  really  believe  thiii 
there  "  is  no  restraint  with  the  Lord,"  and  whether  lack  of  faith  in  this  great  trull 
does  not  explain  much  in  our  life  and  labour  which  we  deplore.     3.  We  may  as' 
ourselves  whether  there  is  anything  in  the  present  state  of  the.  Church  and  the  worh' 
afEording  scope  for  our  special  exertion  after  the  manner  of  Jonathan's.     4.  1 
should  be  an  inquiry  as  to  whether  we  are  open  to  receive  and  welcome  an  inspir;> 
tion  from  the  Lord  to  enter  on  some  work  involving  self-denial  and  difficulty.    6.  1 
we  think  we  are  inspired  to  undertake  some  difficult  work  for  Christ,  we  shoulii 
discriminate  between  sudden  impulse  and  mature  irresistible  longing ;  and,  mekinf, 
counsel  of  God,  follow  the  signs  of  Providence. 

Vera.  13 — 23. — God's  faithfulness  to  his  oum.  The  facts  are — 1.  Jonathan  awC 
his  servant  ascend  the  precipice  and  slay,  on  a  narrow  strip  of  land,  about  twenty 
men.  2.  A  panic  arising,  from  a  combination  of  causes,  the  commotion  attracts  thi 
attention  of  Saul's  sentinels.  3.  It  being  ascertained  that  Jonathan  was  engaged 
against  the  Philistines,  inquiry  is  sought  of  God,  by  Saul,  through  the  priest  Ahiali. 
4.  The  tumult  among  the  Philistines  increasing,  Saul  abruptly  stops  the  inquiry  and 
leads  on  his  followers  to  battle.  5.  The  deserters  and  the  fugitives  fall  on  the  reaj- 
of  the  retreating  Philistines.  The  historian  sums  up  the  narrative  of  events  in  this 
section  by  the  suggestive  words,  "  So  the  Lord  saved  Israel  that  day,"  It  wag  "the 
Lord,"  working  through  the  instrumentality  of  a  noble-hearted  man  and  the  events 
concurrent  with  his  action — not  withholding  the  reward  of  fidelity,  notwithstanding 
the  questionable  conduct  of  the  king.  "  It  is  the  Lord,"  must  be  the  verdict  of 
history,  not  only  of  their  deliverance,  but  of  many  others  in  all  time. 

I.  God's  faithfulness  is  seen  in  pekfecting  the  work  which  he  inspires. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  but  that  Jonathan  received  this  "  good  and  perfect  gift "  of 
inspiration,  to  seek  the  salvation  of  his  country,  from  God.  We  have  seen  that  ii 
could  not  have  been  a  mere  human,  earth-born  impulse.  There  may  be  a  point  at 
which  the  human  free  aspiration  becomes  touched  with  a  Divine  power;  but,  as  n 
whole,  the  impulse  is  of  God.  The  narrative  tells  us  how  certainly  God  wrought  foi 
the  perfecting  of  that  which  he  saw  in  the  heart.  Not  a  step  of  his  way  did 
Jonathan  find  to  be  a  practical  denial  of  the  truth  of  his  inward  prompting.  Thus 
the  life  of  the  true  man  of  God  is  crowded  with  evidences  of  the  Divine  faithful- 
ness. He  who  begins  a  "  good  work  "  within  us  will  carry  it  through.  He  is  "  not 
unrighteous  to  forget  our  work  of  faith  and  labour  of  love."  He  will  "  perfect  that 
which  concerneth  us."  "  Loving  his  own,"  he  loves  "  to  the  end."  Abraham,  under 
an  inspiration  from  God,  went  forth,  and  all  through  his  pilgrimage  he  found  Jehovah 
to  be  a  coVenant-keeping  God.  In  our  painful  and  protracted  endeavours,  in  obedi- 
ence to  an  aspiration  born  from  above  to  rise  to  the  heights  of  holiness  and  to  bless 
others,  we  shall  find  him  faithful  who  hath  promised  never  to  leave  nor  forsake  ns. 

II.  In  maintaining  his  faithfulness  to  his  people  God  causes  varied  influ- 
ences TO  CONVERGE  ON  THE  DESIRED  RESULT  OF  EFFORT.  The  Divine  faithfulness 
is  not  arbitrarily  and  absolutely  manifested.  It  is  seen  in  realising  the  desired  end 
by  a  succession  of  events  naturally  connected.  Jonathan's  exertions  were  put  forth 
as  though  all  rested  on  the  courage  of  his  own  heart  and  the  strength  of  his  own 
arm.  The  narrative  shows  us  how  an  unseen  hand  upheld  the  brave  soldier,  and 
caused  diverse  things  to  converge  on  the  one  issue :  e.  g.  the  young  soldier's  skill, 
tact,  and  courage ;  the  folly  of  the  defenders  in  allowing  him  a  footing  on  the  narrow 
pathway  of  the  upper  part  of  the  precipice ;  the  fear  aroused  through  ignorance  of 
the  full  facts  of  the  assault ;  the  panic  spread  from  post  to  post — strengthened, 
possibly,  by  a  slight  shock  of  earthquake ;  the  onward  movement  of  Saul's  troop ; 
»nd  the  opportunity  crea*9d  for  the  rallying  of  fugitives  and  deserters  (vers.  31, 32). 


260  THE  FiaST  BOOii.  JF  SAMUEL.  toH.  xiv.  1—36. 

Such  an  historical  episode  is  of  great  value  to  us,  as  indicating  in  distinct,  traceable 
incidents  the  reality  of  that  Divine  wisdom  and  power  which  ever  presides  over  all 
the  efforts  of  Christians  to  rid  themselves  and  the  world  of  sin.  It  illustrates  as  on 
a  picture  the  great  formula  of  faith — "All  thing"  work  together  tor  good  to  them  that 
love  God."  As  "the  stars  in  their  courses  fougr.  against  Sisera,"  and  as  even  holy 
angels  are  "  ministering  spirits  sent  forth  to  minister  to  those  who  shall  be  heirs  of 
salvation,"  so  may  it  be  said,  in  the  case  of  every  one  who  strives  to  purify  himself 
from  all  sin,  or  seeks  by  some  bold  or  ordinary  endeavour  to  win  the  world  over  to 
Christ,  "all  things  are  yours,"  —  are  being  governed  by  the  Lord  of  all  so  as  to 
subserve  the  one  holy  end  to  the  attainment  of  which  your  hearts  are  inspired. 
III.  In  manifesting  his  faithfulness  to  his  people  God  permits  the  impek- 

FECT  TO  SHARE   IN   THE  BLESSINGS  PROCURED    BY    THE   MORE  PERFECT.      Primarily,  it 

was  God's  compassion  for  Israel  and  his  covenant  with  Abraham  that  must  accouiit 
for  this  new  deliverance.  Secondarily,  it  was  a  reward  to  Jonathan's  fidelity  and 
self-consecration.  Saul  had  shut  himself  out  of  the  honour  and  privilege  of  obtaining 
deliverance  for  the  nation.  Even  now  his  old  folly  and  rashness  reappear,  in 
religiously  beginning  to  seek  counsel,  thus  honouring  God,  and  then  in  irreverently 
discontinuing  to  seek  that  counsel,  through  his  impetuous  haste  to  join  in  the  pursuit, 
thus  preferring  the  impulse  of  his  heart  to  the  declared  -^ylll  of  God.  Nevertheless, 
even  Saul  derives  great  advantage  from  the  prowess  of  the  good  and  devout 
Jonathan.  God,  in  his  mercy,  does  not  sacrifice  the  final  interests  of  his  people  to 
the  folly  of  a  leader.  Thus,  also,  Joseph's  brethren  shared  in  the  prosperity  won  by 
their  holy  and  wise  brother.  The  inferior  Christians  of  to-day  participate  in  somr- 
of  the  outward  blessings  accruing  to  the  faithful  as  the  result  of  their  fidelity. 

General  lessons: — 1.  It  would  be  a  profitable  study  to  note  in  detail,  over -the  field 
of  sacred  and  Church  history,  and  in  the  sphere  of  private  Christian  enterprise,  to 
what  a  large  extent  the  world  is  indebted  for  spiritual,  material,  and  educational 
good  to  the  honour  God  has  put  on  the  labours  of  the  most  faithful  of  his  servants. 
2.  We  may  be  perfectly  sure  in  the  pursuit  of  any  holy  enterprise,  to  which  person- 
ally we  may  feel  inadequate,  that  God,  with  whom  is  "  no  restraint,"  will  develop 
helping  circumstances.  3.  I'he  helping  circumstances  desiderated  will  arise,  not  at 
first,  but  only  as  we  faithfully  press  along  the  line  of  duty.  4.  The  cumulating 
record  of  God's  faithfulness  to  his  people  through  the  long  ages  should  make  up 
calm,  ijtrong,  and  immovable  in  the  most  perilous  of  enterprises  undertaken  fui 
Christ 

Vers.  24 — 35.  —  Unwise  zeal  and  moral  ohtuseness.  The  facts  are — 1.  Saul  by  u 
rash  vow  causes  great  distress  amot  g  Uie  people  and  diminishes  the  fruits  of  victory. 
2.  Jonathan,  unawares,  takes  food  contrary  to  his  father's  prohibition,  and  on  being 
informed  of  the  tnitli,  deplores  the  unwisdom  of  the  vow.  3.  As  a  consequence  of 
the  enforced  exhaustion,  the  people  at  the  close  of  the  day  violate  the  ceremonial 
law  by  a  voracious  meal  of  flesh  unduly  prepared.  4.  Saul,  professing  to  he  shocked 
at  their  sin,  provides  means  by  which  the  offence  may  be  avoided,  and  raises  an  altar 
unto  the  Lord.  The  turn  in  affairs  brought  on  by  Jonathan's  heioism  was  most  wel- 
come to  Saul,  as  it  seemed  to  he  the  return  of  the  prosperity  which  had  r»ceived  a 
check  in  his  own  sin  at  Gilgal.  There  had  been  no  expressions  of  sincere  penitenae, 
nor,  as  far  as  tiie  narrative  gives  light,  any  efEort  to  regain  former  relationships  to 
Samuel.  .The  impulsive  rush  from  the  inquiring  priest  to  join  in  the  pursuit  revealed 
a  state  of  mind  which  at  once  accounts  for  the  curse  pronounced  on  any  one  who 
should  dare  to  take  food.  The  facts  included  in  the  section  before  ub  furnish  a 
conspicuous  instance  of  unwise  zeal  and  moral  ohtuseness. 

I.  Unwise  zeal.  The  zeal  of  Saul  was  conspicuous  enough.  As  in  the  case  of 
Joshua  (Josh.  viii.  8 — 13),  there  was  an  intense  desire  to  put  into  a  single  day  all 
the  exertion  possible  in  order  to  make  the  victory  over  God's  enemies  more  complete. 
There  was  clearly  in  his  mind  an  idea  that  he  was  doing  God  service  (ver.  33).  But 
the  unwisdom  of  the  zeal  is  equally  conspicuous  ;  for  it  prevented,  by  the  physical 
weakness  induced,  the  very  end  designed  (vers.  29,  30) :  it  caused  pain  and  annoy- 
ance to  an  obedient  people,  who,  while  submissive,  must  have  lost  some  respect  for 
their  monarch's  judgment ;  it  exposed  the  best  man  of  the  day  to  a  great  peril,  and 


OH.  XIV.  1-56.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  261 


the  people  to  a  strong  temptation  to  commit  excess.  Unvdse  zeal  may  he  considered 
vanoudy.  1.  As  to  form.  It  assumes  diverse  forms  according  to  the  circumstances 
of  'the  case.  _  (1)  Sometimes  the  aim,  may  he  wrong,  as  when  the  Jews  in  apostolic 
times,  in  their  zeal,  not  according  to  knowledge,  sought  most  energetically  to  per- 
petuate a  decaying  ceremonial.  The  same  is  true  of  all  who  compass  sea  and  land 
to  make  mere  proselytes  to  their  order  or  sect,  or  to  bring  modem  feeling  and  usage 
back,  in  matters  of  minor  significance,  to  the  style  of  the  past.  (2)  Often  the 
method  is  ivrong,  as  in  the  case  of  Saul.  Men  have  not  always  the  wisdom  to  con- 
serve or  develop,  as  the  occasion  may  demand,  their  energy  suitably  to  the  end  in 
view.  There  is  an  enormous  waste  in  the  world  from  this  cause.  Perhaps  no  man, 
in  his  daily  calli»\g,  is  free  from  this  form  of  unwise  zeal.  We  see  illustrations  of 
this  in  the  untiring  effort  of  some  to  be  justified  before  God  by  their  own  deeds  of 
righteousness ;  in  the  constant  and  painful  flow  of  penitential  tears  and  self-inflicted 
sorrows  as  means  of  the  forgiveness  which  comes  only  by  calm  trust  in  Christ ;  and 
in  the  wild  and  ill-considered  agencies  sometimes  used  to  win  careless  men  to'Christ. 
(3)  Sometimes  the  end  is  good  and  the  method,  but  the  time  is  iinswited.  It  might 
be  good  for  Israel  to  chase  the  foe  with  full  energy,  and  also  good  to  fast,  but  the 
time  was  not  suitable  for  the  conjunction  of  the  two.  It  is  mistaken  zeal  to  concen- 
trate all  strength  on  the  edification  of  a  Church  when  multitudes  are  living  outside 
the  fold  of  Christ.  Wisdom  lies  much  in  doing  work  at  the  right  season.  2.  As  to 
origin.  Saul's  unwise  zeal  arose  fi-om  his  impulsive  temperament  not  being  chastened 
and  regulated  by  a  diligent  use  of  the  counsel  which  was  always  available  to  him  as 
king  from  God.  This  radical  error  accounts  for  the  ill-balanced  judgment  which 
could  not  see  the  effect  of  a  long  fast  on  physical  energy,  for  the  rash  utterance,  for 
the  eager  springing  at  the  first  chance  to  escape  from  the  helpless  position  conse- 
quent on  recent  transgression,  and  for  the  egotistical  reference  to  avenging  his  own 
enemies.  The  origin  of  unwise  zeal  in  most  instances  is  connected  with  deficient 
waiting  upon  God.  The  knowledge  of  men  may  be  defective,  their  temperament 
may  be  impulsive,  their  prevision  of  a  low  grade,  their  self -regulation  a  matter  of 
emotional  pressure  rather  than  of  reason ;  and  yet  if  such  men  would,  remembering 
their  obvious  imperfections,  devoutly  wait  on  God  for  his  guidance,  and  seek  daily 
grace  to  govern  themselves,  they  would  avoid  many  blunders  in  practice.  Imper- 
fectly^balanced  men  will  never  do  work  in  life  perfectly.  We  must  lay  to  our  account 
a  large  proportion  of  foolish  deeds  in  Christian  and  secular  enterprise.  The  calming, 
enlightening  power  of  devotion  is  not  fully  recognised.  3.  As  to  consequences.  In 
Saul's  case,  as  already  indicated,  it  induced  trouble  and  pain  to  his  people,  interfered 
with  the  most  perfect  success  of  Jonathan's  effort  (vers.  29,  30),  lowered  himself  in 
the  eyes  of  his  subjects  as  a  king  deficient  in  judgment,  and,  by  exercise,  intensified 
the  defective  qualities  which  gave  rise  to  it.  We  have  here  a  summary  of  what 
always  attends  unwise  zeal.  Every  foolish  display  of  energy,  even  in  a  good  cause, 
brings  distress  to  those  who  have  the  interests  of  religion  and  humanity  at  heart. 
Being  a  waste  of  power,  and  therefore  a  violation  of  the  moral  and  social  laws  by 
which  God  brings  the  highest  results  to  pass,  it  impedes  the  subjugation  of  evil  to 
good,  and  the  final  triumph  of  God's  kingdom.  The  world  is  suffering  still  from 
erratic  courses,  destitute  of  sound  judgment,  pursued  in  the  name  of  religion ;  from  a 
concentration  of  energy  on  superficial  instead  of  on  radical  evils;  and  from  an 
undue  application  of  resources  to  the  curative  methods,  in  frequent  oversight  of 
the  preventive.  ..       j 

II.  MOBAI.  OBTCeBNESS.  The  moral  obtuseness  of  Saul's  character  had  manifested 
itself  in  his  evident  inability  to  see  at  Gilgal  (ch.  xiii.  8—10)  the  stupidity  of  seeking 
to  please  God  by  an  act  of  worship  which  itself  was  a  violation  of  his  explicit  com- 
mands. Character  becomes  more  fixed  as  time  passes  on ;  and  here  we  see  Saul  so 
morally  obtuse  as  not  to  perceive  that,  while  condemning  a  ceremonial  offence  on  the 
part  of  the  people  (ver.  33),  he  was  unconscious  of  the  folly  of  his  own  conduct,  and 
of  the  mor^  offence  both  of  laying  on  the  people  a  serious  hindrance  to  victory  and 
of  preferring  his  own  wild  impulse  to  the  counsel  of  Jehovah.  Moral  obtusenesi 
may  be  regarded  in  reference  to — 1.  Its  causes — e.  g.  inherited  dulness  of  conscience, 
imperfectly-formed  moral  discrimination  in  early  years,  growing  habituation  to 
formal  religious  acts,  the  influence  of  a  low  state  of  public  morality,  and  postpone- 


262  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xn.  1—35. 

ment  of  sincere  repentance  after  known  transgressions.  2.  Its  manifestation — e.  g. 
in  ri^d  external  observances  to  the  neglect  of  spiritual  culture,  combination  ol 
religious  zeal  with  positive  indulgence  in  immoral  feelings,  ease  in  detecting  palpable 
oflEences  in  others  with  self-complacent  views  of  one's  own  condition,  insensibility  to 
the  truth  which  awakens  the  finer  spiritual  feelings  of  other  men,  and  coarse  treat- 
ment of  the  sensitive.  3.  Its  danger — e.  g.  in  being  inaccessible  to  many  of  the 
most  elevating  influences,  rendered  more  dense  by  every  repeated  exercise,  and 
productive  of  a  delusive  self-righteousness  which  becomes  more  self-assertive  in 
proportion  as  inward  unholiness  prevails.  4.  Its  treatment — e.  g.  by  distinct  personal 
teaching  of  the  most  discriminating  and  pungent  character,  placing  the  individuals 
in  close  association  with  persons  of  fine  spiritual  discernment  and  delicacy  of  cha- 
racter as  a  striking  foil,  prompting  to  acts  that  will  tend  to  reveal  the  inward  incom- 
petency, and  special  prayer  for  the  quickening  of  the  life-giving  Spirit. 

General  lessons : — 1.  Cultivate  a  refined  moral  sensibility  in  youth  as  a  basis  for 
life.  2.  Men  in  office  need  prayer  for  special  spiritual  wisdom.  3.  When  sin  has 
been  committed  it  should  be  repented  of  at  once,  and  special  prayer  made  lest  its 
inward  influence  be  to  lower  the  tone  of  feeling. 

HOMILIES  BY  VABIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 15.  (Geba,  Michmash.) — The  heroism  of  Jonathan.  "  Come,  and  let  us 
go  over  unto  the  garrison  of  these  uncircumcised, '  &c.  (ver.  6).  The  character  of 
Jonathan  is  one  of  the  bravest,  most  generous,  devout,  and  blameless  in  history.  Of 
his  earliest  years  nothing  is  recorded.  When  first  mentioned  he  was  in  command  of 
a  thousand  soldiers  (ch.  xiii.  2),  and  his  overthrow  of  the  Philistine  garrison  in  Geba 
was  "  the  first  act  of  the  war  of  independence ;  "  but  (as  in  the  case  of  Moses — ^Acts 
vii.  25)  it  failed  to  deliver  his  people  from  oppression.  His  attack  upon  the  enemy's 
camp  at  Michmash,  which  is  here  described,  resulted  in  victory.  He  inherited  the 
physical  strength  and  courage  of  Saul ;  but  in  other  respects  presented  a  contrast 
to  his  father;  exemplified  the  best,  as  the  latter  exemplified  some  of  the  worst 
features  of  the  age,  and  set  a  pattern  of  true  heroism  for  all  time. 

"  What  makes  a  hero  ?  an  heroic  mind 
Expressed  in  action,  in  endurance  proved." 

I.  Exalted  ASPIRATIONS  (ver.  1)  which — 1.  Are  cherished  in  adverse  circumstances 
(ch.  xiii.  22  ;  ver.  2).  Instead  of  being  crushed  by  adversity,  "  an  heroic  mind  " 
bears  it  patiently,  rises  above  it,  and  aspires  to  higher  things  (Acts  xxi.  13).  In  its 
midst  it  shines  all  the  more  brightly,  like  gold  purified  by  the  fire.  2.  Lead  to 
courageous  projects.  Jonathan  often  looks  across  the  ravine  between  Bozez  and 
Seneh  (vers.  4,  0),  and  revolves  in  his  mind  how  he  can  strike  a  blow  at  the  appar- 
ently inaccessible  fortress  of  the  enemy ;  and  at  length  goes  forth  secretly  in  the 
night  or  at  early  dawn,  attended  only  by  his  armour-bearer.  To  communicate  his 
project  to  others,  even  if  it  were  as  yet  clear  to  himself,  would  be  to  hinder  or  defeat 
its  accomplishment.  He  feels  called  to  attempt  something  great,  and  "  confers  not 
with  flesh  and  blood."  3.  Are  inspired  hy  the  Divine  Spirit.  More  of  "  the  mind 
of  the  Lord  "  was  doubtless  made  known  to  Jonathan  than  to  the  king,  notwith- 
standing the  presence  of  the  priest  with  him  (ver.  3).  What  appears  presumption 
to  others  is  often  to  one  Divinely  taught  the  simple  path  of  duty. 

II.  Eminent  faith  (ver.  6),  including — 1.  A  firm  conviction  of  the  covenant 
relation  of  God  to  his  people.  "These  uncircumcised"  in  opposition  to  Israel. 
Jonathan's  thought  was  not  of  himself,  but  of  his  people,  and  of  the  promises  and 
purposes  of  God  concerning  them.  2.  A  lofty  conception  of  the  unlimited  power  oj 
God  to  save  them.  ''  There  is  no  restraint  to  the  Lord  to  save  by  many  or  by  few  " 
(2  Ghron.  xiv.  11 ;  Mioah  ii.  7).  In  comparison  with  his  might  the  strength  of  man, 
whether  nuch  or  little,  is  nothing.  He  has  often  used  "  the  weak  things  of  the 
world  to  confound  the  tilings  that  are  mighty"  (1  Cor.  i.  27,  28),  and  he  can  do  so 
again.  Faith  is  shown  in  contemplating  the  power  of  God,  and  is  thereby  greatly 
increased.  3.  Humble  reliance  on  the  gracious  co-operation  of  God  on  their  behalf. 
"  It  may  be  that  the  Lord  will  work  for  us."  He  is  ready  and  able  to  afford  help, 
but  whether  it  will  be  given  in  connection  with  a  particular  course  of  action  la, 


CH  XIV.  1—36.]  THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  263 


without  express  direction  or  promise,  uncertain ;  and  the  indications  of  his  will  should 
be  followed  with  humility,  hopefulness,  and  confidence.  "  The  measure  of  faith  ia 
the  measure  of  God's  help."    "  All  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth." 

III.  Pbudbnt  WATCHFULNESS  (vers.  9, 10).  1.  In  contrast  to  reckless  adventure 
Faith  in  God  gives  insight  into  the  hidden  principles  and  tendencies  of  things, 
teaches  the  adoption  of  appropriate  means,  and  makes  men  calm  as  well  as  fearless 
when  others  lose  self-control,  and  adopt  foolish  and  dangerous  expedients  (Acts 
«vii.  25,  30).  2.  In  ascertaining  the  prospects  of  success.  If  the  enemy  are  on 
the  alert  and  exhibit  courage,  it  will  be  vain  to  expect  to  take  them  by  surprise 
(ver.  9);  but  if  they  feel  themselves  secure  in  their  position,  are  careless  and  slack, 
and  blinded  by  self-confidence,  "the  Lord  hath  delivered  them  into  the  hand  of 
Israel"  (ver.  12)._  3.  In  working  teiseltf  teith  a  view  to  that  end.  God  works  by 
means,  and  not  without  them,  and  the  wisest  means  are  the  most  successful. 

IV.  Daring  ENERGY  (vers.  11— 14)  in— 1.  Enduring  great  ris)!!.  2.  Putting  forth 
immense  effort.  "  Jonathan  climbed  up  on  his  hands  and  knees."  It  is  a  severe  as 
well  as  a  dangerous  climb  to  reach  the  point  where  the  conflict  begins.  3.  Following  up 
every  advantage  to  the  utmost.  "  When  he  came  in  full  view  of  the  enemy  they  both 
discharged  such  a  flight  of  arrows,  stones,  and  pebbles  from  their  bows,  crossbows, 
and  slings  that  twenty  men  fell  at  the  first  onset,  and  the  garrison  fled  in  a  panic." 

V.  Inspiring  sympathy  (vers.  7, 13).  A  believing  and  heroic  spirit  begets  the 
same  spirit  in  others.  1.  At  first  those  with  whom  it  comes  into  closest  contact — it 
may  be  a  single  individual.  2.  Afterwards  a  host  (vers.  21,  22).  3.  And  their 
aid  contributes  to  the  general  result.  "  The  history  of  battles  should  teach  us  the 
mighty  power  of  sympathetic  relations.'* 

VI.  Di YIN  E  APPROVAL.  \.  Expresscd  in  the  (werthrow  of  the  enemy — bringing  them 
into  confusion  (ver.  15),  turning  them  against  one  another  (ver.  16),  and  saving 
Israel  from  their  oppression,  as  well  as  in  the  Providential  ordering  of  all  things  that 
contributed  to  it.  2.  In  commendation  of  "  the  spirit  of  faith"  in  which  the  enter- 
prise was  undertaken  and  carried  out.  3.  Recognised  by  all  the  people.  "  He  hath 
wrought  with  God  this  day  "  (ver.  45) — wrought  efEectually  through  his  favour  and 
power.  The  day  was  won  by  Jonathan ;  still  more  by  God.  "  So  the  Lord  saved 
Israel  that  day  "  (ver.  23).    And  to  him  the  glory  must  be  ascribed. — ^D. 

Vers.  16 — 23.  (Gibbah.) — Impatience  in  seeking  Divine  counsel.  "Withdraw 
thine  hand  "  (ver.  19).  In  order  to  ascertain  the  will  of  God  two  things  are  neces- 
sary : — 1.  A  special  method  of  communication.  In  ancient  days  it  was  "  by  dreams, 
Urim,  and  prophets  "  (ch.  xxviii.  6).  The  Urim  (light,  illumination)  and  T'hummim 
(perfection,  completeness,  truth)  were  symbols  of  some  kind  or  other  attached  to  or 
placed  within  the  folded  breastplate  connected  with  the  ephod  of  the  high  priest 
(Exod.  xxviii.  30 ;  Num.  xxvii.  21).  "  The  question  brought  was  one  affecting  the 
well-being  of  the  nation,  or  its  army,  or  its  king.  The  inquirer  spoke  in  a  low  whisper, 
asking  one  question  only  at  a  time.  The  high  priest,  fixing  his  gaze  on  the  '  gems 
oracular '  that '  lay  on  his  heart,'  fixed  his  thoughts  on  the  light  and  perfection  which 
they  symbolised,  on  the  holy  name  inscribed  on  them.  The  act  was  itself  a  prayer, 
and,  like  other  prayers,  it  might  be  answered.  After  a  time  he  passed  into  the  new, 
mysterious,  half  ecstatic  state.  All  disturbing  elements — selfishness,  prejudice,  the 
fear  of  man — were  eliminated.  He  received  the  insight  he  craved.  Men  trusted 
in  his  decisions,  as  with  us  men  trust  the  judgment  which  has  been  purified  by  prayer 
for  the  help  of  the  eternal  Spirit  more  than  that  which  grows  only  out  of  debate 
and  policy  and  calculation  "  (Smith's  '  Die.').  "  When  at  length  a  visible  king  reigned 
,by  Divine  appointment,  the  counsel  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim  passed  into  the  public 
ministry  of  the  prophets,  which  modified  and  controlled  the  political  organisations  of 
the  kings  "  ('  Bible  Eduo.,'iv.  37).  We  have  now  the  written  word  and  the  guidance 
of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  A  proper  spirit  of  inquiry — humility,  sincerity,  faith,  patience, 
and  perseverance.  Saul  "inquired  of  the  Lord  "  (Judges  i.  1 ;  xx.  27 ;  ch.  x.  22),  but  not 
in  a  right  manner,  impatiently  breaking  off  his  inquiry  before  the  answer  came,  and 
commanding  the  priest  to  desist  from  pursuing  it.  In  like  manner  many  persons 
Degin  to  pray,  and  forthwith  cease,  instead  of  "  continuing  instant  in  prayer ;  "  ask, 
and  wait  not  to  receive ;  call  upon  God  under  the  pressure  of  trouble,  and  neglect  to 


«64  THE  riBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xit.  1— 8fc 

do  80  when  it  has  passed  away.    Such  impatience  in  seeking  to  "  understand  what 
the  will  of  the  Lord  is  " — 

I.  Arises  from  undub  concebn  about  secondary  matters.  1.  The  need  of  human 
^ort,  as  if  nothing  else  were  necessary  to  success  (Ps.  zxiii.  16, 17 ;  cxxvii.  1,  2). 
2.  The  gain  of  earthly  ho/rwur  or  other  advantages.  Saul  was  eager  to  obtain, 
beyond  everything  else,  the  glory  of  a  victory  over  his  enemies.  3.  The  loss  of  a 
favourable  oppoi'tunity.  But  "  there  is  no  time  lost  while  we  are  waiting  God's  time. 
It  is  as  acceptable  a  piece  of  submission  to  the  will  of  God  to  sit  still  contentedly 
when  our  Lord  requires  it  as  to  work  for  him  when  we  are  called  to  do  it "  (M.  Henry). 

II.  Proves  sinful  indifference  to  the  highest  object.  1.  Inappreciation  oj 
its  worth.  Men  often  imagine  that  their  own  wisdom  and  strength  are  sufBcient,  and 
that  it  can  be  done  without.  2.  Indisposition  to  bow  to  its  authority.  They  love  to 
have  their  own  way.  3.  Incredulity  as  to  its  communication  at  the  right  time 
and  in  the  right  manner.  They  disbelieve  the  promises  as  well  as  reject  the  con- 
ditions of  obtaining  them. 

III.  Exhibits  reckless  disregard  of  the  Lord  himself.  By — 1.  Seeking  him  in 
an  insincere,  inconsistent,  and  hypocritical  manner,  which  the  cessation  of  prayer 
plainly  shows  (Job  xxvii.  10).  2.  Preferring  personal  and  immediate  convenience 
to  his  honour,  and  desiring  his  help  only  in  so  far  as  it  may  be  conducive  to-  self- 
interest.  3.  Disobediertce  to  his  will;  for  to  act  without  the  knowledge  of  that  will 
when  it  may  be  obtained  is  a  manifest  act  of  disobedience  (Isa.  xxx.  1). 

IV.  Involves  disastrous  consequences.  1.  Destitution  of  the  highest  counsel 
and  aid.  2.  Unpreparedness  for  duty  and  conflict.  3.  A  course  of  recklessness,  sin, 
trouble,  and  humiliation  (vers.  24,  37,  39,  44,  45).  "  Therefore  turn  thou  to  thy 
God:  keep  mercy  and  judgment,  and  wait  on  thy  God  continually"  (Hosea  xiL  6). 
"  I  will  hear  what  God  the  Lord  will  speak,"  &c.  (Ps.  lixxv.  8).— D. 

Vera.  24 — 46.  (Michmash,  Ajalon.) — Rashness.  "  Cursed  be  the  man  that  eateth 
•ny  food  until  evening,"  &c.  (ver.  24).  Rashness  is  often  a  cause  of  trouble ;  and 
some  persons  might  profitably  ponder  the  advice  once  given  by  the  town-clerk  of 
Ephesus,  "  Do  nothing  rashly  (Acts  xix.  36).  It  is  also,  sometimes,  very  sinful, 
as  it  was  in  Saul.  Whilst  pursuing  the  Philistines,  and  wishing  to  exterminate  them, 
he  imposed  a  solemn  oath  upon  the  people  not  to  take  food  until  the  evening  under 
penalty  of  death.  This  rash  oath  was  followed  by  two  others  of  a  similar  nature 
(vers.  39,  44),  all  indicating  the  recklessness  and  wilfulness  of  his  course.  Hi« 
concern  for  the  law  (vers.  33,  34),  his  erection  of  an  altar  (ver.  35),  his  asking 
counsel  of  God  before  going  to  spoil  the  enemy  by  night  (ver.  37),  his  eagerness  to 
ascertain  by  lot  the  cause  of  the  silence  of  the  oracle  (ver.  41),  were  not  an  exhibition 
of  genuine  piety ;  they  were  rather  a  substitute  for  it,  and  the  fruits  of  an  unsanctitied, 
blind,  and  passionate  zeal ;  and  the  death  of  the  noble  Jonathan,  if  it  had  taken  place, 
would  have  completed  his  folly  and  sin.     Consider  his  rashness  as — 

I.  Revealing  a  wrong  state  of  mind.  1.  Inconsideration.  His  oath  was 
uttered  without  deliberation  (Ecoles.  v.  2).  He  did  not  consider  whether  it  was 
according  to  the  will  of  God,  nor  what  its  consequences  might  he.  He  did  not  after- 
wards reflect  how  far  the  transgressions  of  others  and  the  silence  of  Heaven  might  be 
due  to  his  own  fault,  and  he  did  not  apparently  recognise  his  fault  when  plainly  set 
before  him.  2.  Insincerity.  "It  did  not  proceed  from  a  proper  attitude  toward 
God,  but  was  an  act  of  false  zeal  in  which  he  had  more  regard  to  himself  and  his 
own  kingly  power  than  to  the  cause  of  the  kingdom  of  Jehovah  "  (Keil).  3.  Vain- 
glory. "  That  I  may  be  avenged  on  mine  enemies."  "  In  this  prohibition  there  was 
a  secret  pride  and  misuse  of  power,  for  he  desired  to  force,  as  it  were,  a  complete 
victory,  and  then  appropriate  the  glory  of  it  to  himself." 

II.  Imposing  a  needless  burden  upon  others.  Once  and  again  it  is  said  "the 
people  were  faint"  (vers.  28,  31).  They  were  exhausted  with  severe  and  prolonged 
exertion,  famished  with  hunger,  and  unable  to  continue  the  pursuit  Their  suffering 
was  great,  their  power  diminished,  their  temptation  strong.  But  Saul  had  thought 
only  of  himself.  Rulers  should  seek  the  welfare  of  their  subjects  rather  than  theif 
own  glory ;  and  all  men  should  consider  the  effect  of  their  resolutions,  promises,  anc 

,  eommands  on  other  people,  and  use  their  ijifluence  over  them  for  their  good. 


CH.  XIV.  36— 52.J 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


i6t 


III.  Occasioning  grievous  sin  in  them  (vers.  32 — 35).  They  avoided  one  ofience 
only  to  commit  another  with  a  rashness  equal  to  that  of  Saul  himself  (Gen.  ix.  4; 
D6ut.  xii.  16 ;  Levit.  iii.  17 ;  vii.  27).  He  censured  and  checked  them.  Would  thai 
he  had  also  censured  and  checked  himself  I  But  men  who  severely  condemn  the 
faults  of  others  are  often  blind  to  their  own,  even  when  the  former  reflect  and  are 
occasioned  by  the  latter  (Ps.  xix.  12,  13).  The  altar,  erected  doubtless  with  a  view 
to  the  presentation  upon  it  of  thank  offerings  for  the  victory,  was  still  more  needed 
for  the  sin  offerings  (expiatory)  which  ought  to  have  been  offered  on  behalf  both  of 
ruler  and  people  (Levit.  iv.  13,  22). 

IV.  Imperilling  innocent  life.  Not  having  heard  the  oath,  Jonathan,  in  uncon 
sciously  violating  it  (ver.  27),  was  morally  blameless.  Yet  his  act  could  rot  br 
passed  by  with  due  regard  to  the  great  name  in  which  the  people  had  been  adjured 
it  interrupted  Divine  communications  (ver.  37),  and  resulted  in  his  being  chosen  by 
the  lot  (ver.  42).  Again  Saul  should  have  been  led  to  consider  his  own  error  as  its 
cause,  and  a  trespass  or  guilt  offering  might  have  sufiSced  (Levit.  v.  4).  To  inflict 
the  "curse"  would  be  wholly  unjust,  as  is  implied  in  Jonathan's  simple,  mild,  and 
submissive  remonstrance  (ver.  43).  But  Saul's  last  oath  was  more  reckless  than  his 
first;  it  was  ignorant  and  wilful,  showed  more  concern  about  the  literal  fulfilment  of 
his  word  than  humble  and  faithful  obedience  to  a  higher  will,  and  brought  him  to 
the  brink  of  a  great  crime. 

"  Take  then  no  vow  at  random :  ta'en  in  faith 
Preserve  it ;  yet  not  bent,  as  Jephthah  one*, 
Blindly  to  execute  a  rash  resolve, 
Whom  better  it  had  suited  to  exclaim, 
'  I  have  done  ill,'  than  to  redeem  his  pledgt 
By  doing  worse  "  (Dante,  '  Par.'  v.). 

V.  Bringing  deep  unMiLiATioN  (ver.  45).  The  ominous  silence  of  the  people 
(ver.  39)  is  followed  by  their  unanimous  and  resolute  voice,  in  which  reason  and 
justice,  conscience  and  God,  speak  with  irresistible  might.  They  set  their  will  in 
opposition  to  his,  and  he  is  compelled  to  submit.  His  purpose  is  frustrated.  "  The 
son  is  raised  above  the  falher,  and  the  people  above  the  king."  But  although  his  sin 
is  now  forced  home  upon  him,  of  voluntary  submission  there  is  no  sign.  Rashness 
and  self-will  are  8ur«  to  meet  with  a  check,  and  happy  is  he  who  lays  to  heart  the 
lesson  which  it  teaches. 

VI.  Defeating  its  own  aims  (ver.  46).  "My  father  hath  brought  disaster  on 
the  land,"  &c.  (vers.  29,  30 ;  Josh.  vii.  25).  The  completeness  of  the  overthrow  of 
the  enemy  is  marred.  The  opportunity  of  inflicting  a  fatal  blow  upon  them  is  lost. 
"  And  there  was  sore  war  against  the  Philistines  all  the  days  of  Saul "  (ver.  62). 
That  which  begins  in  rashness  ends  in  disappointment  and  grief. — D. 


EXPOSITION. 


Jonathan's  danger  and  deliverance 
(vers.  36 — 46).  Ver.  36. — Let  U3  go  down 
after  the  Philistines  by  night  Saul,  con- 
scious that  he  had  prevented  the  victory 
from  being  so  decisive  as  it  would  otherwise 
have  been,  proposes  to  repair  his  fault,  now 
that  the  people  have  taken  food,  by  con- 
tinuing the  pursuit  during  the  night.  The 
people  render  the  same  unquestioning  obe- 
dience as  before,  but  Ahian  gives  counsel 
that  they  should  first  ask  the  approval  of 
God.  Let  ns  draw  near  hither.  /.  e.  to  the 
altar  which  Saul  had  just  set  up.  Ahiah 
may  have  done  this  because  he  disapproved 
of  Saul's  projoct,  or  because  generally  God 
Dbght  to  be  consulted  ,  before  undertaking 
invthing  of  importance.     Already  the  neg- 


lect of  this  h»d  led  to  no  good  resuItA  (so. 
ver.  19). 

Vers.  37,  38.  —  He  answered  him  not. 
From  this  silenes  Saul  concludes  that  some 
sin  has  been  committed,  and  therefore  calls 
together  all  the  chief  of  the  people — liter- 
ally, "  the  corner  stones  "  (Judges  xx.  2) — 
to  inquire  who  was  the  guilty  person,  and 
wherein  he  had  sinned. 

Ver.  39. — He  shall  surely  die.  With  des- 
potic violence,  without  waiting  to  learn  what 
the  offence  was,  and  judging  simply  by  con- 
sequences, because  he  was  delayed  in  follow- 
ing up  the  pursuit,  he  takes  a  solemn  oath 
that  the  offending  person  shall  be  put  to 
death.  Thus  twice  in  the  same  day  he  was 
guilty  of  the  sin  of  rash  swearing.     The 


i56 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[CH.  XI7.  86—62. 


people  condemn  him  by  their  silence.  They 
had  obeyed  him  with  ready  devotion ;  but 
now  they  listen  in  terror  to  the  rash  and 
violent  words  which  condemn  to  death  the 
young  hero  by  whom  God  had  that  day 
■wrought  deliverance  for  them. 

Vers.  40,  41. — As  God  also  condemned 
Saul  by  his  silence,  the  Urim  and  Thum- 
mim  giving  no  answer,  he  places  himself 
and  Jonathan  on  one  side,  and  the  people  on 
the  other,  and  determines  to  cast  lots.  He 
then  prays.  Give  a  perfect  lot,  or,  as  in  the 
margin,  "Show"  (literally,  give)  "the inno- 
cent" This  is  undoubtedly  the  meaning  of 
the  Hebrew,  while  the  rendering  of  the  text 
is  taken  from  Kimclu.  There  are  few  mis- 
translations of  the  A.  v.  which  have  not 
some  good  Jewish  authority  for  them,  as 
King  James's  translators  were  singularly 
well  versed  in  Jewish  literature,  while  they 
seem  strangely  to  have  neglected  the  still 
higher  authority  of  the  ancient  versions. 
These  generally  translate  "Give  holiness," 
a  phrase  equivalent  to  "  Show  the  truth." 
The  Septuagiut  and  Yulgate  add  explana- 
tions, which,  however,  throw  no  light  upon 
the  passage. 

Ver.  44.  — God  do  eo,  ftc.  Again  Saul 
takes  an  oath  to  put  Jonathan  to  death, 
supposing  himself  bound  by  his  former 
words.  But  he  must  have  been  pained  be- 
yond measure  at  the  miserable  consequences 
of  his  rashness,  and  have  bitterly  reproached 
himself  for  thus  twice  marring  the  happiness 
of  the  day  by  unhallowed  oaths.  Jonathan's 
trespass,  committed  unwittingly,  required 
nothing  more  than  a  trespass  ofiering  for  its 
expiation,  nor  did  the  silence  of  the  Urim 
and  Thummim  imply  any  fault  in  him.  The 
fault  lay  in  Saul  having  imposed  an  oath 
upon  the  army  ;  that  oath  had  been  broken, 
and  •  formal  expiation  must  be  made.  But 
Sanl  was  by  nature  a  despot,  and  could 
endme  nothing  that  seemed  even  for  the 
moment  to  stand  in  his  way. 

Ver.  45. — The  people  said.  They  had 
hitherto  shown  their  disapproval  of  Saul's 
conduct  by  their  silence  ;  now  they  decide 
that  Jonathan  shall  not  die,  and  their  decision 
was  right  and  godly.  Saul  might  feel  bound 
by  his  rash  oath,  but  the  consciences  of  the 
people  told  them  that  an  oath  to  commit  a 
crime  is  an  oath  to  be  repented  of  as  a  sin,  and 
not  to  be  performed  as  a  duty.  They  do  not 
say,  however,  God  forbid,  but  "  Far  be  it." 
The  name  of  the  Deity  is  constantly  taken 
in  vain  in  the  A.  V.  without  adding  either 
beauty  or  energy  to  the  word  of  God.  But 
even  "if  it  did,  what  right  have  translators 
to  add  energy  to  the  word  of  God  1  He  hath 
wrought  with  God  this  day.  The  argument 
of  the  people  is  vrise  and  good.  Jonathan's 
whole  conduct  on  that  day  proved  an  especial 
preienoi  of  God  with  him.     It  would  be 


morally  wrong  and  an  offence  against  religion 
to  condemn  that  which  God  approved,  and 
the  people  therefore  set  theii  oath  against 
tJie  king's  oath,  and  prevail. 

Ver.  46. — Saul  went  up,  &c.  Thus,  as  the 
final  result  of  his  self-will,  Saul  had  to  dis- 
continue his  pursuit  of  the  Philistines,  and 
their  power,  tnough  weakened  by  the  over- 
throw, remained  unbroken. 

SnMMAEY  OF  Saul's  wars,  amb  aooount 
OF  HIS  FAMILY  (vers.  47 — 52).  Ver.  47. — 
So  Sanl  took  the  kingdom.  Instead  of  so  the 
Hebrew  has  atld,  rightly ;  for  this  is  no 
result  or  consequence  of  Saul's  victory  over 
the  Philistines,  but  a  mere  historical  intro- 
duction to  the  summary  of  his  wars.  The 
more  correct  translation  would  be,  "  When 
Saul  had  taken  the  kingdom  over  Israel,  he 
fought,"  &C.  Saul's  reign  was  valiant  and 
full  of  military  glory.  He  was,  in  fact,  in 
war  all  that  the  people  had  longed  for,  and 
not  only  did  he  gain  independence  for  Israel, 
but  laid  the  foundation  of  the  vast  empire  of 
David  and  Solomon.  But  it  is  not  the  purpose 
of  Holy  Scripture  to  give  us  the  history  of 
all  Saul's  valiant  exploits,  but  only  of  his 
moral  probation  and  failure.  Of  wars  we  read 
more  than  enough  in  profane  history  ;  here 
we  read  of  the  formation  of  character,  and 
how  a  hero  in  the  midst  of  noble  and  worthy 
feats  of  arms  may  yet  lose  something  nobler 
and  worthier — the  favour  of  God.  On  every 
side.  Moab  and  Ammon  were  on  the  east, 
Edom  on  the  south,  Zobah  on  the  north- 
east, and  the  Philistines  on  the  west.  Zobah 
lay  beyond  Damascus,  and,  from  the  accounts 
given  in  2  Sam.  viii.  8 — 8 ;  x.  6,  must  have 
been  a  powerful  state.  He  vexed  them.  The 
verb  is  a  judicial  one,  used  of  punishing  the 
guilty,  and  might  be  translated  "he  chas- 
tised them."  The  Syriac  and  Vulgate  give 
the  real  sense — "  he  was  victorious. 

Ver.  48. — He  gathered  •  host.  So  the 
Syriac  and  Vulgate,  but  the  margin  is  pro- 
bably the  true  meaning,  "He  wi'ought 
mightily,"  or  valiantly. 

Ver.  49.  —  Saul's  family  and  kindred. 
Three  sons  only  of  Saul  are  here  mentioned, 
apparently  those  slain  at  the  battle  of  Mount 
Gilboa,  where,  however,  Ishui  is  named 
Abinadab  (ch.  xxxi.  2,  as  also  in  1  Chron. 
viii.  33 ;  ix.  39).  A  fourth  son,  Esh-baal, 
subsequently  called  Ishbosheth,  is  omitted. 
The  daughters,  Merab  and  Michal,  are  men- 
tioned because  of  the  history  in  ch.  xviii. 
17—21. 

Ver.  SO. — Saul's  wife  was  Ahinoam,  thi 
daughter  of  Ahimaaz.  We  have  noticed  on 
ver.  3  the  fondness  of  the  family  of  Eli  for 
names  beginning  with  Ah,  "brother."  It 
does  not  justify  us  in  concluding  that  Ahi- 
noam was  a  descendant  of  Eli,  but  she  may 
possibly  have  been  so.  Abner,  whose  name 
IS  here  given  in  its  strictly  proper  fonni 


CH.  XIV.  3(i — 52.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


257 


Abiner,  was  Saul's  first  cousin,  both  Eish 
■nd  Ner  being  sons  of  Abiel  (cpmp.  ch.  ix.  1). 
Ver.  Bl. — The  son  of  Abiel.  There  can 
bo  little  doubt  that  the  right  reading  is  sons, 
and  not  son.  We  thus  get  an  intelligible 
statement— "  And  Kish  the  father  of  Saul, 
and  ITer  the  father  of  Abner,  were  sous  of 
Abiel." 

Ver.  52. — The  summary  ends  with-  two 
important  particulars  respecting  Saul's  king- 
dom— the  first,  that  the  Philistines  were 
Eowerful  and  dangerous  enemies  to  Israel  all 
is  days  ;  the  second,  that  in  order  to  carry 
on  the  war  with  them  he  ever  kept  around 
him  the  nucleus  of  a  standing  army.  In 
thus  forming  a  "  school  of  heroes  "  he  raised 
the  whole  spirit  of  the  people,  and  took  an 
essential  and  necesaaiy  step  for  maintaining 


Israel's  freedom.  With  much  of  the  despot 
in  him,  Saul  had  grand  qualities  as  a  soldier, 
and  for  many  years  admirably  fulfilled  the 
primary  object  for  which  he  was  chosen. 
And  while  he  was  thus  giving  the  nation 
internal  security,  Samuel  was  teaching  it 
how  to  use  its  growing  prosperity,  and  was 
raisiug  it  in  the  scale  of  intellectual  worth. 
If  in  the  time  of  the  judges  we  have  Israel 
in  its  boyhood,  as  in  the  Sinaitic  desert  we 
have  it  in  its-infancy,  under  Saul  and  Samuel 
it  reached  its  manhood,  and  became  a  power- 
ful, vigorous,  and  well-ordered  community, 
able  to  maintain  its  freedom,  and  with  means 
for  its  internal  development  in  the  schools 
of  the  prophets,  which  ended  in  making  it 
not  merely  enlightened  itself,  but  the  giver 
of  light  to  the  teA  of  mankind. 


HOMILETICa 

Ven.  8S— 46. — SeeM/ng  counsd  of  God  and  keeping  tmit  uxyrd.  The  facts  w*^ 
1.  Saul,  following  his  own  impulse,  desires  to  pursue  the  Philistines  during  the  night, 
but  is  restrained  by  the  priest  advising  to  seek  counsel  of  Qod.  2.  No  answer 
coming  from  God,  Saul  concludes  that  sin  has  been  committed,  and  resolves  that  the 
sinner  when  discovered  shall  die.  3.  A  lot  being  taken,  it  falls  on  Jonathan,  who 
admits  having  tasted  honey,  and  submits  to  the  sentence.  4.  Saul,  again  solemnly 
consigning  his  son  to  death,  is  confronted  by  the  people,  who  claim  and  rescue 
Jonathan's  life  on  the  ground  that  he  was  doing  God's  work  that  day.  Rash  impulse 
was  the  besetting  sin  of  Saul.  Being  by  Divine  arrangement  more  than  a  military 
leader,  it  was  his  duty  to  seek  guidance  from  God  in  times  of  uncertainty.  Men  of 
cooler  judgment  doubted  whether  it  was  wise  to  urge  on  all  through  the  night  men 
who  had  been  worn  down  by  fasting  all  day,  and  were  scarcely  free  from  their 
evening  meal.  The  priest  evidently  saw  that  Saul's  haste  and  the  unexpressed  hesi- 
tation of  the  people  could  be  best  dealt  with  by  consulting  the  Urim.  The  Divine 
silence  at  once  indicated  that  something  was  wrong,  and  according  to  precedent  it 
was  necessary  to  ascertain  where  it  lay.  The  ceremonial  wrong  was  Jonathan's,  the 
moral  Saul's.  The  moral  degeneracy  of  Saul  was  not  only  seen  in  his  impulsive 
neglect  of  God's  counsel,  but  also  in  the  self-complacent  zeal  with  which  he  sought 
out  the  breach  of  his  own  rash  command,  and  in  the  unnatural  harshness  of  his 
sentence.  People  are  sometimes  better  than  their  rulers,  and  hence  the  popular 
sense  of  justice  demanded  that  in  this  instance  royal  authority  and  national  custom 
should  give  way  before  the  manifest  will  of  God.  Jonathan  must  not  die,  even 
though  a  king's  word  be  broken.  The  three  prominent  matters  of  the  narrative  are 
seeking  counsel,  keeping  one's  word,  and  safety  in  God. 

I.  Sbekino  counsel.  It  is  the  part  of  wisdom  in  life's  affairs  to  seek  counsel  of 
God ;  and  although  sometimes  no  counsel  is  given,  its  absence  is  very  instructive, 
and  the  causes  of  it  are  ascertainable.  In  the  case  of  Saul  both  dut.v  and  privilege 
demanded  a  frequent  appeal  to  God.  On  the  occasion  before  us  tue  need  was  real, 
the  method  was  at  hand,  and  response  was  possible,  and  a  lack  of  response  was 
itself  of  value.  Our  common  human  relation  to  God  is  not  unlike  that  of  Israel's 
king.  1.  There  is  for  every  one  frequent  need  of  Divine  counsel.  Life,-  even  under 
the  direction  of  the  clearest  reason  and  purest  natural  impulses,  is  not  safe ;  for  sm 
has  disturbed  the  nature  of  the  best  of  men.  It  is  not  always  that  that  which  at  first 
■eems  good  and  safe  turns  oiit  in  the  end  to  be  so.  What  to  do  in  private,  domestic, 
•nd  public  affairs,  and  what  proportion  of  time  and  strength  to  give  to  various 
claims,  are  questions  pressing  on  every  conscientious  mind.  In  matters  pertaining 
to  religious  belief,  culture,  and  enterprise,  we  each,  if  life  be  not  stagnant,  require 
more  than  earthly  wisdom.  The  heart  of  man  'a  sensible  that  it  is  not  in  him 
infallibly  and  safely  to  "  direct  his  scep»,  -  and  hence  in  all  lands  it  instinctively 
1  SAM.  • 


26»  Tiiii  ifiUST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xiv.  36—62, 

though  often  in  ignorance,  cries  out  for  the  living  God  (Prov.  xvi.  9 ;  Jer.  x.  23). 
2.  There  i$  a  method  at  hand.  The  Urim  was  not  far  from  Saul.  By  a  study  of 
God's  will  as  seen  in  his  word,  his  providence,  the  yearnings  of  a  sanctified  heart, 
and  the  voice  of  his  people,  we  may  gain  guidance  in  addition  to  that  private  illa- 
mination  which  unquestionably  comes  in  answer  to  true  prayer.  No  rule  can  be  laid 
down  for  individuals.  Each  day's  circumstances  must  suggest  the  means  we  use  to 
ascertain  the  will  of  God.  3.  There  is  reason  for  looking  for  a  response  to  our 
seeking.  It  was  a  tacit  understanding  with  Saul  on  the  settlement  of  the  kingdom 
(ch.  ix.  25 — 27  ;  x.  24,  25^  that  he  might  count  on  the  guidance  of  God.  Samuel's 
exhortations  and  instructions  all  through  proceeded  on  this  assumption.  Nor  was 
God's  silence  on  the  present  occasion  contrary  to  this  ;  for  it  was  of  itself  a  sigpiifi- 
cant  indication  of  the  mind  of  God.  Saul  knew  its  meaning.  The  exhortations  to 
us  to  "  seek  the  Lord,"  the  distinct  promises  that  he  will  "  hear,"  the  many  instances 
on  record  in  which  men  sought  and  followed  the  Lord,  raise  an  assurance  that 
the  seed  of  Jacob  shall  not  seek  his  face  in  vain  (Isa.  xix.  1),  The  answer  may 
come  in  unlooked-for  forms, — in  the  clearing  of  our  moral  perceptions,  the  secret 
bent  given  to  the  purified  heart,  the  opening  up  of  courses  of  action,  or  a  concurrence 
of  events  and  influences, — but  come  it  will  some  time  if  we  are  sincere  and  earnest. 
4.  The  absence  of  response  is  often  accountable.  We  know  why  Saul's  seeking  for 
counsel  was  in  vain.  There  are  frequent  instances  in  which  the  silence  of  God  is 
conspicuous.  He  was  silent  when  the  Psalmist  cried  unto  him  to  "awake"  (Ps. 
XXXV.  22 — 24) ;  when  defiled  men  cried  unto  him  (Isa.  i.  12 — 15)  ;  when  amidst  the 
storm  men  were  in  fear  (Matt.  viii.  24 — 26)  ;  when  in  presence  of  a  wounded  heart 
he  would  not  heed  captious  men  (John  viii.  6,  7)  ;  and  when  questioned  by  one  who 
had  no  right  to  assume  a  tone  of  authority  (John  xix.  9).  Even  though  our  holiness 
of  life,  or  at  least  consistency,  be  real,  and  our  supposed  need  be  urgent,  it  is  possible 
that  the  discipline  of  faith  and  patience  is  the  reason  for  no  response. 

II.  Keeping  one's  word.  Saul  felt  bound  in  honour  to  keep  his  word,  even  at 
the  cost  of  his  son's  life.  He  found  himself  in  an  awkward  position,  for  it  would 
reveal  an  irresolution  unfavourable  to  authority  if  he  should  overlook  his  son's  deed 
under  a  plea  of  ignorance  which  any  one  might  make ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  as 
the  people  did  believe  Jonathan's  plea,  and  held  him  to  be  the  real  victor  of  the  day, 
it  would  expose  Saul's  folly  and  injustice  if  he  should  take  away  so  valuable  a  life. 
Such  was  Saul's  sense  of  the  importance  of  keeping  his  word,  that  all  must  be  sacri- 
ficed to  it.  1.  There  is  a  fictitious  truthfulness.  The  bare  doing  as  he  had  said,  and 
merely  because  he  had  said  it,  was  Saul's  ideal  of  truthfulness.  Here,  then,  was  a 
vague  apprehension  of  a  grand  virtue,  and  a  crude  presentation  of  moral  obliquity  as 
being  identical  with  it.  Truth  is  a  virtue  entering  into  the  depths  of  life ;  and  had 
Saul  been  really  a  man«of  truth,  he  would  have  considered  Jonathan's  case  on  its 
own  merits,  have  honestly  admitted  the  folly  and  sin  of  his  own  rash  declaration, 
and  have  sacrificed  his  o-rni  repute  to  the  general  interests  of  righteousness.  There 
is  much  fictitious  truthfulness  in  the  world.  Some  men,  by  sheer  obstinacy  of  dispo- 
sition, will  do  as  they  say  simply  because  they  said  it,  heedless  of  the  injury  it  may 
4o.  To  keep  to  what  one  has  acknowledged  to  be  binding  is  supposed  to  be  truth- 
fulness in  act,  and  yet  many  will  be  rigorous  in  the  observance  of  some  moral 
obligations  and  careless  of  others.  To  avoid  theft  and  murder  is  coincident  with 
deeds  of  lying  and  sellishness.  A  similar  fictitious  truthfulness  is  seen  in  the  careful 
outward  observance  of  days  without  cherishing  the  spirit  in  accordance  with  them, 
and  in  the  performance  of  acts  of  worship  as  a  substitute  for  the  homage  of  the  soul. 
2.  Real  truthfulness  is  a  quality  of  extreme  importance.  Saul  confessed  this  in  his 
zeal  for  the  fictitious ;  as  do  all  men  in  their  devices,  to  secure  an  appearance  of  it, 
and  their  instinctive  homage  to  the  reality  when  presented  in  word  or  deed.  Real 
truthfulness  does  not  apply  merely  to  correspondence  of  statement  with  occurrence. 
It  is  another  name  for  reality  in  thought,  feeling,  life  ;  and  it  applies  to  our  relation 
both  to  man  and  God.  The  conformity  of  our  nature  with  what  is  befitting  a  crea- 
ture of  the  Holy  One  is  the  real  truthfulness.  Hence,  nothing  enters  the  New 
Jerusalem  that  "  maketh  a  lie."  Hence,  regeneration  is  a  renewal  "  in  the  image  of 
him  "  who  created  us.  Hence,  also,  in  so  far  as  we  are  like  unto  him  who  is  "  the 
Truth,"  all  our  relations  to  men  are  pure,  lovely,  honest — the  natural  outcome  ol 


OH.  XIV.  86—62.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  26J 

"truth  in  the  inward  parts."  This  quality  is  essential  to  the  most  perfect  social 
confidence ;  for  it  renders  fraud,  deceit,  selfishness,  dissimulation,  distrust  impossible, 
and  the  reverse  virtues  real,  whenever  it  is  dominant  in  human  nature.  Attention  to 
this  in  education  is  supremely  important. 

III.  Safety  in  God.  Jonathan's  life  was  safe  in  God's  care  in  spite  of  zeal  for  a 
fictitious  regard  for  truth  on  the  part  of  his  father.  The  voice  of  the  people 
demanding  his  release  was  the  voice  of  God,  and  the  honour  put  on  Jonathan 
during  the  previous  day  was  evidence  to  all  but  the  obstinate  king  of  a  favour  much 
to  be  desired.  He  who  had  gone  forth  in  the  service  of  the  Lord  with  true,  honest 
heart,  and  had  been  shielded  in  the  dangerous  enterprise,  was  not  forsaken  by  his 
God  when  now  the  rashness  of  man  encompassed  his  life  with  peril.  Thus,  the 
custom  of  Eastern  rulers  keeping  their  word  when  once  uttered  (Judges  xi.  30 — 39 ; 
Matt.  xiv.  9),  personal  consistency,  and  royal  authority  must  give  place  where 
God  makes  manifest  his  approval.  Does  not  the  position  of  Jonathan  lead  our 
thoughts  on  to  our  own  in  a  greater  day  of  trial  ?  We  are  not  to  be  tried  by  the 
variable  impulse  of  man  or  established  custom,  but  by  impartial  justice.  What  God 
declares  shall  be  done  when  our  day's  battle  is  over  will  be  done  in  truth.  11  he 
acquits  us  then,  who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  His  favour  will  save  from  a  worse 
calamity  than  any  that  threatened  Jonathan ;  and  the  practical  question  is  how  to 
come  into  such  relation  to  God  that  the  universal  demand  of  justice  shall  be  for  our 
not  perishing.  The  answer  is — "  There  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in 
Christ  Jesus  "  (Rom.  viii.  1)  ;  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect? 
It  is  God  that  justifieth"  (Rom.  viii.  33). 

General  lessons : — 1.  We  are  consistent  with  our  privileges  whon  not  only  our 
calamities  and  great  aflEairs,  but  our  ordinary  actions,  are  made  subject  to  Divine 
guidance  (Phil.  iv.  6).  2.  It  is  especially  desirable  to  seek  counsel  of  God  when  we 
are  conscious  of  restlessness  and  ill-regulated  impulse.  3.  Faithfulness  requires  thai, 
a  promise  or  engagement  being  made,  we  keep  our  word  even  at  much  personal  cost ; 
but  when  such  loss  would  occur,  generosity  requires  of  the  gainer  that  it  be  not 
wholly  insisted  on  (Ps.  xv.  4 ;  Luke  vi.  31 ;  Ephes.  iv.  32).  4.  Truthfulness  in 
character  is  the  opposite  of  sinfulness,  for  sin  is  a  practical  lie  (Gen.  iii.  1 — 6 ;  1  John 
ii.  4).  5.  Our  final  safety  rests  not  on  the  past  untarnished  purity  of  life  (Rom.  iii. 
10;  1  John  i.  8),  but  on  our  being  identified  with  Messiah's  life  and  purpose  (John 
xiv.  19 ;  Rom.  viii.  36—39). 

Vers.  47 — 62. — Gradation  in  service.  The  facts  are — 1.  Saul's  warlike  efforts 
issue  in  the  general  discomfiture  of  his  enemies.  2.  The  domestic  relations  of  Saul 
are  incorporated  in  the  record  of  facts  pertaining  to  gradual  unfolding  of  the  Divine 
purpose.  3.  During  all  his  conflicts  with  the  Philistines  Saul  shows  prudence  in 
strengthening  his  military  position.  The  section  ^ives  a  summary  of  the  military 
operations  of  Saul's  reign  and  of  the  success  of  his  efforts,  and  also  places  on  the 
page  of  sacred  history  the  names  of  the  members  of  his  family.  Judged  by  rules 
applicable  to  ordinary  historical  records,  the  brief  reference  to  his  wars  may  appear 
to  have  little  or  no  moral  significance,  and  the  allusion  to  his  father,  his  wife,  and 
children  to  be  merely  a  matter  of  Jewish  antiquarian  interest.  But  the  Bible  was 
composed  under  the  guidance  of  a  higher  than  human  wisdom  ;  and  both  in  what  it 
includes  and  omits  there  is  a  relation  to  the  higher  spiritual  issues  in  which  the 
events  of  Jewish  history  culminated.  There  had  been  given  to  Saul  the  oppor- 
tunity of  rendering  service  to  Israel,  both  by  setting  them  free  from  the  oppression 
of  enemies  and  by  inspiring  the  nation  with  a  spirit  conformable  to  the  great 
Messianic  purpose  for  which  they  existed.  He  failed  to  enter  into  the  high  spiritual 
aspirations  suitable  to  a  ruler  of  the  chosen  race,  and  therefore  history  simply  records 
the  fact  that  his  life  was  spent  in  the  rendering  of  the  lower  kind  of  service. 
Repression  of  the  foe  was  service,  but  of  an  inferior  type.  He  missed  a  chance  of 
doing  a  more  glorious  and  enduring  work. 

I.  There  is  a  gbaduated  service  fossiblk  to  wen.  The  possibilities  of  Saul'i 
life  when  entering  on  his  public  career  are  manifest.  They  were  not  realised,  though 
he,  using  certain  natural  abilities,  succeeded  in  rendering  valuable  service  as  a 
warrior.     Of  every  human  being  it  may  be  said,  as  he  enters  on  life,  there  is  a 

s  9 


260  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xiv.  36—54 

foBsibility  of  conferrmg  few  or  many,  small  or  great,  benefits  on  his  kind.  The 
londitions  of  rising  to  the  higher  grade  of  service  are  the  possession  of  appropriate 
natural  abilities  and  an  occasion  for  employing  them.  These  conditions  being  given, 
it  rests  with  his  will  to  rise  to  the  higher  level  or  to  be  content  with  the  lower. 
Gecular  and  spiritual  are  not  always  good  terms  to  indicate  spheres  of  activity, 
becanse  every  act  can  and  ought  to  be  spiritual  in  its  tone  and  principle.  But  for 
»ur  present  purpose  we  may  use  the  terms  in  the  common  acceptation.  There  are 
grades  of  service — 1.  In  the  secular  sphere.  It  may  not  be  easy  to  construct  a  scale 
that  shall  in  detail  exhibit  the  relative  value  of  labour,  but  there  are  broad  outlines 
which  are  always  recognised  in  civilised  society.  Manual  toil  is  not  comparable  with 
mental.  That  service  which  relates  to  the  material  condition  of  mankind  is  inferior 
to  that  which  bears  on  the  moral.  Whatever  produces  temporary  effects  is  of  less 
value  than  that  which  issues  in  the  enduring.  There  are  men  who  remain  all  their 
days  on  the  lowest  level,  and  there  have  been  some  who  rose  from  that  position  to 
almost,  if  not  quite,  the  highest  in  the  scale.  No  man's  contribution  to  the  common 
weal  is  to  be  despised,  but  every  man  is  bound  to  rise  as  high  as  possible  in  the  scale 
of  valuable  service.  2.  In  the  spiritual  sphere.  As  in  ancient  times  there  were 
"hewers  of  wood  and  drawers  of  water,"  subordinate,  in  the- common  work  of  the 
chosen  race,  to  men  of  loftier  aspiration  and  more  refined  occupation,  so  in  the 
Christian  Church  there  are  diversities  in  gifts  and  service.  Generically  all  true 
Christians  are  equal  in  privilege  of  position  and  in  function  as  witness-bearers  for 
Christ.  And  there  is  no  room  for  boasting  or  invidious  comparisons,  as  it  is  the 
"  grace  of  God  "  which  worketh  all  in  all.  Yet  as  a  matter  of  fact,  arising  partly 
from  great  diversity  in  natural  capacity  and  partly  from  causes  in  the  individual 
will,  there  are  distinct  gradations  in  kind  and  value  of  service  rendered,  as  tested  by 
the  strength  of  principle  involved  and  the  enduring  character  of  the  effect.  There 
are  men  who  devote  time  and  means  only  to  the  preservation  of  the  outward  organ- 
isations of  the  Church.  Others,  nourishing  their  own  piety  with  care,  minister  consol- 
ation and  instruction  to  the  sick  and  ignorant.  Others,  again,  by  a  wonderfully  holy 
and  beautiful  life  at  home,  as  well  as  quiet  zeal  outside,  train  souls  for  Christ,  and 
leave  an  imperishable  impress  on  the  world. 

II.    The   GEADE    OF    SERVICE    ATTAINED    TO    DEPENDS    CHIEFLY  ON  A  WISE  USB  OP 

EARLT  OPPOETUNITIES.  Had  Saul  cherished  the  spirit  awakened  by  his  converse 
with  Samuel  and  the  subsequent  inspiration  from  God  (ch.  ix.  25 — 27 ;  x.  9),  and 
strengthened  it  by  obedience  in  the  hour  of  trial  (ch.  xiii.  13),  far  nobler  service 
would  have  been  recorded  of  him  than  that  he  made  war  with  the  Philistines  all  the 
days  of  his  life.  His  successor  David  entered  on  a  higher  sphere.  Of  course  both 
in  the  secular  and  spiritual  spheres  natural  capacity  and  education  are  important 
determinants,  as  also  the  occurrence  of  favourable  opportunities.  But,  as  a  rule,  the 
position  we  occupy  depends  on  our  disposition  to  innprove  such  opportunities  as  now 
and  then  fall  to  the  lot  of  most  persons.  Hundreds  are  "  hewers  of  wood  and 
drawers  of  water  "  all  their  days  because  in  early  life  they  failed  to  seize  the  chance 
of  deviiloping  their  own  powers.  In  science  and  literature  there  are  men  who,  when 
raw  youths  of  meagre  education,  laid  hold  of  some  passing  opportunity  for  self- 
improvement  which  opened  the  way  to  still  higher  advantages.  In  the  Churcb 
there  are  and  have  been  noble  men  who,  carefully  nourishing  the  sacred  gift  of  a 
new  spirit  and  availing  themselves  of  some  chance  of  doing  good,  rose  from  obscurity 
to  the  distinction  of  ambassadors  for  Christ,  "  whose  praise  is  in  all  the  Churches.' 
'J'here  are  Sauls  and  Davids  still. 

General  lessons : — 1.  While  thankful  for  being  permitted  to  render  the  smallest 
service  to  the  Church  and  the  world,  we  should  "  covet  earnestly  the  best  gifts  " 
(1  Cor.  xii.  31).  2.  Youths  and  persons  young  in  the  Christian  life  should  be 
impressed  with  the  importance  of  the  due  improvement  of  their  position.  3.  When- 
ever possible  we  should  look  favourably  upon  any  effort  to  enter  on  a  wider  range 
of  usefulness.  4.  The  slandard  of  service,  as  to  aim,  method,  and  spirit,  by  whicfa 
our  aspirations  should  be  regulated,  i«  the  life  of  Christ. 


,  XIV.  36—^2.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  261 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vew.  86,  87.  (Ajalon.) — Drawing  near  to  God.  Of  the  fallen  honae  of  Eli,  on« 
at  least,  Ahiah  (Ahimelech — ch.  xxi.  1),  the  grandson  of  Phinehas,  appears  to  have 
been  a  faithful  servant  of  God.  When  the  people,  having  ended  their  pursuit  of  the 
Philistines  and  gatisfied  their  hunger,  rested  around  their  gleaming  camp-fires,  and 
Saul  proposed  a  nocturnal  expedition  against  the  enemy  so  as  "  not  to  leave  a  man 
.  of  them,"  he  devoutly  and  courageously  interposed  with  the  words,  "  Let  us  draw 
near  hither  unto"  God."  He  had  already  witnessed  the  effects  of  the  king's  rash- 
ness, feared  its  further  results,  and  felt  that  "it  was  dangerous  to  undertake 
anything  without  asking  counsel  of  God "  (see  ver.  19).  His  language  is  sug- 
gestive of — 

I.  The  exercisb  or  A  BELioions  feofle  in  prayer.  It  ia — 1.  A  posdhility.  For 
God  is  "nigh  at  hand,  and  not  afar  off"  (Deut.  iv.  7;  Ps.  cxlv.  18;  Jer.  xxiii.  23). 
He  has  provided  a  way  of  access — an  altar  ('Heb.  ziii.  10),  a  sacrifice,  and  a  high 
priest  (Heb.  vii.  19 ;  x.  20 — 22 ;  Ephes.  ii.  18).  The  throne  of  God  is  not  only  a 
throne  of  glory  and  of  judgment,  but  also  a  throne  of  grace.  "  The  Lamb  is  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne."  2.  A  privilege.  What  higher  privilege  or  honour  can  be 
conferred  than  to  hold  intercourse  with  so  glorious  a  Being  ?  What  greater  benefit 
than  his  fellowship,  counsel,  and  aid  ?  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  28).  3.  An  obligation,  arising  out 
of  his  relationship  to  men,  and  indicated  by  his  word,  by  conscience,  and  the  deepest 
needs  and  impulses  of  the  soul.  "  Draw  nigh  to  God,  and  ho  will  draw  nigh  to 
you  "  (James  iv.  8 ;  Ps.  xliii.  4).  "  Ye  people,  pour  out  your  heart  before  him  " 
(Ps.  Ixii.  8). 

II.  The  vocation  of  a  paithfot  minister  with  respect  to  this  exercise.  It  is — 
1.  To  hear  a  fearless  testimony  concerning  it  before  the  people :  setting  forth  the 
supreme  claims  of  God  upon  their  homage,  reminding  them  or  their  want,  reproving 
their  f  orgetf  ulness,  and  teaching  them  the  good  and  right  way  (ch.  xii.  23).  2.  To 
exhibit  a  devotional  spirit  in  his  intercourse  with  them.  He  who  exhorts  others  to 
pray  should  be  himself  a  man  of  prayer,  and  speak  to  them  by  his  example  as  well 
as  by  his  words.  Exhortation  to  them  is  often  less  beneficial  than  intercession  for 
them.  "  We  will  give  ourselves  continually  to  prayer  "  (Acts  vi.  4).  3.  To  invite 
them  to  sincere  union  with  him  in  seeking  the  face  of  God.  "Let  us  draw  near." 
"  Let  us  pray  " — not  merely  with  the  lips  or  in  outward  form,  not  regarding  iniquity 
in  the  heart ;  but  humbly  and  sincerely,  with  one  accord,  with  a  true  heart,  and  in 
full  assurance  of  faith  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  8). 

III.  The  influence  of  timely  intervention  on  the  part  of  a  good  man.  "  Then 
(when  both  king  and  people  were  about  to  set  forth  without  seeking  Divine  counsel) 
said  the  priest,"  &c. ;  and  he  did  not  speak  in  vain  (ver.  37).  Such  advice  and 
prayer  are  generally  effectual — 1.  In  restraining  from  the  pursuit  of  a  wrong 
course — a  doubtful  or  dangerous  enterprise,  devotion  to  worldly  objects,  following 
selfish  and  revengeful  inclinations,  &c.  A  single  "word  in  season"  sometimes  pre- 
vents much  mischief .  2.  Incows^ramMifl'totheperformanceof  neglected  duty.  The 
inquiry  which  Saul  had  broken  off  was  now  formally  resumed,  though  not  on  bis 
part  in  a  right  spirit.  3.  In  obtaining  the  possession  of  needful  good.  It  is  not 
always  what  is  sought.  There  may  be  delay  or  refusal  in  granting  a  definite  answer ; 
but  the  experience  thereby  gained  is  itself  beneficial,  and  the  necessary  condition  of 
obtaining  the  highest  good. 

IV.  The  instbuctiveness  oj  unanswered  prayer.  "  He  answered  him  not  that 
day"  (ch.  xxviii.  6,  15).  The  silence  of  God  is  significant.  It  indicates — 1.  The 
presence  of  sin,  which  hinders  the  communications  of  Heaven,  as  a  cloud  intercepts 
the  beams  of  the  sun  (Isa.  lix.  2;  Lam.  iii.  44;  Hoseav.  15;  James  iv.  2,  3).  2.  The 
duty  of  its  discovery,  by  means  of  diligent  inquiry  and  self-examination  (Josh.  vii. 
13  ;  Ps.  cxxxix.  23,  24  ;  Lam.  iii.  40).  3.  The  necestUy  of  humiliation,  removing 
"  the  accursed  thing,"  and  turning  to  God  with  full  purpose  of  heart,  so  that  he  may 
cause  his  face  to  shine  upon  us.  "  Praying  will  either  make  a  man  leave  off  sinning 
or  sinning  will  make  him  leave  off  praying:."  In  the  former  case  his  path  is  upward 
into  the  light,  in  the  latter  it  is  downward  into  darkness  and  despair. — D. 


262  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xiv.  36—62. 

Ver.  45.  (A}ALOT!i.)—Bemonstranct  with  rulert.  The  obedience  which  subjects 
owe  to  the  commands  of  .a  ruler  is  not  absolute,  but  limited  by  their  obligation  to  a 
higher  law.  When  he  determines  on  measures  which  are  not  good  they  have  a  right 
to  remonstrate,  and  are  sometimes  bound  to  do  so.  Concerning  the  remonstrance  of 
the  people  with  Saul  (after  yielding  notable  obedience  in  other  things — vers.  26,  34, 
36),  observe  that  it  was — 

I.  JnsT  ;  in  opposition  to  an  unreasonable,  arbitrary,  and  cruel  decision  (vei.  44),  in 
defence  of  the  innocent,  and  impelled  by  "  an  enlightened  conscience  and  generous 
enthusiasm." 

II.  Devout  ;  recognising  the  hand  of  God  in  the  victory  of  Jonathan,  testifying 
their  gratitude  for  the  deliverance  wrought  through  him,  and  obeying  a  higher  will, 
thereby  indicated,  in  preference  to  that  of  the  king. 

III.  Resolute  ;  whilst  stating  the  ground  of  their  determination,  manifesting  a 
disposition  to  carry  it  into  effect,  and  binding  themselves  by  a  united  and  solemn 
oath  to  do  so. 

IV.  Successful.  They  prevailed,  Jonathan  was  rescued,  a  great  crime  was  pre- 
vented, and  Saul  was  checked  and  warned  in  his  despotic  career.  When  the  people 
remonstrate  in  the  same  manner  they  may  expect  the  same  success. — ^D. 

Ver.  45.  (Ajalon.) — Co-operation  mtk  God.  "  He  hath  wrought  with  God  this 
day."  Apart  from  the  power  of  God  man  can  do  nothing.  In  opposition  to  it  he  is 
defeated  and  crushed.  Only  in  co-operation  with  it  can  he  accomplish  anything 
great  or  good.  As  in  the  material,  so  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  world  it  is  our 
wisdom,  strength,  and  dignity  to  be  "  labourers  together  with  God  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  9 ;  3 
Cor.  vi.  1).     Notice — 

The  aim  of  this  co-operation.  1.  To  overcome  sin  and  misery  amongst  men. 
2.  To  promote  righteousness  and  happiness  in  ourselves  and  others.  8.  To  extend 
the  kingdom  and  glory  of  God. 

II.  The  MEANS.  1.  Studying  the  laws  or  modes  of  God's  working  (Eccles.  iii.  14) 
and  the  manifold  intimations  of  his  will.  2.  Trusting  in  him,  firmly  resting  on  his 
promises,  and  patiently  waiting  their  fulfilment.  Oftentimes  "  our  strength  is  to  sit 
still."  3.  Using  with  dih'gence  the  strength  he  gives,  still  depending  on  him  "  who 
worketh  all  in  all "  (1  Cor.  xii.  6  ;  Phil.  ii.  13  ;  Isa.  xxvi.  12). 

III.  The  result,  1.  Conscious  approbation  of  God.  2.  Effectual  aid.  t.  Certain 
achievement.     "  In  due  season  we  shall  reap  if  we  faint  not." — D. 

Vers.  47 — 52.  (Gibeah.) — Savl'i  lovereignty  and  umrt,  Am  army  and  family. 
From  this  summary  observe  that — 

I.  The  pbofle  of  God  ark  beset  bt  numerous  adversaries.  Moab,  Ammon, 
&c. — "  on  every  side,''  of  varied  character,  imbued  with  the  same  enmity,  and  threaten- 
ing their  existence.     Conflict  i^  necessary  to  self-preservation. 

II.  The  chastisement  of  the  wicked  is  inflicted  by  suitable  aobnts.    "  And 
Saul  took  the  kingdom,"  &c.    "  Whithersoever  he  turned  himself  he  chastised  them. 
For  this  work  he  was  well  qualified  by  warlike  courage  and  skill,  indomitable  energy 
and  zeal,  and  in  it  he  met  with  success.     God  often  employs  men  to  carry  out  his 
purposes  who  possess  little  of  the  spirit  of  obedience. 

III.  Diversity  op  character  is  often  manifested  in  the  same  cibcumbtances. 
"  Now  the  sons  of  Saul  were  Jonathan,  and  Ishui  (Abinadab),  and  Melchishua."  The 
fourth,  Esh-baal  (Ishbosheth),  is  not  here  mentioned.  "  And  the  names  of  his  two 
daughters  were  Merab  and  Michal,"  &c.  (vers.  49 — 51).  What  a  contrast  of  cha- 
racter is  presented  in  this  family — «.  g.  between  Jonathan  and  his  father  and  sister 
(Michal).  Hidden  hereditary  influences  and  special  associations  may  have  con- 
tributed to  the  difference,  but  much  more  the  voluntary  use  or  abuse  of  preliminary 
conditions,  outward  circumstances,  and  spiritual  gifts. 

IV.  The  misuse  op  power  ib  the  ruin  of  its  possessor.  "  He  gathered  a  host" 
(ver.  48),  or  acquired  power.  He  formed  a  standing  army,  as  it  had  been  predicted 
(ch.  viii.  11,  16 ;  xxii.  7).  He  employed  his  power  for  his  own  aggrandisement. 
"  If  he  could  have  done  as  he  wished,  there  would  have  been  an  end  to  the  supremacy 
of  God  in  Israel.    Rude  despotism  would  have  usurped  its  place  "  (Heng^tenberg). 


m.  XIV.  36—62.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  261 

Samuel's  antagonistic  working  preserved  the  principle  of  the  theocracy,  and  Saal's 
kingdom  departed  from  him  (Dan.  iv.  31). 

V.  The  perversity  of  men  involves  teem  in  sore  distress.  "  There  was  sore 
war,"  &c.  (ver.  52).  "  Very  different  had  been  the  state  of  things  when  Samuel 
ruled  Israel  (ch.  vii.  13).  And  the  people  who  looked  for  protection  to  an  arm  of 
flesh  rather  than  to  God,  who  was  their  King,  were  punished  by  that  instrument — 
Saul — which  they  had  chosen  for  themselves  in  order  that  they  might  be  saved  by 
it "  (Wordsworth's  '  Com.'). 

VI.  The  kingdom  op  God  most  prevail  over  all  opposition,  whether  from 
open  adversaries  or  disloyal  adherents.  That  which  seems  to  hinder  it  is  often  made 
a  means  of  its  furtherance.  The  Divine  purpose  concerning  it  cannot  be  defeated. 
It  endured,  wrought,  and  was  developed  amidst  all  the  vicissitudes  of  Israel's  history 
vmtil  the  advent  of  "  the  King  Messiah,"  and  it  is  still  advancing  toward  its  perfect 
and  eternal  consummation  (1  Cor.  xv.  24,  25). — D. 

Vers.  47,  48. — The  restless  king.  When  a  locomotive  engine  slips  ofE  the  rails,  it 
would  do  little  harm  if  it  could  stop  at  once ;  but  its  momentum  carries  it  forward. 
It  ploughs  up  the  way,  it  dashes  over  an  embankment,  and  drags  ever  so  many 
carriages  and  passengers  to  destruction.  So  is  it  with  the  deflection  of  a  man  of 
force  and  influence  from  the  right  course.  If  he  would  stop  at  once,  or  i£  he  should 
soon  die,  the  mischief  might  be  small.  But  the  momentum  of  his  character  and 
position  drives  him  on ;  he  goes  further  and  further  from  the  straight  lines  of 
righteousness,  and  in  the  end  not  only  hurls  himself  on  ruin,  but  pulls  many  after 
him  to  their  hurt.  It  was  so  with  king  Saul.  He  sinned,  and  the  prophet  Samuel 
intimated  to  him  the  Lord's  displeasure.  Had  the  king  stopped  there,  no  great 
damage  might  have  been  done  ;  but  he  could  not  stop.  The  vehemence  of  his  nature, 
and  what  seemed  to  be  the  necessities  of  his  position,  drove  him  on.  He  became 
more  and  more  arbitrary.  So  we  see  him  in  this  chapter  of  the  history  issuing  the 
most  unreasonable  restrictions  and  commands,  lenient  when  he  should  have  been 
strict,  and  severe  when  he  should  have  been  lenient.  By  his  rashness  he  very 
nearly  turned  to  mourning  the  signal  triumph  over  the  Philistines  which  crowned 
the  faith  and  valour  of  Prince  Jonathan,  and  from  that  day  he  felleven  below  his 
own  subjects  in  his  perception  of  right  and  wrong,  forfeited  their  respect,  and 
became  more  and  more  wayward  and  unreasonable.  Yet  he  had  successes — great 
successes  as  a  warrior.  His  martial  temper  and  skill  did  not  leave  him,  and  all  the 
iurrounding  nations  felt  his  heavy  hand.  Not  content  with  defending  the  territory, 
Saul  organised  and  disciplined  the  army  of  Israel,  so  as  to  be_  able  to  use  it  in 
aggressive  war,  and  smite  the  nations  which  had  at  various  periods  oppressed  his 
country.  Whithersoever  he  turned  himself  he  was  victorious.  And  yet  Saul  did  not 
conduct  those  wars  or  win  those  victories  in  a  manner  worthy  of  a  servant  of 
Jehovah.  There  is  no  trace  of  his  having  command  or  counsel  from  God.  There  is 
no  reference  to  the  fulness  of  Divine  promise  regarding  the  land  such  as  one  sees  in 
the  thoughts  of  David  when  he  enlarged  the  territory  of  Israel  till  they  possessed 
all  that  the  Lord  had  assigned  to  the  posterity  of  Abraham.  Saul  struck  right  and 
left  as  the  mood  seized  him,  and  "  whithersoever  he  turned  himself "_  he  con- 
quered. This  is  worth  noting.  A  man  may  have  many  successes  in  life ;  nay, 
may  have  them  in  the  Church,  and  in  vindication  of  sacred  truth,  yet  not  have  them 
as  a  Christian  ought,  and  so  not  please  God.  Especially  may  this  be  thecase  in 
ecclesiastical  and  theological  controversy.  One  may  be  quite  on  the  right  side,  and 
may  strike  heavy  blows  at  errorists  and  heretics  all  round,  just  as  he  "  turns  him- 
self "  and  yet  have  no  communion  with  the  God  of  truth  whom  he  seems  to  serve, 
obey  motives  unworthy  of  a  servant  of  Christ,  and  indulge  a  harsh  and  wilful  temper 
Buch  as  God  cannot  approve.  Restlessness  indicates  an  undiscipHned,  unhallowed 
energy.  Restfulness  belongs  to  those  who  submit  all  their  plans  to  God,  and  lay  all 
their  energies  at  his  feet.  No  men  are  so  deaf  to  expostulation  and  so  hard  of 
recovery  as  those  who  try  to  keep  an  accusing  conscience  quiet  by  ceaseless  activity. 
They  turn  hither  and  smite,  thither  and  smite  again.  Perhaps  they  attack  what 
deserves  to  be  smitten ;  but  it  is  a  bad  sign  of  themselves  that  they  are  neTer  still 
before  the  Lord,  letting  his  word  search  them.    Under  ever  so  much  noise  of  debat* 


2«4 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[CH.  XV.  1 — 35. 


and  controversy,  what  hoUowness  may  lurk,  what  degeneracy  I  Alas,  it  is  so  easy 
to  go  wrong,  and  having  gone  wrong  once,  easier  to  do  it  again.  And  then  it  is  so 
hard  to  accept  blarae  before  God  or  man,  and  to  submit  to  correction.  Why  not 
brandish  our  swords,  and  show  ourselves  brave  Christian  soldiers  ?  Will  not  this 
compensate  for  our  faults?  0  foolish  Saul  I  0  more  foolish  followers  of  the  restless, 
haughty  king  I   Lord,  keep  us  back  from  all  presumptuous  sin  I — F. 


EXPOSITION. 
Final  Rejection  of  Saul  (ch.  xv.) 


CHAPTER  XV. 
Divine  command  to  pttnish  thb  Ama- 

LBKITES,     AND     ITS     EXECUTION     BY     SaUL 

(vers.  1—9).  Ver.  1. — Samuel  also  said. 
Better  literally,  "  And  Samuel  said. "  There 
is  no  note  of  time,  but  probably  a  consider- 
able interval  elapsed  before  this  second  trial 
of  Saul  was  made.  God  does  not  finally 
reject  a  man  until,  after  repeated  oppor- 
tunities for  repentance,  he  finally  proves 
obdurate.  David  committed  worse  crimes 
than.  Saul,  but  he  had  a  tender  conscience, 
and  each  fall  was  followed  by  deep  and 
earnest  sorrow.  Saul  sinned  and  repented 
not.  Just,  then,  as  Eli  had  a  first  warning, 
which,  though  apparently  unconditional  in  its 
terms  (ch.  ii.  27 — 36),  was  really  a  call  to 
repentance,  and  was  only  made  irrevocable 
by  his  persistence  for  many  years  in  the 
same  sins  (ch.  iii.  11—14),  so  was  it  with 
SauL  The  prophet's  words  in  ch.  xiii.  13, 
14  were  a  stern  warning,  and  had  Saul  taken 
them  to  heart,  God  would  have  forgiven  him 
his  sin.  He  repented  not,  but  repeated  the 
offence,  and  so  the  sentence  was  confirmed. 
When,  then,  critics  say  that  we  have  two 
accounts  of  Saul's  rejection,  and  that  he  is 
represented  as  having  been  set  aside  first  for 
one  reason  and  then  for  another,  their  ob- 
jection arises  entirely  from  a  false  view  of 
God's  dealings  with  mankind.  Alike  pro- 
mises and  threatenings,  blessings  and  pun- 
ishments are  conditional ;  for  there  is  no 
heathen  fatalism  in  Holy  Scripture,  but 
mercy  waiting  to  triumph  over  justice.  God, 
then,  was  not  willing  lightly  to  cast  away  so 
noble  an  instrument  as  Saul.  His  first  sin 
too  had  been  committed  when  he  was  new  in 
the  kingdom,  and  in  a  position  of  danger 
and  difficulty.  He  waits,  therefore,  till  Saul 
has  had  some  years  of  success  and  power, 
and  his  character  has  developed  itself,  and  is 
taking  its  permanent  form ;  and  then  again 
gives  him  a  trial  in  order  to  test  his  fitness 
to  be  a  theocratic  king.  The  interest,  then, 
of  this  chapter  lies  in  the  unfolding  of  Saul's 
character,  and  so  it  follows  immediately 
upon  ch.  xiv. ,  which  was  occupied  with  the 
same  subject,  without  any  note  of  chronology, 
because  the  historical  narrative  is  subserv- 
iwnt  to  the  personal.    Hence,  too,  Samuer* 


solemn  address,  reminding  Saul  that  he  wms 
Jehovah's  anointed  one,  and  therefore  hail 
special  duties  towards  him  ;  that  he  had  also 
been  anointed  by  Samuel's  instrumentality, 
and  after  earnest  instruction  as  to  his  duties  ; 
and,  finally,  that  Israel  was  Jehovah's  people, 
and  their  king,  therefore,  bound  to  obey 
Jehovah's  commands. 

Ver.  2. — Amalek.  The  Amalekitea  were 
a  fierce  race  of  nomads  who  inhabited  the 
desert  to  the  south  of  Judsea  towards  Egypt. 
They  were,  and  still  continue  to  be  in  their 
descendants,  the  Bedouins,  an  untamable 
race  of  savages,  whose  delight  is  in  robbery 
and  plunder.  Between  them  and  Israel 
there  was  bitter  hostility  occasioned  by 
their  having  attacked  the  people  unmediately 
after  the  Exodus  (Exod.  xvii.  8 — 16),  and 
the  command  there  given  to  exterminate 
them  is  repeated  now,  probably  in  conse- 
quence of  their  raids  having  become  more 
numerous  and  sanguinary  under  their  present 
king,  as  we  gather  from  ver.  33.  'The  refer- 
ence to  a  war  with  tlie  Amalektes  in  ch.  xiv. 
48  no  doubt  refers  to  this  expedition,  as  we 
have  there  a  mere  summary  of  Saul's  military 
enterprises.  I  remember.  Literally,  "  I 
have  visited ; "  but  the  sense  of  remembering 
seems  confirmedby  such  passages  as  Gen.  xxi. 
1 ;  \.  24  ;  Isa.  xxiii.  17 ;  xxvi.  16.  The 
Septuagint,  however,  and  Aquila  give  a  veiy 
good  sense:  "I  have  considered,"  "thought 
over."  How  he  laid  wait  for  him  in  the 
way.  There  is  no  idea  in  the  Hebrew  of 
ambuscade  or  treachery.  It  is  simply,  "How- 
he  set  himself  in  the  way  against  him,"  i,  e. 
opposed,  withstood  him,  tried  to  bar  his 
progress. 

Ver.  3. — Utterly  destroy.  Hebrew,  "  put 
under  the  ban."  The  word  herem,  ban, 
properly  signifies  a  thing  set  apart,  especially 
one  devoted  to  God ;  and  whatever  was  so 
devoted  could  not  be  redeemed,  but  must  be 
slain.  When  a  country  was  put  under  the  ban, 
all  living  things,  men  and  cattle,  were  to  be 
killed  ;  no  spoil  might  be  taken,  but  it  was 
to  be  burnt,  and  things  indestructible  by  fire, 
as  silver  and  gold,  were  to  be  brought  into 
the  treasury.  Everj'thing,  in  short,  belonging 
to  such  a  nation  was  looked  upon  as  accursed 
(see  Num.  xxi.  2,  8). 

Ver.  4. — Telaim.     Ximchi  identifies  thi* 


ca.  XV.  1-  36. j 


THE  FlfiST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


S6£ 


with  Telem  (Josh.  XT.  24),  a  place  on  the 
southern  border  of  Jndah  near  the  country 
of  the  Amalekites.  But  as  telaim,  means 
"lambs,"  more  probably  beth,  "  house,"  is  to 
be  understood ;  and  so  it  was  no  town,  but 
the  "  place  of  lambs,"  i.  e.  some  open  spot 
where  at  the  proper  season  the  lambs  were 
collected  from  the  pastures  in  the  wilderness. 
Ten  thousand  men  of  Judah.  A  very  small 
number  compared  with  the  hosts  of  Israel, 
especially  as  Judah  was  most  exposed  to  the 
Amalekite,  raids  (but  see  on  ch.  xi  8.  A 
large  army  was  necessary,  because  the  Be- 
douin race,  though  offering  little  direct 
resistance,  would  be  very  difficult  to  over- 
take. 

Ver.  6. — ^A  city  of  Amalek.  More  pro- 
bably Ir-Amalek,  the  name  of  their  one 
town.  Laid  wait  Many  commentators 
follow  the  Syriac  in  rendering  this  verb  con- 
tended, strove;  others,  like  the  A.  V.,  with 
the  Septuagint  and  Vulgate,  regard  it  as  a 
contracted  form  of  a  verb  signifying  to  lay 
an  ambuscade.  It  is  not,  however,  a  valley, 
but  a  "  torrent-bed,"  which  was  more  fit  for 
an  ambush  than  for  a  strife  or  dispute. 
Eashi  explains  the  verb  as  signifying  "  con- 
tended with  himself,"  and  quotes  from  the 
Talmud  an  opinion  that  when  Saul  reached 
the  torrent  he  called  to  mind  the  command 
In  Deut.  XXL  4,  to  slay  a  heifer  at  a  torrent 
in  expiation  of  a  murder,  and  had  misgivings 
whether  a  slaughter  so  indiscriminate  as  that 
on  which  he  was  engaged  could  be  justified. 
The  law  of  the  Herem  was  soon  softened 
down,  but  we  find  David  in  several  of  his 
wars  guilty  of  fearful  cruelty.  The  transla- 
tion of  the  A.  V.  is  the  more  probable. 

Ver.  6. — Saul  said  unto  the  Eenites.  Not 
while  he  was  lying  in  ambush  in  the  torrent- 
bed,  but  after  smiting  Ir-Amalek.  The  Ke- 
nitea  were  always  friendly  to  the  Israelites, 
but  seem,  like  the  Amalekites,  to  have  been  a 
Bedouin  nation,  ever  wandering  about  with- 
out a  settled  home.  In  Abraham's  time 
they  were  a  powerful  people  (Gen.  xv.  19), 
but,  for  some  reason  or  other,  broke  up  into 
small  tribes,  some,  as  those  here  spoken  of, 
choosing  the  wilderness  of  Judah  for  their 
home  (Judges  i.  16),  others  living  far  to  the 
north  in  Naphtali  {ibid.  iv.  11,  17),  others 
among  the  rocks  of  Arabia  Petrtea.  Of  these 
last  we  know  but  little,  but  the  rest  con- 
tinued to  be  on  friendly  terms  with  David 
(1  Sam.  xxz.  29). 

Ver.  7. — From  Havilah  until  thou  comest 
to  Shur.  Hebrew,  "from  Havilah  as  thou 
goest  towards  Shur."  It  seems  impossible 
that  this  Havilah  can  be  the  north-western 
portion  of  Yemen,  called  Chawlan,  and  iden- 
tified with  the  Havilah  of  Gen.  i.  7,  29,  as 
this  would  make  Saul  smite  them  from  south- 
east to  north-west.  Shur,  which  means  wall, 
u,  M  WeUhansen  (Text  Sam.  97)  observe*, 


originally  the  name  of  the  wall  which  ran 
from  Pelusium  past  Migdol  to  Hero,  and 
which  gave  to  Egypt,  as  Ebers  tbinka,  its 
name  Mizraim,  the  enclosed  or  fortified. 
Shur  is  again  mentioned  in  ch.  xxviL  8  as 
indicating  the  direction  towards  Egypt  of 
the  region  occupied  by  the  Amalekites. 
Havilah,  which  means  circle,  must  have 
been  some  spot  on  the  route  to  the  isthmus 
of  Suez,  lying  on  the  edge  of  the  wildemese 
to  the  south  of  Judah,  where  Saul  com- 
menced his  foray.  Beginning  thus  upon  the 
borders  of  Judsea,  Saul  continued  his  devast- 
ations up  to  the  limits  of  Egypt 

Ver.  8. — He  took  Agag.  This  was  the 
official  name  of  the  Amalekite  kings  (see 
Num.  xxiv.  7),  as  Pharaoh  was  that  of  the 
kings  of  Egypt.  For  its  meaning  we  most 
wait  till  we  know  more  about  the  language 
of  this  race.  Agag,  however,  from  ver.  82, 
seems  to  have  been  able  to  speak  Hebrew. 
He  utterly  destroyed — i.  «.  pat  under  the 
ban — all  the  people.  They  appear,  however, 
again  in  ch.  zxvii.  8,  and  with  so  vast  a 
wilderness  in  which  to  take  refuge,  it  would 
be  impossible  really  to  exterminate  a  people 
used  to  lead  a  wandering  life.  Moreover,  as 
soon  as  Israel  began  to  lay  hands  on  the 
spoil  the  pursuit  would  flag,  as  the  cattle 
would  be  killed  by  over-driving. 

Ver.  9. — The  fatlings.  So  the  Syriac  and 
Chaldee  render  the  word,  but  the  Hebrew 
literally  means  "  the  second  best"  Kimchi 
and  Tanchum  give  perhaps  a  preferable  ren- 
dering, "the  second-bom,"  such  animals 
being  considered  superior  to  the  first-bom, 
as  the  dams  had  by  that  time  arrived  a1 
their  full  strength. 

Rejection  of  Savl  and  his  dvnast^ 
(vers.  10—23).  Ver.  11.— It  repenteth  me. 
By  the  law  of  man's  free  will  his  concurrencr 
is  necessary  in.carrying  out  the  Divine  pur 
pose,  and  consequently  every  man  called  ti 
the  execution  of  any  such  purpose  undergoe 
a  probation.  God's  purpose  will  be  finally 
carried  out,  but  each  special  instrument,  i 
it  prove  unworthy,  will  be  laid  aside.  'Thi, 
change  of  administration  is  always  describee 
in  Scriptural  language  as  God's  repentance, 
possibly  because  the  phrase  contains  also  th( 
idea  of  the  Divine  grief  over  the  rebellious 
sinner.  But  though  Saul  and  his  dynasty 
were  thus  put  aside,  and  no  longer  repre- 
sented« Jehovah,  still  Saul  remained  the 
actual  king,  because  God  works  slowly  by  the 
natural  sequence  of  cause  and  effect  Saul's 
ill-governed  temper,  and  his  hatred  and 
malice  towards  David,  were  the  means  of 
bringing  about  his  ruin.  It  grieved  SamneL 
Hebrew,  "  it  burned  to  Samuel,"  tl  c  he 
was  angry  and  displeased.  The  same  phrase 
occurs  in  Jonah  iv.  1,  where  it  is  rendered 
"  he  was  very  angry."  But  with  whom  was 
Samuel  vexed  t  Generally  at  the  whoU  coniM 


266 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMDEL. 


[cH.  XV.  l—3b 


of  events,  but  especially  with  Saul,  In  choos- 
ing him  he  had  hoped  that,  in  addition  to  high 
nulitaiy  qualities,  he  would  possess  a  religious 
and  obedient  heart.  He  had  now  obtained 
for  him  a  second  trial,  and  if,  warned  by  his 
earlier  failure,  he  had  proved  trustworthy  all 
might  have  been  well.  Saul  had  too  many 
noble  gifts  for  Samuel  to  feel  indifferent  at 
the  perversion  of  so  great  an  intellect  and  so 
heroic  a  heart.  But  he  was  of  a  despotic 
temperament,  and  would  bend  to  no  will  but 
his  own  ;  and  so  he  had  saved  the  best  of  the 
plunder  to  enrich  the  people,  and  Agag 
possibly  as  a  proof  of  his  personal  triuinpb. 
And  he  cried  unto  Jehovah  all  night  L  e. 
he  offered  an  earnest  prayer  for  forgiveness 
for  Saul,  and  for  a  change  in  his  heart.  As 
Abravanel  says,  Samuel  no  doubt  loved  Saul 
for  his  beauty  and  heroism,  and  therefore 
prayed  for  him ;  but  no  change  came  in 
answer  to  his  prayer,  and  as  forgiveness  is 
conditional  upon  man's  repentance,  Saul  was 
not  forgiven.  It  is  remarkable  how  often 
Samuel  is  represented  as  "  crying  "  unto  God 
(see  ch.  vii.  8,  9  ;  xii  18). 

Ver.  12.— Samuel  rose  early.  If  Samuel 
was  at  home  at  Ramah,  he  would  have  a 
journey  of  several  days  before  reaching 
Carmel,  the  city  mentioned  in  Josh.  xv. 
65,  on  the  road  from  Arad,  on  the  borders 
of  the  wilderness  of  Judah,  about  ten  miles 
south-east  of  Hebron.  The  words  in  the 
morning  should  be  joined  with  rose  early. 
Before  setting  out,  however,  Samuel  learned 
that  Saul  had  already  marched  northward 
towards  Gilgal,  having  first  set  him  up  a  place 
— Hebrew,  "a  hand,"  i.  e.  a  monument, 
something  to  call  attention  to  his  victory. 
In  2  Sam.  xviii.  18  Absalom's  pillar  is  styled 
"Absalom's  hand."  A  Hebrew  trophy  in 
honour  of  a  victory  possibly  had  a  hand 
carved  upon  it.  Gilgal  was  the  city  in  the 
Jordan  valley  near  Jericho,  whither  Samuel 
now  followed  Saul. 

Ver.  13.— Blessed  be  then  of  Tehovah. 
Saul  meets  Samuel  with  all  external  respect, 
and  seems  even  to  expect  his  approval,  say- 
ing, I  have  performed  the  commandment  of 
Jehovah.  And  so  he  had  in  the  half-way  in 
which  men  generally  keep  God's  command- 
ments, doing  that  part  which  is  agreeable  to 
themselves,  and  leaving  that  part  undone 
which  gives  them  neither  pleasure  nor  profit. 
Saul  probably  had  thought  very  little  about 
the  exact  temis  of  the  command  given  him, 
and  having  successfully  accomplished  the 
main  point  of  carrying  out  a  vast  foray 
against  the  Amalekites,  regarded  the  captive 
king  and  the  plundered  cattle  as  proofs  of  his 
victory.  The  trophy  at  Carmel  is  a  token  of 
his  own  self-satisfaction. 

Ver.  14. — What  meaneth  then  this  bleat- 
ing? &e.  Literally,  "What  is  this  voice  of 
sheep  in  my  ears,  and  the  voice  of  oxen  ? " 


While  Saul's  own  conscience  was  silent  thej 
were  proclaiming  his  disobedience. 

Ver.  16. — They  have  brought  them.  Ka 
doubt  this  was  verbally  true,  and  very  pro- 
bably the  excuse  of  holding  a  great  sacrifice 
to  Jehovah  had-  been  put  prominently  for- 
ward. But  reasons  are  never  wanting  when 
men  have  made  up  their  minds,  and  the 
people  who  so  readily  obeyed  Saul  before 
(ch.  xiv.  24,  84,  40)  would  have  obeyed  him 
now,  had  he  really  wished  it.  For  a  king  so 
wilful  and  imperious  as  Saul  thus  to  seek 
for  excuses,  and  try  to  throw  the  blame  on 
others,  marks,  as  has  been  well  observed,  a 
thorough  break-down  of  his  moral  character. 

Ver.  16. — Stay.  Samuel  will  hear  no  more. 
Long  as  he  had  striven  for  him  in  prayer 
(ver.  11),  he  now  feels  that  Saul  has  &llen 
too  low  for  recovery  to  be  possible.  This 
night  It  is  plain  from  this  that  Samuel 
had  not  gone  to  meet  Saul  at  Carmel,  but  on 
receiving  information  of  his  movements  had 
proceeded  straight  to  Gilgal,  distant  &om 
Bamah  about  fifteen  miles. 

Ver.  17. — When — ^rather,  Though — thou 
wast  little  in  thine  own  sight  Before  hif 
elevation  to  the  royal  dignity  Saul  had 
deemed  himself  altogether  unequal  to  so 
heavy  a  task  (ch.  ix.  21) ;  now,  after  great 
military  successes,  he  is  filled  with  arrogance, 
and  will  rule  in  open  defiance  of  the  con- 
ditions upon  which  Jehovah  had  appointed 
him  to  the  ofSce 

Ver.  18. — The  sinners.  The  Amalekites 
were  a  race  of  robbers,  and  the  command  "  to 
devote  them "  was  the  consequence  of  the 
robbery  and  murder  practised  by  them  on 
the  Israelite  borders. 

Vers.  20,  21. — Saul's  justification  of  him- 
self is  remarkable,  as  he  seems  entirely  un- 
conscious of  having  done  anything  wrong. 
His  education  had  no  doubt  been  defective 
(ch.  X.  12),  and  his  knowledge  of  the  law 
was  probably  very  small ;  but  he  must  have 
listened  to  Samuel's  injunctions  in  a  veiy 
off-hand  way,  and  have  troubled  himseu 
about  very  little  more  than  that  he  was  to 
make  war  upon  the  Amalekites.  There  may 
even  have  been  the  wish  in  his  mind  to  let 
Samuel  know  that  he  was  now  king,  and 
would  carry  on  affairs  after  his  own  fashion. 
The  very  form  of  his  answer  requires  notice  ; 
for  the  word  rendered  yea  is  literally  in  that, 
or  because,  and  may  be  paraphrased  as  fol- 
lows :  Do  you  reproach  me  thus  because  I 
have  obeyed  you?  See,  there  is  Agag  in 
proof  of  our  victory  ;  and  if  the  people  have 
spared  the  cattle,  it  was  with  the  best  ot 
intentions.  The  next  clause,  the  chief  of 
the  things  which  should  have  been  utterly 
destroyed,  reads  in  the  A.  V.  like  an  ironical 
parenthesis.  It  is  not  so,  but  an  important 
part  of  Saul's  defence.  These  sbe?p  and 
oxen  were  "  the  best  of  the  devoted  thiugs," 


OH.  XV.  1-^5.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


267 


selected  as  the  first-fruits  for  sacrifice.  Saul 
may  not  have  known  that  such  a  sacrifice 
was  forbidden  (Deut.  xlii.  15  — 17).  The 
words,  to  sacrifice  unto  JTehovah  thy  Ood, 
imply  that  Samuel  ought  to  be  pleased  at 
the  victorious  army  doing  this  public  hom- 
age to  the  Deity  whose  prophet  he  was. 
It  was  virtually  a  compliment  to  himself, 
and  is  very  much  in  accordance  with  the 
notions  of  the  generality  of  people  now,  who 
consider  that  attendance  at  a  place  of  wor- 
ship, or  sending  their  children  to  school,  is 
a  favour  to  the  clergyman. 

Vers.  22,  23. — The  rebuke  of  Samuel  con- 
tains one  of  those  pregnant  sayings  which 
mark  the  high  moral  tone  of  the  teaching  of 
the  prophets,  and  soon  became  a  fundamental 
principle  with  them.  To  obey  is  better  than 
sacrifice  is  a  dictum  reproduced  by  Hosea 
(ch.  vi  6),  the  most  ancient  of  those  pro- 
phets of  Israel  whose  lessons  have  been 
preserved  in  writing ;  it  is  referred  to  in 
still  earlier  psalms  (see  Ps.  1.  8—14  ;  li.  16, 
17)  ;  by  other  prophets  (Isa.  i.  11 ;  Jer.  vi 
20  ;  Micah  vi.  6,  8) ;  and  finally  received  our 
Lord's  special  approbation  (Matt.  ix.  13 ; 
xii.  7).  It  asserts  in  the  clearest  terms  the 
superiority  of  moral  to  ritual  worship,  and 
that  God  can  only  be  really  served  with  the 
heart.  Witclicraft  is  in  the  Hebrew  divin- 
ation, a  sin  always  strongly  condemned  in 
the  Old  Testament.  Iniquity  literally  means 
nothingness,  and  so  is  constantly  used  for 
"  an  idol ; "  and  this  must  be  its  signification 
here,  as  the  word  coupled  with  it,  and  ren- 
dered Idolatry,  is  really  teraphim.  These 
were  the  Hebrew  household  gods,  answering 
to  the  Roman  Lares,  and  were  supposed  to 
bring  good  luck.  Their  worship,  we  see  from 
this  place,  was  strictly  forbidden.  The  verae, 
therefore,  means,  "  For  rebellion  is  the  sin  of 
divination  (i  e.  is  equal  to  it  in  wickedness), 
and  obstinacy  (i.  e.  intractablencss)  is  an  idol 
and  teraphim."  Samuel  thus  accuses  Saul 
of  resistance  to  Jehovah's  will,  and  of  the 
determination  at  all  hazards  to  be  his  own 
master.  With  this  temper  of  mind  he  could 
be  no  fit  representative  of  Jehovah,  and  there- 
fore Samuel  dethrones  him.  Henceforward 
he  reigns  only  as  a  temporal,  and  no  longer 
as  the  theocratic,  king. 

Satjl's  profession  of  repentakoe  and 
FINAL  REJECTION  (vcrs.  24 — 35).  Ver.  24. — 
The  words  of  Samuel  struck  Saul  with  terror. 
The  same  authority  which  had  first  given 
him  the  kingdom  now  withdraws  it  from  nim, 
and  pronounces  his  offence  as  equal  in  God's 
sight  to  crimes  which  Saul  himself  held  in 
great  abhorrence.  He  humbles  himself,  there- 
fore, before  Samuel,  acknowledges  his  sin,  and 
frankly  confesses  that  the  cause  of  it  had 
been  his  unwillingness  to  act  in  a  manner 
contrary  to  the  wishes  of  the  people  ;  and  we 
must  fairly  conclude  that  the  sparing  of  the 


spoil  had  been  the  people's  doing.  But  was 
it  not  the  king's  duty  to  make  the  people 
obedient  to  Jehovah's  voice  1  As  the  theo- 
cratic king,  he  was  Jehovah's  minister, 
and  in  preferring  popularity  to  duty  he 
showed  himself  unworthy  of  his  position. 
Nor  can  we  suppose  that  his  confession  of 
sin  arose  from  penitence.  It  was  the  result 
simply  of  vexation  at  having  his  victory 
crossed  by  reproaches  and  disapproval  from 
the  only  power  capable  of  holding  him  in 
cheek.  It  seems,  too,  as  if  it  were  Samuel 
whom  he  feared  more  than  Jehovah  ;  for  he 
speaks  of  thy  words,  and  asks  Samuel  to 
pardon  his  sin,  and  to  grant  him  the  favour 
of  his  public  presence  with  him  at  the  sacri- 
fice which  was  about  to  be  celebrated  in 
honour  of  their  triumph. 

Vers.  26,  27,  28.— At  first  the  prophet  re- 
fuses the  king's  request.  Saul  had  dishonoured 
God,  and,  therefore,  had  no  claim  to  public 
homage  from  God's  minister.  He  turns, 
therefore,  to  go  away,  and  Saul  in  his  eager- 
ness seizes  hold  of  Samuel's  mantle.  'The 
A.  V.  is  very  careless  about  the  exact  render- 
ing of  words  of  this  description,  and  seems 
guided  in  its  choice  of  terms  simply  by  the 
ear.  Now  the  mantle,  addereth,  though  used 
of  the  Shinar  shawl  stolen  by  Achan  (Josh, 
vii.  21,  24),  was  the  distinctive  dress  of  the 
prophets,  but  naturally  was  never  worn  by 
Samuel  himself  Special  dresses  come  into 
use  only  gradually,  and  Elijah  is  the  first 
person  described  as  being  thus  clad.  Long 
before  his  time  the  schools  of  the  prophets 
had  grown  into  a  national  institution,  and  a 
loose  wrapper  of  coarse  cloth  made  of  camel's 
hair,  fastened  round  the  body  at  the  waist  by 
a  leathern  girdle,  had  become  the  usual  pro- 
phetic dress,  and  continued  so  to  be  until 
the  arrival  of  Israel's  last  prophet,  John  the 
Baptist  (Matt.  iiL  4).  The  garment  here 
spoken  of  is  the  m^,  on  which  see  ch.  ii  19, 
where  it  was  shown  to  be  the  ordinary  dress 
of  people  of  various  classes  in  easy  circum- 
stances. Now  the  mM  was  not  a  loosely- 
flowing  garment,  but  fitted  rather  closely  to 
the  body,  and,  therefore,  the  tearing  of  it 
implies  a  considerable  amount  of  violence  on 
Saul's  part.  Skirt,  moreover,  gives  a  wrong 
idea.  What  Saul  took  hold  of  was  the  hem, 
the  outer  border  of  the  garment,  probably  at 
Samuel's  neck  or  shoulder,  as  he  turned  to 
go  away.  He  seized  him,  as  we  should  say, 
by  the  collar,  and  endeavoured  by  main  force 
to  retain  him,  and  in  the  struggle  the  hem 
rent.  And  Samuel,  using  it  as  an  omen,  said, 
Jehovah  hath  rent  the  kingdom  of  Israel 
from  thee  this  day,  and  hath  given  it  to  a 
neighbour  of  thine,  that  is  better  than 
thou.  Neighhour  is  used  in  Hebrew  in  a 
very  indefinite  manner,  and  here  means 
generally  "some  one,  whoever  it  may  be," 
but  one  who  will  discharge  the  dntiesof  thy 


268 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[CH.  XV.  1—36. 


office  better  than  thon  hast  done  (comp. 
Luke  X.  36). 

Ver.  29. — The  Strength — ^better,  as  in  the 
margin,  the  Victory  or  Triumph — of  Israel. 
He  who  is  Israel's  Victory,  or  He  in  whom 
Israel  has  victoi^,  will  not  repent.  In  ver. 
11  God  was  said  to  repent,  because  there 
was  what  appeared  to  be  a  change  in  the 
Divine  counsels.  "  God  gave  Israel  a  king 
in  his  anger,  and  took  him  away  in  his 
wrath"  (Hosea  xiil  11).  But  such  modes 
of  speaking  are  in  condescension  to  human 
weakness.  Absolutely  with  God  there  is  no 
change.  He  is  the  Eternal  Present,  with 
whom  all  things  that  were,  and'  are,  and 
shall  be  are  one.  But  even  looked  at  from 
below,  ad  this  finite  creature  man  looks  at 
his  Maker's  acts,  there  is  no  change  in  the 
Divine  counsels,  because,  amidst  all  the 
vicissitudes  of  human  events,  God's  will 
moves  calmly  forward  without  let  or  hin- 
drance. No  lower  or  secondary  motives  in- 
fluence him,  no  rival  power  thwarts  him. 
One  instrument  may  be  laid  aside,  and 
another  chosen,  because  God  ordains  that 
the  instruments  by  which  he  works  shall  be 
beings  endowed  with  free  wiU.  Saul  was 
the  very  counterpart  of  the  Jewish  people — 
highly  endowed  with  noble  qualities,  but 
head-strong,  self-willed,  disobedient.  Never- 
theless, he  laid  the  foundation  for  the  throne 
of  David,  who  in  so  many  points  was  the 
ideal  of  the  theocratic  king ;  and  Israel  in 
like  manner  prepared  the  way  for  the  coming 
of  the  true  Messianic  King,  and  gave  man- 
kind the  one  Catholic,  i.  e.  universal,  religion. 
"  He  who  is  Israel's  Victory  does  not  repent." 

Vers.  30,  31.  —  Then  he  said,  I  have 
sinned.  We  have  here  no  real  confession 
of  guilt.  Even  in  ver.  24  the  words  were 
rather  an  expression  of  vexation  at  the 
strictness  with  which  he  was  held  to  the 
letter  of  the  command,  than  an  acknowledg- 
ment that  he  really  had  done  wrong.  Here 
Saul's  meaning  seems  to  be.  Well,  granting 
that  I  have  sinned,  and  that  this  sentence  of 
exclusion  from  the  kingdom  is  passed  upon 
me,  yet  at  least  pay  me  the  honour  due  to 
the  rank  which  I  still  continue  to  hold. 
And  to  this  request  Samuel  accedes.  Saul 
was  de  facto  king,  and  would  continue  to  be 
BO  during  his  lifetime.  The  anointing,  once 
bestowed,  was  a  consecration  for  life,  and  so 
generally  it  was  in  the  days  of  the  son  that 
the  consequences  of  the  father's  sin  came 
fuUy  to  pass  (1  Kings  xL  34,  35  ;  xiv.  13, 
&c. ).  Had  Samuel  refused  the  public  honour 
due  to  Saul's  rank,  it  would  have  given  an 
occasion  for  intrigue  and  resistance  to  all  who 
were  disaffected  with  Saul's  government,  and 
been  a  step  towards  bringing  hack  the  old 
anarchy.    Jehovah  thy  God.    See  on  ver.  13. 

Ver.  32.  —  Delicately.  The  Septuagint 
uvl  Yulgatt  translate  this  word  trembling, 


and  the  Syriac  omits,  probably  from  inability 
to  give  its  meaning.  Most  commentators 
render  cheerfully,  joyfully,  forming  it  from 
the  same  root  as  Eden,  the  garden  of  joy 
(comp.  Ps.  xxxvi  8,  where  Eden  is  trans- 
lated pleasure).  The  very  word,  however, 
occurs  in  Job  xxxviii.  31,  where  the  A.  V. 
renders  it  bands,  and  this  seems  the  right 
sense:  "Agag  came  unto  him  in  fetters." 
The  idea  that  Agag  came  cheerfully  is  con- 
tradicted by  the  next  clause — Surely  the 
bitterness  of  death  is  passed.  Though  put 
affirmatively,  there  is  underlying  doubt.  It 
is  no  expression  of  heroic  contempt  for  death, 
nor  of  real  confidence  that,  as  Saul  had  spared 
him  hitherto,  his  life  was  in  no  danger.  He 
had  been  brought  to  the  national  sanctuary, 
and  a  great  festival  in  honour  of  the  success 
of  the  army  was  to  be  held.  It  was  entirely 
in  accordance  irith  the  customs  of  ancient 
times  that  his  execution  should  be  the 
central  feature  of  the  spectacle.  Agag's 
words  show  that  this  fear  was  present  in  Eis 
mind,  though  they  are  put  in  such  a  form  as 
to  be  a  protest  against  his  life  being  taken 
after  so  long  delay.  Samuel's  reply  treats 
Agag's  assertion  as  being  thus  at  once  a 
question  and  a  protest.  The  bitterness  of 
death  has  still  to  be  borne,  and  the  cruelty 
of  Agag's  past  life  makes  the  shedding  of 
his  own  blood  just.  The  Syriac  translates, 
"Surely  death  is  bitter;"  the  Septuagint, 
"  If  death  be  so  bitter,"  with  which  the 
Vulgate  agrees.  Thus  they  all  understood 
that  Agag  came  trembling  for  his  life. 

Ver.  33. — As  thy  sword  hath  made  women 
childless.  Agag's  life  had  been  spent  in 
freebooting  expeditions,  in  which  he  had 
shed  blood  ruthlessly,  and  so  justice  re- 
quired his  execution  in  requital  of  his  deeds 
to  others.  Samuel  hewed  Agag  in  pieces. 
The  verb  occurs  only  here,  and  probably 
refers  to  some  particular  method  of  execu- 
tion, like  the  quartering  of  the  middle  ages. 
Being  in  the  Piel  conjugation,  it  would  mean 
not  so  much  that  Samuel  put  Agag  to  death 
himself  as  that  he  commanded  it  to  be  done. 

Ver.  35. — Samuel  came  no  more  to  see 
Saul.  The  friendly  intercourse  which  had 
previously  existed  was  now  broken  off,  and 
though  they  met  again  (ch.  xix.  24),  it  was 
neither  in  an  amicable  manner,  nor  was 
their  interview  of  Samuel's  seeking.  But 
the  words  have  a  higher  meaning  than  the 
mere  seeing  or  meeting  one  mth  the  other. 
They  involve  the  cessation  of  that  relation 
in  which  Samuel  and  Saul  had  previously 
stood  to  one  another  as  respectively  the  pro- 
phet and  king  of  the  same  Jehovah  Saul 
was  no  longer  the  representative  of  Jehovah, 
and  consequently  Samuel  no  more  came  to 
him,  bearing  messages  and  commands,  and 
giving  him  counsel  and  guidance  from  God. 
Nevertheless    Samuel   mourned   for    SauL 


3H.  XV.  1 — 35.J 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


269 


There  was  so  much  in  him  that  was  good 
and  admirable,  and  he  had  wrought  such 
brave  services  in  delivering  Israel  from  its 
many .  enemies,  that  Samuel  loved  him. 
Now  lie  saw  all  his  high  qualities  perverted, 
the  man  fallen,  his  powers  of  usefulness 
destroyed.  Already,  too,  there  was  probably 
the  beginning  of  that  darkening  of  Saul's 


intellect  which  filled  so  many  of  his  future 
years  with  melancholy,  bursting  out  f^om 
time  to  time  into  fits  of  madness.  All  this 
would  end  in  the  expulsion  of  himc/clf  and 
his  dynasty  from  the  throne,  for  Jehovah 
repented  that  be  had  made  Saul  king  over 
IsraeL     See  on  ver.  11 


H0MILBTIC8. 

Vers.  1 — ^7. — GooHs  terrible  acts.  The  facts  are — 1.  Saul  is  reminded  that  though 
a  king  he  is  but  the  servant  of  God,  and  bound  to  carry  out  his  declared  will.  2. 
Saul  is  commanded  to  utterly  destroy  Amalek  in  retribution  for  former  sins.  3.  In 
prosecuting  his  duty  Saul  discriminates  in  favour  of  the  Kenites,  then  resident  among 
the  Amalekites,  in  consequence  of  their  former  kindness  to  Israel.  It  appears  from 
xiv.  48  that,  although  the  sin  of  Amalek  in  bygone  times  (Exod.  xvii.  8 — 16)  was  the 
primary  ground  of  the  judgment  about  to  be  inflicted,  the  recent  annoyance  and 
injury  caused  to  Saul's  subjects  was  the  occasion  for  the  execution  of  the  ancient 
sentence  at  this  juncture.  Those  living  under  the  mild  and  beneficent  influences  of 
the  Christian  dispensation  are  conscious  of  a  shock  to  their  sensibilities  in  reading  the 
account  of  wholesale  destruction  brought  by  human  instrumentality  on  an  entire 
people ;  and  the  emotional  disturbance  is  supplemented  by  intellectual  perplexity  on 
observing  that  the  transaction  was  in  obedience  to  a  most  explicit  command  of  God. 
It  is  sometimes  the  practice,  very  easy  for  all  who  will  not  take  pains  to  enter  care- 
fully into  the  subject,  to  get  rid  of  the  emotion  and  the  perplexity  by  rejecting  the 
inspiration  of  the  entire  record,  or  else  by  saying  that  Samuel  and  Saul  sincerely  but 
ignorantly  mistook  their  own  views  of  policy  and  dispositions  of  heart  for  the  voice 
of  God.  The  question  at  issue  is  a  large  one,  but  as  it  embraces  in  principle  the 
whole  of  what  in  the  Psalms  are  called  his  "  terrible  acts,"  which,  whenever  occurring 
or  read,  tax  our  feelings  and  perplex  our  intellects,  we  may  notice  a  few  points 
applicable  more  or  less  to  all  God's  righteous  judgments. 

I.  The  spirit  with  which  wb  should  appkoach  the  considbeation  of  God's 
"  TERRIBLE  ACTS."  It  is  not  improbable  that  an  unteachable,  self-assertive  spirit — a 
spirit  that  will  not  repose  in  a  higher  wisdom  and  goodness  than  its  own,  or  that 
chafes  tinder  its  inability  to  square  human  views  of  sin  and  its  relations  with  God's — 
is  the  moral  cause  of  man's  quarrel  with  some  of  the  records  of  Old  Testament 
history.  Our  present  contention  is  not  with  atheists,  who  to  get  rid  of  one  difficulty 
create  many  others,  but  with  those  who  believe  in  an  almighty,  all-wise,  and  merciful 
God,  who  is  the  Author  of  the  moral  and  physical  laws,  by  the  action  of  which  the 
world  finds  bliss  or  woe.  We  cannot  help  finding  ourselves  face  to  face  with  events 
bringing  sorrow  and  shame,  material  and  moral  desolation  to  multitudes,  because 
God  so  willed  one  creature's  condition  to  be  affected  by  the  conduct  of  another. 
Apart  from  all  human  conduct,  there  are  awful  events  in  which,  so  to  speak,  the 
reputation  of  God  for  goodness  and  tenderness  seems  to  be  at  stake.  This  circum- 
stance should  make  the  rejecter  of  Old  Testament  records  pause  ere  he  yields  to  the 
spirit  of  unbelief.  There  are  "  clouds  and  darkness  "  round  about  the  throne  ;  and 
he  who  would  flee  from  mystery  may  well  seek  to  flee  from  the  universe.  The  judg- 
ment that  condemns  everything  of  which  it  does  not  see  the  reason  is  not  qualified 
to  exercise  Itself  on  the  acts  of  an  infinite  Being.  The  cherubim  and  seraphim  cover 
their  faces,  not  presuming  to  attempt  to  pierce  even  with  their  clear  and  strong 
vision  the  ineffable  glory ;  and  so  when  a  great  burden  of  fear  rests  on  our  heart 
because  of  the  terrible  things  of  God,  it  is  for  us  to  bow  in  lowliness  and  trustful- 
ness, saying  for  our  comfort,  because  of  what  we  know  him  to  be,  and  not  because 
we  can  solve  the  awful  problems  of  existence,  "  Just  and  true  are  thy  waj-s,  thou 
King  of  saints.  Who  shall  not  fear  thee,  0  Lord,  and  glorify  thy  name  ?  "  (Rev. 
XV.  3,  4  ;  cl  Ps.  xxxvi.  6). 

II.  Facts  and  rRiNciPLES  that  should  weigh  with  ub  in  cub  thoughts  upoh 
God's  "  terrible  acts."     It  ia  not  possible  to  find  a  perfect  solution  of  all  the  acti 


270  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [CH.  XT.  1—86 

ascribed  to  God,  or  even  those  known,  without  question,  to  result  from  his  appoint- 
ments. But  some  light  shines  around  the  "  clouds  and  darkness,"  and  here  and  there 
a  rift  in  the  awful  covering  appears.  1,  There  is  an  awfvl  as  well  as  a  mild  aspect 
of  the  Divine  nature.  Christianity  is  no  doubt  mildness,  tenderness,  peace,  love — 
all  that  is  precious  to  the  sorrowing,  perplexed  spirit.  The  tendency  of  8ome,'how- 
ever,  is  to  overlook  the  significant  fact  that  all  this  becomes  real  to  us  in  virtue  of 
the  awful  sufferings  and  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  The  fact,  and  the  evident  neces- 
sity ot  the  fact,  for  otherwise  it  would  not  occur,  of  his  unutterable  woes  is  perhaps 
the  mo«t  stupendous  of  all  terrible  acts  known  by  man.  There  was  the  love  that 
gave  him  for  man  ;  yes,  and  the  awful  righteousness  which  had  so  originally  consti- 
tuted the  moral  relations  of  men  to  a  holy  God  that  love  could  only  efiect  its  work 
through  a  catastrophe,  on  which  angels  must  have  gazed  With  perplexity,  and 
possibly  pain,  greater  than  any  we  know  when  contemplating  a  ruined  Amalek  or  a 
world  swept  by  deluge.  It  is  an  imperfect  Christianity  which  eliminates  the 
majesty  of  righteousness  in  Law.  He  who  said,  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour, 
and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest,"  is  the  same  who  one  day  will  say, 
"Depart."  "These  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment."  The  "wrath  of 
the  Lamb  "  is  as  real  as  his  love.  2.  The  events  which  confound  our  thought  are  not 
confined  to  the  Scripture  record.  Who  shall  estimate  the  pains  of  death  experienced 
during  the  succession  of  catastrophes  incident  to  the  history  of  our  globe?  It  is 
probable  that  the  number  of  Amalekites  who  fell  under  the  judgment  of  God  was 
less  than  the  sum  of  young  and  old  who  in  one  day  experience  the' "  pains  of  death  " 
by  the  ordination  of  God.  The  destruction  caused  by  the  deluge,  the  fire  on  Sodom^ 
the  waters  on  the  Egyptians,  is  not  greater  in  the  number  of  lives  cut  off  than  what 
befell  the  thousands  cut  off  by  events  not  mentioned  in  the  Bible.  What  though  the 
events — the  sweeping  calamities  of  famine,  plague,  earthquake,  and  flood,  and  the 
daily  sufferings  and  death  of  thousands  of  young  and  old — be  the  outcome  of  law  I 
God  is  the  Author  of  that  law,  and,  therefore,  the  events  are  in  a  significant  sense 
his,  as  truly  as  were  the  ruin  of  Sodom  and  the  doom  of  the  Amalekites.  No  doubt 
the  sum  of  enjoyment  in  the  lives  of  creatures  cut  off  by  catastrophes  was  far  in 
excess  of  the  sum  of  misery  experienced  in  the  cutting  of  them  off,  and  so  a  philo- 
sopher can  still  rest  in  the  benevolence  of  God.  Sudden  destruction  is  not  identical 
with  a  whole  existence  given  up  only  to  anguish.  3.  So  far  as  we  can  see,  the  great 
woes  tliat  come  hy  ordinary  law  and  hy  special  command  are  alike  subordinate  to 
an  ulterior  issue.  Although  we  speak  of  some  events  occurring  by  the  action  of 
natural  law, — e.g.  earthquakes,  floods,  famines,  and  plagues, — yet  those  in  which  the 
specific  command  appears  are  also  according  to  law.  The  difference  lies  in  the  fact 
of  the  Divine  origin  of  the  arrangement  which  issues  in  destruction  being  brought 
out  and  emphasised.  The  laws  that  work  ruin  in  fire  and  tempest  and  flood  are 
subordinate  to  the  higher  laws  involved  in  the  perfect  economy  of  the  world.  Laws 
involving  incidental  disasters  subserve  the  conservation  of  the  whole  system  of 
which  they  are  a  part.  The  laws  which  bring  destruction  to  men  who  have  sinned, 
and  because  they  have  sinned,  are  subordinate  to  the  moral  laws  that  govern  man's 
relation  to  God.  They  are  so  inter- related,  in  these  instances,  as  to  be  parts  of  one 
great  system,  and  to  subserve  the  final  supremacy  of  the  law  of  righteousness  on 
which  the  health  and  well-being  of  the  world  depend.  It  is  a  Divine  ordination,  and 
is  incorporated  with  the  physical  and  mental  constitution  of  man,  that  the  sin  of  the 
fathers  shall  be  visited,  not  to  the  exclusion  from  woe  of  the  parent,  but  intensifying 
it,  on  the  third  and  fourth  generation.  We  see  this  law  at  work  every  day.  Awful 
as  it  is,  we  can  even  now  see  its  value  as  subservient  to  the  righteousness  which 
alone  makes  men  blessed ;  for  it  is  a  most  potent  check  to  vice.  Irrespective  of 
their  own  immoral  condition,  the  cutting  off  of  the  Amalekites  for  the  sin  of  their 
ancestors  is  analogous  to  the  shortened  lives,  the  wretched  health,  the  filthy  poverty, 
and  other  miseries  which  are  the  inevitable  lot  of  the  offspring  of  the  desperately 
vicious;  and  this  for  ulterior  issues.  4.  Nations  have  no  posthumous  existence.  For 
individuals  judgment  is  often  reserved  till  another  life.  Nations,  if  visited  with 
judgment  at  all,  must  suffer  here.  In  the  instruction  of  the  individual,  the  fact 
of  the  coming  punishment  of  the  individual  sinner  bears  an  important  part  as  a 
deterrent.     In  the  instruction  of  nations  as  such,  the  signal  and  conspicuous  punish- 


CH.  xy.  1—36.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  271 

tnent  oC  •  people  also  plays  an  important  part.  This  use  of  national  judgments  it 
constantly  recognised  m  the  language  of  Scripture.  "  The  Lord  hath  made  bare  his 
holy  arm  in  the  eyes  of  all  the  nations  "  (Isa.  lii.  10).  "  Put  them  in  fear,  O  Lord,  that 
tht,  nations  may  know  themselves  to  be  but  men  "  (Ps.  ix.  20).  At  the  same  time  the 
judgments  which  on  earth  come  on  nations  as  mch  do  not  necessarily  foreclose  hope 
to  the  young  and  innocent  among  them  of  a  personal  salvation  from  the  woe  due  te 
the  peraonally  guilty  in  another  life.  5.  God  is  the  only  true  Judge  of  the  actual 
demerits  of  a  guilty  nation.  We  cannot  rightly  estimate  the  intrinsic  evil  even  of 
our  own  personal  sins.  "  The  Judge  of  all  the  earth  "  must  decide  what  is  appro- 
priate punishment  for  national  crime ;  for  he  only  knows  the  degree  of  enmity  in  the 
minds  of  Sodomites  and  Amalekites.  None  but  he  can  see  the  intricate  bearings  of 
their  sin  and  of  their  continued  existence  as  a  people.  He  also  knows  best  what 
blessed  deterrent  influence  will  arise  to  mankind  from  the  conspicuous  character  of 
the  judgment  executed.  6.  The  means  hy  which  judgment  is  executed  appear  to  be 
determined  hy  conditions  known  to  God.  Judgment  works  inwardly  through  the 
conscience  and  the  mental  faculties  in  general.  They  bear  the  curse  of  the  sin  com- 
mitted. It  also  works  externally  by  the  pressure  against  the  sinner  of  the  order  of 
nature,  which  is  in  league  with  righteousness,  and  ultimately  makes  "  the  way  of 
transgressors  hard."  Nations  have  not  a  very  lively  conscience.  The  force  of 
Divine  judgments  usually  comes  from  without.  The  instrumentality  used  is  evi'S 
dently  connected  with  the  actual  presence  of  forces  which,  acting  in  a  natural  way 
under  the  preordained  direction  of  the  Omniscient,  become  "his  arm."  Doubtless 
there  were  physical  conditions  of  earth  and  atmosphere  which  rendered  destruction 
by  a  deluge  both  natural  and  yet  conspicuously  of  God.  The  Sodomites  were  de- 
stroyed not  by  water,  nor  slow  plague,  nor  famine,  but  by  the  natural  combustible 
materials  close  at  hand.  The  Amalekites  were  not  left  to  die  out  by  internal  anarchy, 
or  famine,  or  pestilence,  but  were  given  up  to  the  action  of  that  international 
hostility  which  was  as  real  an  element  of  destruction  close  at  hard  as  was  the 
volcanic  force  at  Sodom.  He  who  in  his  vast  prevision,  seeing  the  co-existence  of 
the  vices  of  antediluvians  with  certain  fluvial  conditions  of  a  portion  of  fthe  earth,  and 
the  co-existence  of  the  sin  of  Sodom  with  certain  volcanic  conditions,  used  them  for 
this  purpose,  may  have  also  given  full  freedom  to  the  play  of  national  sentiment  in 
the  minds  of  Israel  co-existing  at  that  juncture  with  the  fit  time  for  the  execution  of 
a  purpose  to  obliterate  a  guilty  nation.  Had  pestilence  or  earthquake  carried  them 
off,  it  would  have  been  God's  act  as  truly  as  when  the  soldiers  of  Saul  were  the 
executioners  of  a  decree.  The  employment  of  an  executioner  gives  no  right,  but  the 
reverse,  to  others  to  go  and  do  the  same.  7.  The  form  of  punishment  on  communi- 
ties under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  is  evidently  suggestive  of  the  danger  of 
antagonism,  to  Christ.  The  sin  of  Amalek  was  that  of  deliberate  attempt  to  destroy 
the  people  of  God  (Exod.  xvii.  8 — 16 ;  Deut.  xxv.  17 — 19).  That  means  to  prevent 
the  realisation  of  salvation  in  the  "  seed  of  Abraham."  If  Amalek  knew,  as  is  cer- 
tainly possible,  the  lofty  claims  of  Israel,  the  crime  was  most  fearful.  That  in  the 
mind  of  God  and  of  Israel  such  was  the  nature  of  the  sin  is  seen  in  the  discrimina- 
tion made  in  favour  of  the  Kenites  because  they  showed  kindness  to  Israel  (ver.  6), 
It  is  at  all  events  clear  that  God  would  have  men  learn  that  it  was  the  sin  of  obstruct- 
ing his  purposes  of  mercy  for  mankind  that  was  so  obnoxious  in  his  sight.  The 
terrible  national  destruction  which  this  sin  brought  on  is  a  clear  intimation  of  the 
"  destruction  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  "  which  must  come  on  the  individuals 
who  set  themselves  in  antagonism  to  Christ  and  his  purposes  of  mercy  to  the  world. 
A  more  terrible  sin  than  that  cannot  be  conceived ;  a  more  terrible  act  of  judgment 
cannot  be  imagined  than  that  which  will  come  when  Christ  shall  say,  "  Depart  from 
me,  ye  cursed"  (Matt.  xxv.  41).  "It  is  a  fearful  thing,"  even  under  the  gospel 
dispensation,  "  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  "  after  a  life  of  deliberate 
antagonism  to  the  very  Saviour  he  has  sent  to  redeem  us.  Although,  therefore, 
there  may  be  much  in  the  recorded  "  terrible  acts  "  of  God  which  weighs  on  our 
spirit  and  demands  of  us  reverence  and  humility,  still  we  are  not  without  some 
gleams  of  light  to  sustain  our  faith  both  in  the  sacred  records  and  the  righteousnesi 
which  never  fails. 
General  lessons: — 1.  We  see  how  judgment  does  surely  come,  though  for  gener*> 


Sn  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [on.  xv.  1—85 


ttons  it  seems  to  linger.  2.  It  becomes  m  to  inquire  whether  we  hj  any  conduct  of 
ours  are  impeding  the  march  of  God's  people.  3.  We  see  bow  Ood  remembers, 
and  causes  his  servants  to  remember,  acts  of  kindness  rendered  to  the  weary  on  their 
way  to  the  promised  rest.  4.  It  is  a  painful  duty  to  have  to  be  executors  of  God's 
judgments ;  yet  when  men  in  national  and  domestic  afEairs  are  really  called  to  it,  let 
them  subordinate  personal  sentiment  to  solemn  duty.  5.  In  all  our  painful  thoughts 
over  the  woes  that  come  on  the  universe,  involving  the  young  and  old,  let  us  seek 
grace  to  "be  still,"  and  to  wait  for  the  passing  away  of  the  night  and  the  coming  of 
the  light  that  shall  turn  weeping  into  joy ;  for  it  will  come. 

Vers.  8 — ^11. — The  limits  of  patience.  The  facts  are— 1.  Saul,  in  disobedience  to 
the  command  of  God,  spares  Agag  and  the  best  of  the  spoil.  2.  God  declares  to 
Samuel  that  he  can  endure  with  Saul  as  king  no  longer,  3.  Samuel,  in  his  grief, 
cries  unto  God  all  night.  It  is  never  said  that  God  changes  his  purpose  absolutely. 
Where  promises  are  given  conditional  on  conduct  they  are  revoked  when  conduct 
fails.  We  cannot  ascribe  human  feelings  to  God ;  yet  it  is  only  by  the  analogy  of 
human  feelings  that  we  can  know  anything  of  the  mind  of  God.  'The  setting  aside 
from  kingly  ofBce  of  Saul  was  an  act  of  the  Divine  mind  conformable  with  the 
original  purpose  of  making  him  king,  since  the  condition  of  permanence  had  not 
been  fulfilled.  Saul  had  been  borne  with  so  long;  now  he  is  to  be  borne  with  no 
longer.     Patience  yields  to  judgment. 

I.  Thbbb  is  a  limit  to  Divine  patience.  Patience  bears  relation  to  wrong- 
doing, or  the  sufferance  of  ill.  In  God  it  relates  to  the  restraint  he  puts  on  him- 
self in  the  presence  of  that  which  merits  his  displeasure.  That  there  is  such  a  limit 
to  Divine  patience  is  clear.  1,  The  language  of  Scripture  indicates  it.  The  heart 
of  God  is  represented  as  being  under  pressure  of  a  moral  force  which  can  scarcely 
bo  resisted.  "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim  ?  "  (Hosea  xi.  8).  The  retrospect 
of  the  past  brings  into  view  the  overpowering  considerations  which  withheld  good 
and  allowed  calamity  to  come.  '■  He  should  have  fed  them  with  the  finest  of  the 
wheat"  (Ps.  Ixxxi.  16).  "0  that  my  people  had  hearkened  unto  me  I"  {ibid.  ver. 
13).  The  persistence  of  men  in  sin,  despite  all  counsel  and  mercy,  raises  the  question 
of  the  length  of  time  during  which  the  hand  of  justice  can  be  stayed.  "  How  long 
shall  I  bear  with  this  evil  congregation  ?  "  (Num.  xiv.  27).  A  reference  to  love, 
tenderness,  and  care  is  set  in  sad  contrast  with  the  doom  which  the  ingratitude  so 
long  endured  is  about  to  bring  (Matt,  xxiii.  37,  38).  2.  Recorded  facts  illustrate  it. 
The  vices  of  the  antediluvians  were  long  endured,  and  it  was  after  the  Spirit  had 
striven  long  with  men,  and  they  had  refused  the  warnings  of  Noah,  that  patience 
yielded  to  the  execution  of  judgment  (1  Pet.  iii.  20).  The  repeated  warnings  given 
to  Pharaoh  reveal  a  patience  which  terminated  in  the  overthrow  in  the  Red  Sea. 
Patience  was  "grieved"  with  the  perverse  generation  in  the  wilderness,  but  grief 
gave  place  to  a  "  wrath  "  which  barred  their  entrance  into  rest  (Heb,  iii.  9 — 12). 
God  endured  long  with  some  of  the  seven  Churches  in  Asia,  but  at  last  judgmera 
came,  and  the  candlesticks  were  removed  from  their  place.  3.  The  close  of  the 
Christian  dispensation  in  a  day  of  judgment  is  the  most  awful  illustration  of  the 
limit  to  God's  patience.  The  plain  teaching  of  that  great  event  is  that  here  men 
have  time  to  repent  and  obtain  through  Christ  all  that  will  qualify  for  a  perfect  life 
— that  for  the  term  of  our  earthly  life  God  bears  with  our  sins  and  provocations,  and 
proves  by  thousands  of  favours  that  he  "  is  slow  to  anger ;  "  but  that  the  end  of  all 
this  must  come,  and  judgment  on  the  whole  life  ensue.  His  long-suffering  is  great. 
But  "  it  is  appointed  to  men  once  to  die,  and  after  this  the  judgment "  (Heb.  ix.  27). 

II.  The  geound  of  the  limit  of  God's  patience.  The  yielding  of  patience  to 
judgment  in  the  case  of  Saul  was  on  the  occasion  of  his  clear  and  deliberate  breach 
of  the  command  (vers.  1 — 3,  8,  9),  and  this  too  after  other  opportunities  of  obedience 
had  been  abused.  But  the  question  arises  how  it  is  that  a  certain  degree  or  persist- 
ence in  wrong  is  the  occasion  of  the  cessation  of  patience.  There  is  a  vague  impres- 
sion in  some  minds  that  because  God  is  perfectly  tender  and  loving  his  patience 
need  and  ought  never  to  fail.  This  kind  of  thinking  springs  from  very  defective 
views  of  the  character  of  God  and  of  his  relation  to  a  moral  order.  It  may  not  be 
possible  for  us  to  give  a  perfect  rationale  of  Divine  procedure ;  but  there  is  per- 


CH.  XV.  1—36.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  878 

hapB  light  enough  to  indicate  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  even  a  limit  to  God's 
patience.  1.  The  privileges  of  responsible  beings  imply  a  probation  for  their  use. 
The  primary  notion  of  a  responsible  being  is  one  blessed  with  privilege,  and  able  to 
use  or  abuse  it  at  will.  But  men  are  constituted  so  as  to  derive  much  wisdom  from 
experience,  and  hence  failure  in  the  use  of  privilege,  in  a  few  instances,  may 
possibly  create  an  experience  that  will  constrain  to  a  more  careful  observance  of 
duty  when  newly  imposed.  Life  is  full  of  helps  to  obedience  as  well  as  of  hin- 
drances. But  as  time  is  required  for  the  development  of  responsibility,  so  it  is 
obvious  that  the  possession  of  privilege  involves  a  limit  to  the  period  for  use  or  abuse. 
Government  without  a  reckoning  would  be  no  government.  Everlasting  patience  is 
inconsistent  with  responsibility  attendant  on  privilege.  2.  In  a  moral  order,  where 
beings  are  closely  inter-related,  breach  of  duty  affects  othert.  Saul's  conduct  could 
not  end  in  himself.  He,  as  fount  of  authority  and  influence,  would  damage  his 
people  by  every  act  of  disobedience  to  the  Divine  command.  The  repeated  sins  of 
men  are  so  many  attacks  on  the  cornmon  welfare  of  the  universe.  God  "  desireth 
not  the  death  of  a  sinner,"  but  that  he  should  "  turn  and  live ; "  but  he  is  the 
Guardian  of  right,  of  good,  of  peace,  and  of  all  that  enters  into  the  true  welfare  of 
the  entire  universe,  and  hence  there  is  a  love  most  deep  and  a  wisdom  unsearchable 
in  not  allowing  the  wilful  sinner  any  longer  to  be  exempt  from  the  restraints  which 
judgment  imposes.  3.  Repeated  acts  of  disobedience  reveal  to  God  a  state  of  mind 
which  will  not  benefit  by  further  favours.  Every  act  of  sin  brings  man  lower  in 
the  moral  scale.  But  while  mercy  and  gentleness  afEord  the  sinner  every  possible 
chance  to  recover  what  is  lost,  it  is  possible  for  the  habit  of  sin  to  gain  such  power 
over  the  entire  man  that  to  the  eye  of  the  Eternal  his  last  chance  of  improving 
additional  opportunities  is  clean  gone.  Samuel's  distress  at  the  abandonment  of 
Saul  (ver.  11)  was  natural,  and  if  his  cry  all  night  was  intercession,  it  was  only 
what  might  be  expected  of  a  good  man  who  knows  only  in  part.  The  intercession 
of  Moses  (Num.  xiv.  15 — 23)  was  for  pardon,  and  was  partially  successful.  Samuel's 
would  appear  to  have  been  for  pardon  in  the  form  of  Saul's  continuance  in  the  kingly 
oflSce  with  the  usual  Divine  sanctions.  It  is,  however,  obvious  that  the  judgment  of 
God  was  based  on  his  perfect  knowledge  that  the  heart  of  Saul  was  too  far  gone  to 
be  trusted  any  further.  It  is  an  awful  fact  that  a  man  may,  by  transgression,  work 
himself  into  such  a  condition  that  all  is  lost  on  him,  and  will  be  lost.  God,  knowing 
this,  may  cease  to  be  long-suffering,  and  reject  him  as  "  nigh  unto  cursing  "  (Heb.  vi. 
6 — 8).  4.  The  holiness  of  God  requires  vindication.  Every  pang  which  followed 
Saul's  earlier  sins  and  every  rebuke  from  Samuel  was  some  vindication  of  the  holi- 
ness of  God.  The  private  and  subjective  recognition  by  the  sinner  of  an  insulted 
holiness  is  not  all  that  the  government  of  God  requires.  He  is  a  jealous  God ;  he 
will  be  honoured  in  the  eyes  of  all  people.  Continued  long-suffering  followed 
by  judgment  renders  holiness  more  conspicuous  than  when  judgment  forestalls 
long-suffering. 

Gmei-al  lessons:  —  1.  We  should  never  forget  that  every  day  affords  us  new 
opportunities  of  keeping  God's  commands.  2.  It  will  repay  the  effort  if  we  endeavour 
to  form  an  estimate  of  the  privileges  conferred  on  us  in  the  past,  and  the  extent  to 
which  we  have  drawn  on  the  patience  of  God.  8.  If  we  are  deliberately  disobedient 
in  any  office  of  trust,  we  may  some  day  look  for  a  grave  judgment.  4.  We  are  not 
always  competent  to  see  the  wisdom  of  God's  severity,  and  may  possibly  pray  for 
what  is  not  to  be  granted. 

Vers.  12— 23.— r^e  sin  of  rebellion.  The  facts  are— 1.  Saul,  having  raised  a 
monument  in  honour  of  his  victory,  meets  Samuel  with  a  pious  salutation,  as  though 
all  were  well.  2.  On  being  reminded  of  the  presence  of  spoil,  Saul  explains  by 
saying  that  it  was  spared  for  the  worship  of  God  in  sacrifice.  3.  Samuel,  referring 
to  the  instructions  received  from  God,  presses  home  upon  him  the  fact  of  his  guilt  in 
difiobeying  the  Lord.  4.  Saul,  in  response,  maintains  that  substantially  he  has  obeyed 
the  voice  of  the  Lord,  but  that  the  people  spared  the  spoil  for  a  religious  purpose. 
6.  Samuel,  therefore,  urges  the  great  truth  that  rigid  obedience  to  Godis  the  primary 
and  essential  duty,  without  which  all  else  is  sinful,  and  that  rebellion  is  a  sin  as 
heinous  as  those  which  men  admit  to  be  most  vile.  6.  Samuel  declares  to  Saul  his 
iBAH.  1* 


274  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oH.  xv.  1— 85. 

rejection  of  God.    The  important  interview  between  the  disobedient  king  and  the 
prophet  of  God  brings  out  several  great  truths. 

I.  Man'b  pbekerence  of  his  own  will  to  the  cxearlt-declared  will  of  God 
a  positive  rebellion  against  the  supreme  acxhobity.  Saul's  sin  was  known  to 
himself  as  a  preference  of  his  own  course  in  dealing  with  the  Araalekites.  He 
thought  it  best  to  modify  the  command  in  its  detailed  execution.  No  doubt  there 
were  reasons  which  seemed  to  render  such  a  course  useful.  It  is  clear  that  he  did 
not  realise  all  that  it  involved,  though  that  was  his  own  fault.  To  him  as  a  king, 
whose  word  was  supposed  to  be  law  to  his  subjects,  there  is  something  very  appro- 
priate in  the  prophet  assuring  him  that  this  preference  of  his  own  will,  however 
plausible  the  reasons  for  it,  was  not  a  simple  weakness  or  fault,  but  nothing  less  than 
rebellion — a  term  of  fearful  significance  under  a  properly-constituted  government. 
The  preference  was  virtually  a  setting  up  a  counter-authority,  impeaching  the  wisdom 
of  God.  Saul  is  not  the  only  one  to  whom  God  has  plainly  declared  his  will.  More 
or  less  he  has  spoken  to  all  men  (Bom.  i.  20).  To  those  blessed  with  the  revealed  will 
as  contained  in  the  Scriptures  he  has  given  commandments  as  precise  and  emphatic 
as  that  to  Saul  to  destroy  the  Amalekites.  Every  believer  in-Christianity  knows  as 
well  as  he  knows  anything  that  Gpd  commands  him  to  repent  of  sin  (Acts  xvii.  30)  ; 
to  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  salvation  fiom  the  curse  of  sin  (John  xz. 
31 ;  Acts  xvi.  30,  31 ;  1  John  v.  10 — 13)  ;  to  exterminate  all  evil — all  Amalekites — 
from  the  soul  (Bom.  viii.  13;  1  Thess.  iv.  3;  1  Pet.  i.  16);  and  to  submit  heart, 
will,  and  intellect  to  the  authority  of  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  29 ;  John  v.  23 ;  Acts  x. 
36;  Phil.  ii.  10,  11).  Now  is  it  not  a  fact  that  men  often  prefer  not  to  do  this? 
They  do  not  dispute  in  formal  terms  the  authority  of  God,  any  more  than  did  Saul ; 
yet  for  reasons  known  to  themselves  they  prefer  tiot  to  repent  of  sin,  not  to  commit 
themselves  to  Christ,  not  to  cast  out  sinful  desires,  not  to  bow  in  all  things  to  the 
yoke  of  the  Saviour.  It  is  possible  that  reasons  may  be  forthcoming  to,  at  least, 
show  that  there  is  no  violent  antagonism.  But  when  carefully  looked  at  it  is  nothing 
but  the  positive  setting  up  of  man's  will  as  a  better,  more-to-be-desired  will  than 
God's ;  it  is  positive  rebellion  of  a  subject  against  a  king — a  setting  at  nought  of  the 
supreme  authority  of  the  universe. 

II.  Man's  estimate  of  the  bin  of  bebbllion  is  in  striking  contbabt  with 
God's.  Whether  Saul  was  self-persuaded  that  he  had  not  committed  any  sin 
(ver.  13)  is,  as  we  shall  yet  see,  doubtful.  The  probability  is  that  he  was  conscious 
of  uneasiness,  but  had  no  true  conception  of  the  enormity  of  his  sin.  His  feeling 
was  that  he  had  no  wish  to  disown  the  authority  of  God,  that  it  was  a  mere  matter  of 
detail,  that  his  general  conduct  was  exemplary,  and  that  he  followed  the  inner  light 
which  seemed  just  then  to  indicate  another  way  of  ultimately  and  substantially 
carrying  out  the  command.  So  do  men  tone  dywn  their  sins  and  regard  them  as 
venial.  The  prophet's  words  reveal  God's  estimate  of  the  sin  of  disobedience.  It  is 
the  cardinal  sin  (vers.  22,  23).  It  cuts  at  the  root  of  all  authority.  It  is  the  assertion 
of  a  power  and  a  wisdom  over  against  the  power  and  wisdom  of  the  Eternal.  It 
makes  man  a  worshipper  of  himself  rather  than  of  God,  It  ignores  the  solemn  truth 
that  we  "cannot  serve  two  masters."  It  does  dishonour  to  him  whose  command- 
ments are  holy,  just,  and  good.  It  sows  in  the  moral  sphere  seeds  of  evil,  which, 
taking  root,  must  widen  the  aberration  of  man  from  God.  It  claims  for  the  desires 
and  dim  light  of  a  sinful  creature  a  higher  value  in  the  determination  of  actions 
than  is  to  be  attached  to  the  purposes  of  the  All-Perfect.  To  render  its  heinous 
character  more  clear,  the  prophet  asserts  that  it  renders  useless  and  even  wicked  the 
most  solemn  acts  of  worship  (ver.  22 ;  cf .  Isa.  i.  11 — 16).  No  profession  of  religion ; 
no  self-denial  in  surrender  of  choice  property  ;  no  conformity  with  venerable  cus- 
toms, or  obedience  in  other  particulars,  will  for  a  moment  be  accepted  in  lieu  of 
full  and  implicit  obedience  to  the  clear  commands  which  God  lays  on  man  both  in 
relation  to  himself  and  mankind.  God  will  have  no  reserve  of  our  will.  Again,  to 
make  it  more  impressive,  the  prophet  assures  Saul  that  this  rebellion  is  in  its  evil 
nature  equal  to  the  sins  which  men  are  led  by  education  and  custom  to  regard  as  the 

most^  abominable  and  indefensible.     "  As  the  sin  of  witchcraft as  iniquity 

and  idolatry."    There  are  men  still  who  shrink  in  horror  at  heathenism  and  vile 
arts.    Are  they  prepared  to  believe  that  not  to  obey  the  clear  command  to  repent,  to 


OH.  XV.  1—36.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  27a 

believe  on  Christ,  to  become  pure,  and  to  submit  in  all  things  to  the  yoke  of  Cliritit. 
is  as  dreadful  in  the  sight  of  God  as  being  an  idolater  or  a  vile  deceiver?  It  is  this 
Divine  estimate  of  sin  which  alone  explains  the  "many  stripes"  with  which  thej 
will  be  punislied  who,  knowing  the  Lord's  will  with  respect  to  these  matters,  never- 
theless? piefer  thoir  own.  It  will  be  more  tolerable  in  the  day  of  judgment  for  Sodom 
tnan  for  some  of  our  day  (Matt.  xi.  20 — 24). 

III.  Man's  condition  and  conduct  afteb  deliberate  rebellion  is  a  revelation 
or  ITS  evil  nature.  All  sin  degrades  and  debases ;  it  prevents  clear  vision  of 
one's  own  condition  and  a  true  estimate  of  conduct.  Sin  is  always  self-apologetic. 
It  enslaves  its  victims.  The  opinion  of  a  morally  fallen  being  on  matters  of  high 
spiritual  import  must  always  be  discounted.  Men  in  internal  opposition  to  God  are 
not  safe  guides  in  dealing  with  the  loftiest  problems  of  human  existence.  This 
general  effect  of  sin  is  more  manifest  when  a  man  has,  after  enjoying  great  advan- 
tages, deliberately  preferred  his  own  will  to  the  clear  will  of  God.  He  then  enters 
into  darkness  moat  dense,  and  the  fountain  of  moral  thought  and  feeling  becomes 
more  corrupt.  We  see  this  in  Saul's  subsequent  conduct  and  perverse  reasoning 
with  Samuel  (vers.  20,  21).  Even  when  conscience  began  to  be  aroused  by  the 
impressive  language  of  the  prophet,  he  found  a  subtle  evasion  in  that,  as  a  king,  he 
had  done  his  part  in  placing  Agag  at  the  disposal  of  Samuel,  but  that  the  people 
were  to  blame  in  the  matter  of  the  spoil.  Thus  it  is  ever.  Sin  does  not  end  in 
itself.  It  by  its  evil  power  induces  self-complacency,  creates  ingenious  excuses, 
prompts  to  observance  of  outward  religious  acts,  throws  blame  on  circumstances 
over  which  there  is  no  control,  and  even  emboldens  the  soul  to  arg^e  with  the 
messengers  of  God. 

IV.  One  serious  conssquenoe  of  bbbellion  is  to  disqualify  for  service  in 
THE  kingdom  of  God.  Apart  from  the  personal  effects  of  Saul's  sin,  the  relative 
effect  was  to  unfit  him  for  performing  the  part  to  which  he  had  been  called  in  the 
service  of  God.  He  was  rejected  from  being  king  (ver.  23).  God's  sanction  and 
blessing  were  henceforth  to  be  withheld.  He  was  to  be  king  in  name  only.  The 
life  once  promising  good  to  Israel  was  to  be  unblest  and  fruitful  in  sorrows.  This 
result  follows  from  every  preference  of  our  own  will.  We  cease  to  hold  the  position 
and  exercise  the  influence  of  God-made  kings  (Rev.  i.  4,  5)  in  so  far  as  we  fail  in 
perfect  execution  of  the  will  of  the  King  of  kings.  It  is  possible  for  a  man  to 
proceed  from  step  to  step  in  deliberate  rebellion  till,  both  on  account  of  his  inward 
moral  decay  and  his  pernicious  influence,  Ged  sets  him  aside  altogether.  A  pastor,  a 
parent,  a  professed  Christian  may  thus  be  practically  disowned  by  Providence.  How- 
ever he  may  continue  to  labour  in  some  lower  departments,  the  higher  spiritual 
service  of  God  will  cease  to  be  his. 

General  lessons: — 1.  It  is  very  dangerous  to  begin  to  compare  our  vrishes  and 
plans  with  the  clear  will  of  God;  every  thought  should  at  once  be  brought  into 
subjection.  2.  Sudden  and  unusual  outbursts  of  pious  zeal  may  be  a  sign  of  an 
uneasy  conscience  ;  steady  growth  is  the  proof  of  reality.  3.  The  folly  of  excuses 
for  sin  is  seen  by  all  except  the  sinner  himself.  4.  Sin,  when  we  are  exalted  to 
privileges,  is  doubly  base  (ver.  17).  6.  We  must  never  subordinate  what  we  may 
call  general  obedience  for  actual  literal  obedience  to  God's  "will  (ver.  20).  6. 
Participation  of  others  in  our  sin  is  no  palliation  of  ours  (ver.  21).  7.  Property 
obtained  by  unholy  means  is  not  acceptable  to  God  when  laid  on  his  altar  for  pro- 
fessedly religious  purposes  (ver.  22).  8.  Obedience  in  matters  outside  acts  of 
worship  is  a  condition  of  acceptable  worship,  but  not  the  ground  of  our  salvation. 
9.  Deceitfulness,  depravity,  and  idolatry  are  the  true  and  ruinous  characteristics  of 
every  act  of  doing  our  own  pleasure  when  professedly  engaged  in  doing  only  the 
will  of  God  (ver.  23). 

Vers.  24 — 31. — GonvMonpf  tin  not  repentance.  The  facts  «•— 1.  Saul,  alleging 
fear  of  the  people,  admits  his  sin,  and  seeks  Samuel's  presence  while  he  worships 
the  Lord.  2.  On  Samuel  refusing  and  turning  away,  Saul  seizes  and  rends  his 
garment,  which  circumstance  is  used  as  a  sign  that  so  the  Lord  had  rent  the  kingdom 
from  Saul  and  given  it  to  another.  3.  On  being  assured  that  God's  purpose  was 
irrevocable,  Saul  entreats,  for  the  sake  of  his  credit  among  the  people,  that  Samuel 

t2 


278  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oH.  xv.  1— 3i 

would  join  him  in  an  act  of  worship,  to  which  Samuel  complies.  The  decisiva 
language  of  the  prophet,  given  in  a  tone  which  admitted  of  no  mistake,  aroused  tha 
slumbering  conscience  of  Saul,  and  brought  about  his  remarkable  pleading  for  pity 
and  help.  We  have  here  the  case  of  a  man  guilty  of  a  great  sin,  concerned  for  its 
iorgiveness,  but  sternly  assured  that  he  shall  not  have  it.  The  apparent  severity  of 
the  prophet  is  not  based  on  any  arbitrary  decree  of  God,  nor  on  an  unchangeableness 
in  the  "  Strength  of  Israel  "  irrespective  of  human  character  and  conduct,  but  upon 
God's  knowledge  of  Saul's  actual  condition.  The  repentance  which  Saul  thinks  to 
be  adequate,  and  which  many  men  would  recognise,  is  known  by  the  Searcher  of  hearts 
not  to  be  true  repentance,  but  only  a  bare  conviction  of  sin,  attended  with  a  conse- 
quent dread  of  the  outward  temporal  consequences  attached  to  it,  as  just  indicated  by 
Samuel.     Bare  conviction  of  sin  is  not  true  repentqnee.     Consider — 

I.  Its  keal  nature.  Conviction  of  sin  is  a  matter  only  of  an  aroused  conscience, 
Drought  about  by  the  evidence  of  facts  being  set  before  the  understanding  and  the 
presence  of  penalties  consequent  on  the  evidence.  There  was  no  resisting  Samuel's 
argument.  The  common  understanding  saw  that  a  human  will  in  opposition  to  a 
Divine  was  necessarily  sin,  and  the  uneasiness  of  conscience  thus  naturally  aronsed 
was  aggravated  by  the  emphatic  announcement  of  a  great  penalty — loss  of  the 
kingdom.  The  mental  operation  was  that  of  a  pure  logical  progression  from  admitted 
premises  to  an  irresistible  conclusion.  Conscience  does  not  disturb  a  man  in  working 
out  a  syllogism  in  formal  logic  or  a  demonstration  in  mathematics ;  but  it  does  when 
the  question  reasoned  on  is  the  man's  own  conduct.  This  is  the  general  nature  of 
the  conviction  of  sin  which  many  experience.  Here,  observe,  is  an  absence  of  all 
that  fine  spiritual  discernment  which  sees  in  sin  essential  unholiness,  and  that  corre- 
sponding feeling  which  loathes  it  because  of  what  it  is  in  the  sight  of  God.  There  is 
no  change  in  the  spirit  towards  sin  itself,  no  detestation  of  the  self -preference  which 
rose  against  the  supreme  will. 

II.  Its  manifestations.  The  manifestation  of  Saul's  conviction  of  sin  is  a 
remarkable  illustration  of  the  enormous  difierence  between  bare  conviction  and  true 
repentance.  The  force  of  evidence  and  pressure  of  penalty  extorted  the  admission, 
"  I  have  sinned  ;  "  yet,  owing  to  the  lack  of  the  spirit  of  repentance,  the  mere  gener- 
ality of  that  admission  was  revealed  by  the  immediate  palliation,  "I  feared  the 
people."  Pardon,  consisting  in  the  removal  of  penalty,  was  the  only  pardon  cared 
for,  and  even  this  was  sought  by  a  superstitious  trust  in  the  prayers  of  another.  A 
zealous  and  prompt  observance  of  some  outward  act  of  worship  was  thought  to  be  a 
sure  means  of  recovering  lost  favour.  The  slightest  movement  of  Samuel  indicative 
of  the  non-reversal  of  the  penalty  only  excited  a  spasmodic  dread,  without  the 
slightest  trace  of  any  changed  sentiment  towards  sin  itself.  And  when  no  hope  of 
avoiding  the  penalty  remains,  the  only  thought  is  to  break  his  fall  before  his  elders, 
and  so  save  some  civil  advantage.  This  analysis,  expressed  in  terms  suitable  to  our 
times,  will  be  found  to  hold  good  of  multitudes  whose  conviction  of  sin  is  unattended 
with  the  spirit;  of  a  true  repentance.  How  different  the  conviction  that  accompanies 
true  repentance  I  Then,  "  I  have  sinned  "  has  a  deep,  unutterable  meaning.  For- 
giveness is  then  not  the  mere  release  of  life  from  suffering  and  loss,  but  a  restoration 
of  the  soul  to  the  joy  of  personal  reconciliation  with  a  holy  Father.  No  thought  of 
excuse  is  ever  entertained,  but  "  against  thee,  and  thee  only,  have  I  sinned  and  done 
this  evil,"  is  the  sincere  confession  of  a  broken  and  contrite  heart.  The  soul  is  so 
filled  with  self-loathing,  and  so  agonised  in  being  far  from  God,  that  it  thinks  not  of 
punishment  and  position  among  men,  and  can  only  go  direct  to  God  and  plead, 
"  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  0  God,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me."  Contrast 
Simon  Magus  (Acts  viii.  24)  and  Felix  (Acts  xxiv.  25 ;  Ps.  li. ;  Luke  xv.). 

IIL  Its  consequences.  Saul,  though  convinced  of  sin,  was  practically  an 
unchanged  man.  He  was,  after  his  pleading  with  Samuel,  and  after  Samuel's 
kindly  act  of  consoling  his  poor  blind  heart  by  joining  in  worship,  as  fond  of  his 
own  self-will  as  before.  No  spiritual  change  being  wrought,  no  remission  of  penalty 
was  ever  possible.  On  his  knowledge  of  what  was  Saul's  radical  evil — s  heart  out 
of  all  sympathy  with  God's  holiness — and  of  its  continuance,  did  Qod  resolve  to  pro- 
vide for  Isra«l  another  kinj^.  The  Strength  of  Israel  is  not  dejjendent  on  existing 
arrangements  or  hnman  beings  for  the  maintenance  of  his  anthonty  and  aooomplish- 


OH.  IV.  1—36.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  271 

ment  of  his  purposes.  Saul  as  a  king  was  ruined.  His  defective  conviction  was  of 
no  avail.  It  should  be  urged  on  all  that  a  mere  admission  of  sin  and  effort  to  be 
free  from  its  punishment  are  of  no  avail.  Loss  of  all  that  is  deemed  precious  must 
ensue.  Only  repentance  of  the  heart  will  serve.  This  is  sure  to  lead  away  from  all 
false  means  of  deliverance  to  him  who  is  exalted  to  give  remission  of  sins. 

Gefoercd  lessons: — 1.  A  spirit  of  blended  firmness  and  kindness  should  influence 
as  in  the  discharge  of  unwelcome  duties.  2.  We  should  be  careful  not  to  encouroge 
men  in  their  self-delusions,  3.  Bespect  for  an  ofBce  and  consideratioii  for  Bocial 
relations  should  enter  into  our  treatment  of  offenders. 

Vers.  32 — 35. — Painful  duties.  The  facts  are — 1,  Samuel  summons  Agag  into  his 
presence  and  hews  him  in  pieces.  2.  Samuel  departs  from  Saul,  and  though  mourning 
for  him,  no  longer  holds  any  o£Scial  connection  with  him.  The  effect  of  Saul's  disobe- 
dience on  th6  people  would  have  been  disastrous  were  the  original  command  to  be  in 
any  way  evaded ;  and,  therefore,  though  it  was  no  part  of  the  prophet's  ordinary  func- 
tions to  act  as  executioner,  Samuel  so  far  deviated  from  his  usual  course,  and  put  his 
feelings  under  restraint,  as  to  slay  the  captive  king.  There  could  be  no  mistake  of 
the  imperativeness  of  the  Divine  command  when  the  people  saw  Samuel  perform  on 
the  body  of  the  king  an  act  symbolical  of  the  utter  destruction  of  the  enemies  of 
God.  The  act  itself,  as  also  the  occasion  of  it,  must  have  given  pain  to  the  prophet's 
mind.  The  subsequent  suspension  of  relations  with  Saul  was  the  natural  result  and 
formal  expression  of  God's  rejection  of  him.  Any  other  line  of  conduct  would  be 
open  to  serious  misinterpretation.  Samuel  naturally  was  grieved  in  thus  setting  his 
ban  on  one  for  whom  he  had  taken  such  pains,  and  in  whose  successful  career  he 
himself  was  deeply  interested.     But  duty  is  above  personal  feeling. 

I.  Human  impebpection  gives  occasion  fob  the  dischabge  of  painfui  dutieb. 
Samuel  is  not  the  only  one  who  has  had  to  discharge  solemn  duties  with  a  sorrowful 
heart.  1.  There  are  instances  recorded  in  Scripture.  (1)  Of  men.  It  was  not 
without  pain  that  Moses  broke  away  from  the  associations  of  the  home  of  Pharaoh's 
daughter,  where  he  had  from  childhood  been  treated  with  consideration  and  kindness. 
Nathan  could  not  but  put  constraint  on  his  feelings  when  he  exposed  the  sin  of  one 
for  whom  he  had  cherished  the  profoundest  respect  (2  Sam.  xii.  7^14).  See  the 
case  of  the  apostles  (Acts  v.  1 — 10 ;  ix.  23 — 29 ;  Bom,  ix.  1 — 3  ;  Phil.  iii.  6 — 8). 
(2)  Of  Christ.  It  was  as  much  beside  his  usual  course  as  for  Samuel  to  slay  Agag 
when  the  gentle  Saviour  made  a  scourge  and  drove  the  money-changers  from  the 
temple  (John  ii.  15).  There  was  evident  sorrow  of  heart  running  through  the 
terrible  denunciations  and  forebodings  which  duty  required  him  to  utter  over  Caper- 
naum, Jerusalem,  and  the  scribes  and  Pharisees.  His  leaving  Nazareth  and  never 
returning,  after  the  cruel  rejection  of  his  word,  must  have  been,  considering  his 
associations  with  the  place,  a  duty  as  painful  almost  as  the  revelation  to  his  disciples 
that  one  of  their  number  would  betray  him  (Luke  iv.  28 — 30 ;  xxii.  21 — 23).  And 
may  wo  not  say  that  it  will  not  be  without  a  tone  of  sadness,  more  marked  than  any 
that  entered  into  Samuel's  demand  for  Agag,  that  Christ,  the  great  Judge,  will  on  the 
day  of  judgment  say  to  those  who  once  heard  his  call  of  mercy  and  scorned  it, 
"Depart  from  me."  2.  There  are  instances  recurring  in  modem  life.  On  some  is 
imposed  the  sorrowful  .duty  of  rebuking  friends  for  disgraceful  deeds,  or  of  admin- 
istering chastisements  which  cause  more  pain  to  the  chastiser  than  to  the  chastised, 
or  of  enforcing  with  bleeding  heart  the  rigorous  rules  of  Church  discipline  upon 
persons  once  honoured  and  beloved.  Samuel  is  but  one  of  a  host  who  have  to  assert 
Divine  authority,  moral  order,  and  the  interests  of  the  community  at  the  cost  oi 
much  personal  suffering. 

II.  SCCH    DISCHABGE  OF  PAINFUL    DUTIES  IS  AN   ILLUSTRATION   OF  THE  BDPBEMACT 

OF  EIGHTEOUSNESS.  The  emotional  element  is  strong  in  life.  Personal  considerations 
have,  wisely  and  usefully,  great  weight  in  regulating  actions.  But  it  was  profound 
regard  for  right  that  enabled  Samuel  to  rule  every  feeling  of  his  nature  and  subor- 
dinate it  to  the  ends  of  justice,  and  therefore  of  benevolence.  The  same  is  seen  in 
every  kindred  instance.  It  is  indicative  of  a  healthful  moral  condition  where  regard 
for  right  is  dominant.  Love,  tenderness,  pity  are  useful,  powerful  elements  m  a 
moral  character ;  but  they  cease  to  be  strictly  moral  when  they  operate  as  mert 


278  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xv.  1-M 

faelings  apart  from  the  guidance  and  control  of  righteousneBS.  This  looking  higk 
Above  personal  relations  to  the  requirements  of  s  universal  equity  is  the  lublimest 
form  ox  oondnot 

HOMILIES  BY  VABI0U8  AUTHORS. 

Ver».  1—9.  (GiBBAH.) — A  probationary  commisgion.  I.  The  fidelity  qf  Said 
ti  the  principle  of  his  appointment,  viz.  obedience  to  the  will  of  Jehovah,  was  once 
and  again  put  to  the  test.  He  had  been  tried  by  inaction,  delay,  and  distress, 
which  became  the  occasion  of  his  being  tempted  to  distrust,  and  the  use  of  his  power 
for  his  own  safety,  in  opposition  to  the  word  of  God  (ch.  xiii.  11).  He  had  been 
tried  by  enterprise,  encouragement,  and  the  expectation  of  brilliant  success,  which 
became  the  occasion  of  his  being  tempted  to  presumption  in  entering  rashly  upon 
bis  own  ways,  and  adopting  "  foolish  and  hurtful  devices  "  for  conquest  and  glory, 
independently  of  the  counsel  of  God  (ch.  xiv.  19,  24).  He  must  now  be  tried  by 
victory,  power,  and  prosperity.  Having  chastised  his  enemies  on  every  side  (ch. 
ziv.  47),  his  assured  success  becomes  the  final  test  of  his  character  and  fitness  to 
rule  over  Israel.  2.  The  temptatums  of  Saul  may  be  compared  with  those  of  others, 
and  especially  with  the  three  temptations  of  Christ  (Matt.  iv.  1 — 10;  Luke  iv.  l'^12), 
which  are  "  an  epitome  of  all  the  temptations,  moral  and  spiritual,  which  the  devil 
has  contrived  for  man  from  the  day  of  his  first  sin  unto  this  very  hour."  The 
antecedents  in  both  cases,  the  circumstances  under  which  the  temptations  occurred, 
the  principles  to  which  they  appealed,  the  inducements  which  they  presented,  the 
means  afforded  for  their  resistance,  and  their  result,  are  all  suggestive.  Where  the 
first  king  of  Israel  failed  the  last  King  of  Israel  prevailed,  and  whilst  Saul  was 
rejected,  Jesus  was  perfected,  and  "  crowned  with  glory  and  honour  "  (Luke  zsii.  28, 
29 ;  Heb.  ii.  10,  18).  3.  The  commission  of  Saul  to  execute  judgment  upon  the 
Amalekites  was  brought  to  him  by  Samuel,  whose  authority  as  the  prophet  of  the 
Lord  he  never  called  in  question,  however  much  he  may  have  acted  contrary  to  his 
directions.  After  Saul  exhibited  a  determination  to  have  his  own  way,  Samuel  seems 
to  have  exerted  little  influence  over  him.  At  the  battle  of  Michmash  the  high  priest 
Ahiah  was  his  only  spiritual  counsellor.  It  became  more  and  more  evident  that  he 
wished  to  establish  a  "  kingdom  of  this  world,"  like  the  surrounding  heathen  king- 
doms, in  opposition  to  the  design  of  God  concerning  Israel,  which  the  prophet 
represented  and  sought  to  carry  into  effect ;  and  it  was  inevitable  that,  with  such 
contrary  aims,  a  conflict  should  arise  between  them.  "  The  great  prophet's  voice 
brings  him  a  new  commission  from  his  God,  and  preludes  it  by  a  note  of  very 
special  warning :  '  The  Lord  sent  me,'  &c.  This  tone  of  adjuration  surely  tells  all. 
It  speaks  the  prophet's  judgment  of  his  character,  of  prayers  and  intercessions,  of 
days  of  watching  and  nights  of  grief  for  one  he  loved  so  well,  as  he  saw  growing  on 
that  darkening  countenance  the  deepening  lines  of  wilfulness.  The  prophet  sees 
that  it  will  be  a  crisis  in  that  life-history  with  which  by  God's  own  hand  his  own  had 
been  so  strangely  entwined.''    The  commission  was — 

L  Divinely  appointed  (ver.  1).  1.  When  a  commimication  enjoining  the  per- 
formance of  any  action  comes  unquestionably  from  God.  it  should  be  unhesitatingly 
obeyed.  His  authority  is  supreme,  his  power  is  infinite,  and  his  commands  are  right 
and  good.  It  does  not  follow  that  everything  he  directs  men  to  do  in  one  age  is 
obligatory  on  all  others  in  every  age.  But  some  things  he  has  undoubtedly  enjoined 
upon  us  all.  2.  When  such  a  communication  is  made  with  peculiar  directness  and 
solemnity,  it  should  be  obeyed  with  peculiar  attention  and  circumspection,  for 
,  important  issues  are  involved  in  its  faithful  or  faithless  observance.  "  If  thou  hast 
failed  in  other  things,  take  heed  that  thou  fail  not  in  this."  3.  When  special 
privilege  and  honour  have  been  bestowed  upon  men  by  God  they  are  placed  under 
special  obligations  of  obedience  to  him.  "  Though  thou  wast  little  in  thine  own 
sight,"  &c.  (ver.  17). 

II.  Justly  deserved  by  those  against  whom  it  was  directed  (ver.  2)—"  the  sinner* 
the  Amalekites "  (ver.  18).  1.  Some  sins  are  marked  by  an  unusual  degree  ol 
criminality  and  guilt.  Like  the  people  of  Israel,  the  Amalekites  were  descendants 
of  Abraham  (Amalek  being  the  grandson  of  Esau — Gen.  xxxvi.  12,  16)  ;  but  they 


CH.  XV.  1—36.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  «7» 

attacked  them  at  Eephidim  on  their  way  through  the  desert,  and  Btrove  to  annihilate 
them  (Exod.  xvii.  8 — 16) ;  they  lay  in  wait  for  them  secretly  and  subtly,  and  smote 
the  hindennost,  the  feeble,  the  faint  and  weary,  and  "  feared  not  God  "  (Deut.  xxv. 
17 — 19).  Their  conduct  was  ungenerous,  unprovoked,  cruel,  and  utterly  godless.  2. 
Special  sins  are  perpetuaied  in  families  and  nations  and  increase  in  intensity.  The 
Amalekites  were  hereditary,  open,  and  deadly  foes  of  Israel  (Num.  xiv.  45 ;  Judges 
iii.  13 ;  vi.  3).  They  lived  by  plunder,  and  were  gfuilty  of  unsparing  bloodshed  (ver. 
33).  Some  fresh  act  of  cruelty  may  have  shown  that  they  were  "ripe  for  the 
judgment  of  extermination."  3.  Sinners  long  spared  and  persisting  in  flagrant 
transgression  bring  upon  themselves  sudden,  signal,  and  overwhelming  destruction. 
If  judgment  is  pervaded  and  limited  by  mercy,  mercy  has  also  limits  beyond  which 
it  does  not  pass,  and  they  who  despise  it  must  perish.  Men  may  forget  what  God 
has  spoken  (Exod.  xvii.  14)  ;  but  he  remembers  it,  and  fulfils  his  word  at  the  proper 
time.  "  Injuries  done  to  the  people  of  God  will  sooner  or  later  be  reckoned  for." 
Impenitent  sinners  "  treasure  up  unto  themselves  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath  " 
(Rom.  ii.  5).     It  accumulates  like  a  gathering  tlmiider-cloud  or  an  Alpine  avalanche 

Siuke  xi.  60,  61),  and  it  frequently  comes  upon  them  by  ways  and  means  such  as 
ey  themselves  have  chosen.  The  Amalekites  put  others  to  the  sword  and  spared 
not ;  they  must  themselves  be  put  to  the  sword  and  not  be  spared.  The  moral 
improvement  of  inveterate  sinners  by  their  continuance  on  earth  is  sometimes  hope- 
less, and  their  removal  by  Divine  judgment  is  necessary  for  the  moral  improvement 
and  general  welfare  of  other  people  with  whom  they  are  connected,  and  teaches 
valuable  lessons  to  succeeding  ages. 

III.  Fully  expressed  (vers.  3, 18).  The  will  of  God  is  made  known  in  different 
forms  and  with  various  degrees  of  clearness,  and  some  men,  whilst  acknowledging 
their  obligation  to  obey  it,  have  sought  to  justify  themselves  in  the  neglect  of 
particular  duties  on  the  ground  of  their  not  having  been  fully  directed.  But  this 
could  not  be  the  case  with  Saul,  whose  commission  was — 1.  Imperative :  so  that 
there  could  be  no  excuse  for  evasion.  "Go  and  smite  Amalek."  2.  Plain;  so 
that  its  meaning  could  not  be  mistaken,  except  by  the  most  inattentive  and  negligent 
of  men.  "  Utterly  destroy  (devote  to  destruction).  Fight  against  them  until  they 
be  consumed."  3.  Minute;  so  that  no  room  was  left  for  the  exercise  of  discretion 
as  to  the  manner-  or  extent  of  its  fulfilment.  It  required  simple,  literal  obedience, 
such  as  is  now  required  in  many  things.     "  Whatsoever  he  saith  unto  you,  do  it." 

IV.  Zealously  commenced  (vers.  4,  6,  7),  The  "  journey  on  which  he  was  sent " 
(ver.  18)  was  entered  upon  by  Saul  with  something  of  the  same  energy  and  zeal 
which  he  had  formerly  displayed  against  the  Ammonites,  but  the  deterioration  which 
had  since  taken  place  in  his  character  by  the  possession  of  power  soon  appeared. 
1.  The  work  to  which  men  are  called  in  the  way  of  duty  sometimes  bears  a  close 
affinity  to  their  natural  temperament  and  disposition.  2.  Men  may  appear  to  others, 
and  even  to  themselves,  to  be  very  zealous /or  the  Lord  whilst  they  are  only  doing 
what  is  naturally  agreeable  to  themselves.  "  Come  with  me,"  said  Jehu,  "  and  see 
my  zeal  for  the  Lord  "  (2  Kings  x.  16,  31).  "  But  Jehu  took  no  heed  to  walk  in  the 
law  of  the  Lord  God  of  Israel."  Saul  of  Tarsus,  like  Saul  of  Gibeah,  appeared  to 
be  fighting  for  God  when  he  was  really  fighting  against  him.  3.  The  real  nature  of 
their  zeal  is  manifested  when  the  requirements  of  God  come  into  collision  with  their 
convenience,  pleasure,  ambition,  or  self-interest.  Then  the  hidden  spring  is  laid 
bare. 

V.  Unfaithfully  executed  (vers.  8,  9).  "  Spared  Agag,  and  the  best  of  the  sheep," 
&c.,  "  and  would  not  destroy  them."  "  He  hath  turned  back  from  following  me,  and 
hath  not  performed  my  commandments  "  (ver.  11).  1.  There  maybe  the  performance 
of  many  things  along  with  the  neglect  or  refusal  to  perform  others  of  equal  or  of 
greater  importance.  Saul  was  "  a  type  of  those  who  are  willing  to  do  something  as 
against  the  world  and  on  behalf  of  Christ,  but  by  no  means  willing  to  do  all  that 
they  ought  to  do."  Herod  "  did  many  things,  and  heard  John  gladly  "  (Mark  vi.  20), 
but  he  would  not  give  up  his  ruling  passion.  2.  Disobedience  in  one  thing  often 
manifests  the  spirit  of  disobedience  in  all  things.  It  shows  that  the  heart  and  wiU 
are  not  surrendered  to  the  Lord,  and  without  such  a  surrender  all  else  is  worthless. 
In  Said's  sparing  Agag  and  the  beirt  of  the  sheep,  &o ,  we  have  *'  a  melaaohoijr 


280  THE  riEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL  [ch.  xv.  1— 3». 

example  of  sparing  sins  and  evils  that  should  be  slain,  and  sheltering  and  harbouring 
theni  under  false  pretences  by  unworthy  pleas  and  excuses."  3.  The  love  of  self  '\» 
the  supreme  motive  of  those  who  refuse  to  obey  God.  Saul  was  actuated  by 
covetonsness  (ver.  19),  worldly-mindedness  (Matt.  iv.  9  ;  1  John  ii.  16,  16),  and 
▼ainglorious  pride,  which  are  only  different  forms  of  the  love  of  self.  "  Behold,  he 
set  him  up  a  monument,  and  is  gone  about  (as  in  a  triumphal  procession),  and  passed 
on,  and  gone  down  to  G-ilgal "  (ver.  12),  intending  probably  to  make  a  display  of  the 
royal  captive  for  his  own  glory ;  perhaps  to  make  him  a  tributary  prince  and  a 
source  of  profit.  "  Pride  arising  from  the  consciousness  of  his  own  strength  led  him 
astray  to  break  the  command  of  God.  His  sin  was  open  rebellion  against  the 
sovereignty  of  the  God  of  Israel ;  for  he  no'longer  desired  to  be  the  medium  of  the 
sovereignty  of  Jehovah,  or  the  executor  of  the  commands  of  theQod-king,  but 
simply  wanted  to  reign  according  to  his  own  arbitrary  will "  (Keil). — D. 

Vers.  6,  6.  (The  wildbbkess  of  J0DAH,)  —  Gome  out  from  among  them.  ^  The 
Kenites  were  descendants  of  Abraham  (Gen.  xxv.  2 ;  Num.  x.  29 ;  Judges  i.  16) 
like  the  Amalekites,  but  they  were  unlike  the  latter  in  character  and  conduct.  Many 
of  them  were  incorporated  with  Israel ;  others,  whilst  standing  in  friendly  relationship 
to  them,  lived  in  close  contact  with  "  the  sinners  the  Amalekites."  They  may  be 
regarded  as  representing  those  who  are  "  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God,"  but 
imperil  their  salvation  by  evil  companionship.  In  this  message  (sent  by  Saul,  perhaps, 
according  to  the  direction  of  Samuel)  we  notice — 

I.  The  peril  of  unqodly  association.  It  is  not  every  association  with  irreligious 
persons  indeed  that  is  to  be  deprecated  (1  Cor.  v.  10),  but  only  such  as  is  unneces- 
sary, voluntary,  very  intimate,  and  formed  with  a  view  to  personal  convenience, 
profit,  or  pleasure  rather  than  to  their  improvement  (Gen.  xiii.  12).  This — 1. 
Destroys  the  good  which  is  possessed.  2.  Conforms  to  the  evil  which  prevails 
(Ps.  i.  1 ;  Eev.  xviii.  4).  3.  Involves  in  the  doom  which  is  predicted — certain, 
terrible,  and  imminent.  The  ban  has  been  pronounced  (1  Cor.  xvi.  22  ;  2  Thess.  L  9); 
and  it  will  ere  long  be  executed.  "  A  companion  ol  fools  shall  be  destroyed 
(Prov.  xiii.  20). 

II.  The  oppoetunitt  op  effbotdal  escape,  which — 1.  Is  afforded  by  the  mercy 
of  God,  of  which  the  message  spoken  by  man  is  the  expression.  2.  Shows  the 
value  which  he  sets  upon  even  the  least  measure  of  kindness  and  piety.  "  Ye  showed 
kindness,"  &c.  (ver.  6).  Moral  goodness,  like  moral  evil  (ver.  2),  tends  to  perpetuate 
itself.  God  honours  it  by  the  blessing  which  he  causes  to  follow  in  its  track.  He 
desires  its  preservation  and  perfection,  and' hence  he  says,  "Destroy  it  not"  (Isa.  Ixv. 
8).  3.  Offers  a  certain,  great,  and  immediate  benefit.  "Come  out  from  among 
them  and  be  separate,  saith  the  Lord,  and  I  will  receive  you "  (2  Cor.  vi. 
14—18). 

III.  The  necessity  of  immediate  sepaeation.  1.  This  requires  decision,  self- 
denial,  sacrifice,  and  effort.  2.  Nothing  else  can  avail  (Ephes.  v.  11).  3.  And  every 
moment's  delay  increases  danger.  "  Escape  for  thy  life ;  look  not  behind  thee, 
neither  stay  thou  in  all  the  plain  "  (Gen.  xix.  17).  "  Be  wise  to-day,  'tis  madness  to 
defer."— D. 

Vers.  10,11.  (Ramah.) — Samuel's  intercemon  for  Savl.  The  recorded  instances 
of  Samuel's  praying  are  of  an  intercessory  character  (ch.  vii.  9 ;  viii.  6,  21 ;  xii. 
18,  23).  The  last  of  them  is  his  intercession  for  Saul.  He  appears  to  have  been 
told  by  God  in  a  dream  of  the  result  of  the  probationary  commission  which  had 
been  given  to  the  king.  Agitated  and  distressed,  and  not  yet  clearly  perceiving  it  to 
be  the  fixed  purpose  of  God  (ver.  29)  that  Saul  should  no  longer  reign  over  Israel  as 
his  recognised  servant  and  vicegerent,  Samuel  gave  himself  unto  prayer,  if  thereby 
he  might  avert  the  calamity.     Respecting  his  intercession,  consider — 

I.  On  whose  behalf  it  was  made.  Chiefly,  doubtiess,  on  behalf  of  Saul,  though 
not  without  regard  to  the  nation,  on  which  his  rejection  seemed  likely  to  produce  a 
disastrous  effect.  Intercession  should  be  made  for  individuals  as  well  as  conununi- 
ties,  "Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you,"  said  he  who  is  the  pei-fect  example  of 
tttteiceBBory  prayer,  "but  I  have  prayed  for  ihu"  (Luke  xsii,  32).    There  were 


CH.  XV.  1—36.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  281 

many  things  in  Saul  calculated  to  call  it  forth.  1.  His  good  qualities,  exalted 
position,  and  Intimate  relationship  to  the  prophet.  2.  Eis  grievous  sin  (vers.  11,  19, 
23),  exceeding  his  previous  transgressions.  3.  His  great  danger — falling  from  his 
high  dignity,  failing  to  accomplish  the  purpose  of  his  appointment,  losing  the  favour 
and  help  of  Jehovah,  and  sinking  into  confirmed  rebellion  and  complete  ruin.  "  It 
repenteth  me  that  I  have  made  Saul  king  ;  for  he  is  turned  back  from  foUowijig 
me  "  (vers.  11,  35).  When  a  change  takes  place  in  the  conduct  of  man  toward  God, 
as  from  obedience  to  disobedience,  it  necessitates  a  change  of  God's  dealings  toward 
him  (otherwise  he  would  not  be  unchangeably  holy),  and  this  "  change  of  bis 
dispensation  "  or  economy  (Theodoret)  is  called  his  repentance.  It  is  not,  however, 
the  same  in  all  respects  as  repentance  in  men.  No  change  in  him  can  arise,  as  in 
them,  from  unforeseen  events  or  more  perfect  knowledge,  seeing  that  "  his  under- 
standing is  infinite  j "  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  as  in  their  repentance  there  is  sorrow,  so 
also  in  his — sorrow  over  those  who  turn  from  him,  oppose  his  gracious  purposes,  and 
bring  misery  upon  themselves  (Gen.  vi.  6  ;  Judges  x.  16)  ;  and  of  this  Divine  sorrow 
the  tears  and  agonies  of  Christ  are  the  most  affecting  revelation. 

II.  In  what  spirit  it  was  made.  1.  Holy  anger  against  sin,  and  against  the 
sinner  in  so  far  as  he  has  yielded  himself  to  its  power,  arising  from  sympathy  with 
God  and  zeal  for  his  honour  (Ps.  cxix.  126,  136,  158).  2.  Deep  sorrow  over  the 
sinner,  in  his  essential  personality,  his  loss  and  ruin  ;  not  unmingled  with  disappoint- 
ment at  the  failure  of  the  hopes  entertained  concerning  him.  Sorrow  over  sinners  is 
a  proof  of  love  to  them.  3.  Intense  desire  for  the  sinner's  repentance,  forgiveness, 
and  salvation.  "  And  he  cried  unto  the  Lord  all  night "  with  a  loud  and  piercing 
cry,  and  in  prolonged  entreaty.  The  old  home  at  Raraah,  which  had  been  sanctified 
by  parental  prayers  and  his  own  incessant  supplications,  never  witnessed  greater 
fervour.  Wonderful  was  the  spirit  of  intercession  which  he  possessed.  Well  might 
the  Psalmist,  in  calling  upon  men  to  worship  the  Lord,  single  him  out  as  pre-eminent 
among  them  that  "  call  upon  his  name  "  (Ps.  xcix.  6).  But  still  more  wonderful  was 
the  spirit  which  was  displayed  by  the  great  Intercessor,  who  often  spent  the  night 
in  prayer,  and  whose  whole  life  was  a  continued  act  of  intercession,  closing  with 
the  cry,  "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do  "  Would  that  more 
of  the  same  spirit  were  possessed  bj  all  his  disciples  I 

"  We  are  told 
How  mach  the  prayers  of  righteous  men  avail  | 
And  yet  'tis  strange  how  very  few  believe 
These  blessed  words,  or  act  as  were  they  true." 

III.  To  WHAT  EXTENT  IT  AVAILED.     1.  N ot  to  the  full  extent  he  desirtd.    8auldid 

not  repent,  neither  was  he  exempted  from  the  sentence  of  rejection.  The  relation  of 
the  sovereignty  of  God  to  the  will  of  men  is  inexplicable.  How  far  the  Almighty 
may,  by  special  and  extraordinary  grace,  subdue  its  opposition  we  cannot  tell.  But 
he  has  conditioned  the  general  exercise  of  his  power  by  the  gift  of  freedom  and 
responsibility.  He  does  not  destroyer  recall  the  gift;  and  the  power  of  human 
resistance  to  the  Divine  will  is  a  fearful  endowment.  There  are  stages  of  human 
guilt  which  would  be  followed  by  the  wrath  of  God  "  though  Moses  and  Samuel  stood 
before  him"  (Jer.  xv.  1).  "There  is  a  sin  unto  death ;  I  do  not  say  that  he  shall 
pray  for  it"  (1  John  v.  16).  "  The  sin,  namely,  of  a  wilful,  obstinate.  Heaven-daring 
opposition  to  the  ways  of  God  and  the  demands  of  righteousness,  and  which,  under 
a  dispensation  of  grace,  can  usually  belong  only  to  such  as  have  grieved  the 
Spirit  of  God  till  he  has  finally  left  them — a  sin,  therefore,  which  hes  beyond  the 
province  of  forgiveness"  (Fairbairn,  'Typology,'  ii.  341).  2.  Tet,  doubtless,  to 
obtain  many  benefits  for  the  transgressor,  in  affording  him  space  for  repentance  and 
motives  to  it.  Who  shall  say  how  many  blessings  came  upon  Saul  in  answer  to 
Samuel's  intercession  for  him  ?  3.  And  to  calm  the  soul  of  him  who  prays,  to  make 
known  the  will  of  God  to  him  more  clearly,  to  bring  him  into  more  perfect  acqui- 
escence with  it,  and  to  strengthen  him  for  tie  duty  tliat  lies  before  him.  "  And  he 
arose  early  to  meet  Saul  in  the  morning"  (ver.  12). 

1.  How  great  is  the  privilege  and  honour  of  intercessory  prayer.  2.  Since  we 
know  not  who  are  beyond  the  reach  of  Divine  grace,  we  should  never  cease  to  interceda 


S82  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xv.  1—36. 

for  any.    8.  If  intercession  does  not  avail  to  obtain  all  that  it  seeks,  it  does  not  fail 
to  obtain  invaluable  blessings. — D. 

Vers.  12 — 21.  (Qu^iii.)—I!xeiue8  for  duohedienct.  1.  Samuel  met  Saul  at 
Gilgal.  It  was  a  sacred  spot,  and  a  well-known  scene  of  important  events  in  fonner 
time  and  in  more  recent  years.  There  the  kingdom  had  been  established  (oh.  xi.  16), 
and  Saul  "had  solemnly  pledged  him  and  the  people  to  unconditional  obedience." 
There  also  he  had  been  previously  rebuked  and- warned  (ch.  xiii.  13J.  And  thither 
he  repaired  ostensibly  to  ofEer  the  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving  for  victory,  really  to 
make  a  boastful  display  and  confirm  his  worldly  power.  How  strangely  and  intimately 
are  particular  places  associated  with  the  moral  life  of  individuals  and  nations  I  2. 
The  interview  (like  the  former)  appears  to  have  been  held  in  private.  The  sentence 
of  rejection  was  heard  by  Saul  alone,  and  long  kept  by  him  as  a  dreadful  secret. 
Yet  it  was  probably  surmised  by  many  from  his  breach  with  Samuel,  and  was 
gp-adually  revealed  by  the  course  of  events.  The  sacred  history  was  written  from  a 
titieocratic  point  of  view,  and  indicates  the  principles  of  which  those  events  were  the 
outcome.  8.  The  appearance  of  Samuel  was  an  arraignment  of  the  disobedient 
king  before  the  tribunal  of  Divine  justice.  Blinded  in  part  and  self-deceived,  he 
made  an  ostentatious  profession  of  regard  for  the  prophet  (ver.  13),  and  with  the 
assumption  of  perfect  innocence  and  praiseworthy  obedience  uttered  "  the  Pharisee's 
boast  — "  I  have  performed  the  commandment  of  Jehovah."  His  subsequent  con- 
fession proved  the  insincerity  of  his  declaration.  His  disobedience  was  crowned  with 
falsehood  and  hypocrisy.  When  formally  called  to  account  (ver.  14),  he  forthwith 
began  to  justify  himself  and  make  excuses  for  his  conduct,  such  as  transgressors  are 
commonly  accustomed  to  make.    They  were — 

L  ExcBEDiNOLT  VABiED.  He  —  1.  Attributes  to  other  persons  what  cannot  be 
denied  to  have  occurred,  and  seeks  to  transfer  to  them  the  blame  which  is  due  to 
himself.  "  They  have  brought  them  from  the  Amalekites :  for  the  people  spared 
the  best  of  the  sheep  and  of  the  oxen  "  (ver.  15).  So  spoke  Adam  and  Eve  at  the 
commencement  of  human  transgression  and  human  excuses  (Gen.  iii.  13).  On  a 
former  occasion,  when  desirous  of  having  his  own  way,  he  had  not  been  so  considerate 
of  their  wishes  or  so  compliant  (ch.  xiv.  24,  39,  45).,  "  If  this  excuse  were  false, 
where  was  the  integrity  and  honour  of  the  monarch  ?  If  it  were  true,  where  was  his 
devotion  and  obedience  ?  And  whether  true  or  false,  how  utterly  unworthy  did  it 
prove  him  of  continuing  the  servant  and  viceroy  of  the  King  of  Israel "  (Le  Bas). 
2.  Protests  good  intentions,  and  even  religious  and  commendable  motives.  "  The 
people  spared  the  best  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  thy  God  ; "  whereby  he  seeks  to 
gain  the  approval  of  the  prophet,  but  betrays  his  own  inward  alienation  from  the 
Lord,  for  he  cannot  truly  say  "  my  God  "  (Matt,  xxiii.  14)  ;  and  whilst  he  has  regard 
to  the  outward  ceremonies  of  the  law,  he  knows  not  (or  wilfully  disregards  it)  that 
by  the  law  the  sacrifices  of  "  devoted  "  things  were  altogether  prohibited  fDeut.  xiii. 
16 ;  Num.  xxxi.  48).  3.  Professes  his  faithful  obedience.  *'  And  the  rest  we  have 
utterly  destroyed."  Again  and  again  he  declares  his  innocence  (vers.  20,  21),  and 
insinuates,  that  instead  of  being  reproved  by  the  prophet,  he  ought  to  be  commended 
by  him  for  his  zeal.  4.  Asserts  complete  readiness  to  meet  whatever  charge  may  be 
preferred  against  him.  "Say  on"  (ver.  16).  "See  how  sin  is  multiplied  by  sin. 
The  transgressor  of  God's  command  stands  forth  as  the  accuser  of  the  people,  the 
speaker  of  gross  falsehood.  The  spirit  of  disobedience  evoked  as  with  the  rod  of  an 
enchanter  those  other  agents  of  iniquity  from  their  lurking-place ;  and  lo  I  they 
sprang  forth  to  do  his  bidding.  Verily  their  name  was  legion,  for  fhey  were  many 
(Anderson,  '  Cloud  of  Witnesses,'  ii.  350). 

II.  Faithfully  exposed.  Samuel's  fidelity,  moral  courage,  and  dignity,  mingled 
with  something  of  bitter  disappointment  and  sorrowful  resentment,  are  specially 
noteworthy.  He — 1.  Points  to  incontestable  fact.  "  What  is  this  bleating  of  sheep 
in  mine  ears,  and  the  lowing  of  oxen  which  I  hear  ?  "  (ver.  14).  It  flatly  contradicts 
thy  statement,  reveals  thy  sin,  and  exposes  thy  excuses.  Between  it  and  thy  duty 
there  is  a  contradiction  which  no  explanation  can  remove.  Sin  cannot  be  wholly 
concealed.  "God  knows  how  to  bring  it  to  light,  however  great  the  care  with  whica 
it  may  be  cloaked."     He  was  convicted  of  it  by  the  voices  of  the  animals  which  he 


CH.  XV.  1—36.1  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  283 

had  spared.  And  "  it  is  no  new  thing  for  the  plausible  pretensions  and  protestations 
of  hypocrites  to  be  contradicted  and  disproved  by  the  most  plain  and  undeniable 
evidences."  2.  Cheeks  the  miUtiplication  of  vain  excuses.  "Stay"  (ver.  16);  pro- 
ceed no  further  in  thy  endeavour  to  justify  thyself.  "  And  I  will  tell  thee,"  &c. 
When  the  voice  of  truth,  of  conscience,  and  of  God  speaks,  it  must  perforce  silence 
all  other  voices.  3.  Recalls  the  requirements  of  the  Divine  commission  (ver.  18), 
which  had  been  kept  out  of  sight  and  evaded  in  the  attempts  made  in  self-defence. 
"  Go  and  utterly  destroy  the  sinners  the  Amalekites  "  (see  ver.  3).  4.  Reveals  the 
motives  of  outward  conduct  (ver.  19),  viz.  self-will,  pride  (ch.  ix.  21),  avarice, 
rapacity,  "  love  of  the  world  (Col.  iii.  6 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  10),  rebellious  opposition  to 
the  will  of  Jehovah,  and  daring  ambition  to  reign  independently  of  him.  In  all  this 
Samuel  sought  to  rouse  the  slumbering  conscience  of  the  king,  and  lead  him  to  see 
his  sin  and  repent.  If  even  yet  he  had  fallen  upon  his  face  and  given  glory  to  God, 
there  might  have  been  hope.  But  the  reiteration  of  his  previous  assertions,  his 
repudiation  of  what  was  laid  to  his  charge,  and  his  blindly  pointing  to  his  main 
offence  ("and  have  brought  Agag  the  king  of  Amalek")  as  an  evidence  of  his 
fidelity  and  zeal,  showed  that  he  was  insensible  to  reproof.  What  should  have 
humbled  him  served  only  to  harden  him  in  rebellion  and  obstinacy.  And  nothing 
was  left  but  his  rejection.     His  excuses  were — 

III.  Utterly  fhtilb,  sinful,  and  injurious.  They — 1.  Failed  of  their  intended 
effect.  2.  Increased  his  delusion,  and  prevented  the  light  of  truth  from  shining  into 
l\is  mind.  3.  Deepened  his  guilt  in  the  sight  of  Heaven.  4.  Brought  upon  him 
lieavier  condemnation.  "As  he  returned  with  his  victorious  troops  the  prophet  met 
him.  That  sorrow-stricken  countenance,  round  which  hung  the  long  Nazarite  locks, 
now  whitened  by  the  snows  of  ninety  years,  pale  and  worn  with  the  long  night's 
unbroken  but  ungranted  intercession,  might  have  told  all.  Now  the  thunder-cloud, 
which  began  to  gather  fourteen  years  before,  breaks  and  peals  over  the  sinner's 
head.  '  Stay,'  is  the  sad  and  terrible  voice  as  it  breaks  through  the  cobweb  limits 
of  self-deception  and  excuse,  'and  I  will  tell  thee  what  the  Lord  said  to  me  this 

night,'  &c '  The  people  took  of  the  spoil,'  &c. — the  very  utterance  of  dark 

superstition  and  mean  equivocation.  Then  the  lightning  came.  The  prophet's 
voice,  gathering  itself  up  into  one  of  those  magnificent  utterances  which,  belonging 
to  another  and  a  later  dispensation,  antedate  the  coming  revelation,  and  are  evidently 
launched  forth  from  the  open  ark  of  the  testimony  of  the  Highest,  said,  '  Hath  the 
Lord,'"  &c.  ('Heroes  of  Heb.  Hist.').— D. 

Vers.  22,  23.  (Gilgal.) — The  sentence  of  rejection. 

"  Hath  Jehovah  (as  much)  delight  in  burnt  offerings  and  iMrifloa^ 

As  in  obeying  the  voice  of  Jehovah  ? 
Behold,  .to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice, 

And  to  give  heed  than  the  fat  of  rams. 
Tor  (like)  the  sin  of  divination  is  rebellion, 

And  (like)  an  idol  and  teraphim  is  obstinacy. 
Because  thou  hast  rejected  the  word  of  Jehovah, 

He  hath  rejected  thee  &om  being  king." 

The  crisis  has  now  fully  arrived.  The  aged  prophet  confronts  the  self-deceived 
king,  whom  he  looks  upon  as  no  longer  reigning  as  servant  of  Jehovah,  in  conse- 
quence of  his  endeavour  to  rule  according  to  bis  own  will  and  pleasure,  though  in 
connection  with  the  outward  forms  of  the  religion  of  Israel.  He  has  striven  in  vain 
to  turn  him  from  his  way,  and  can  henceforth  only  regard  him  as  a  rebel  against  the 
supreme  Ruler.  Inasmuch  as  Saul,  in  seeking  to  justify  himself,  showed  that  he 
estimated  moral  obedience  lightly  in  comparison  with  ritual  worship,  Samuel  first  of 
all  asserts  the  incomparable  superiority  of  the  former  to  the  latter.  He  then  declares 
that  disobedience  is  equivalent  to  heathenism  and  idolatry,  against  which  Saul,  in 
offering  sacrifices  to  Jehovah  and  other  ways,  exhibited  such  zeal.  And,  finally,  he 
pronounces,  as  a  judge  upon  a  criminal,  the  sentence  of  his  rejection.  "  There  is  a 
poetical  rhythm  in  the  original  which  gives  it  the  tone  of  a  Divine  oracle  uttered  by 
the  Spirit  of  God,  imparting  to  it  an  awful  solemnity,  and  making  it  sink  deep  into 
the  memory  of  the  hearers  in  all  generations  "  (Wordsworth).     Notice — 


M4  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xy.  I— «6 

I.  Thk  PABAHonHT  woBTH  Of  OBEDIENCE,  considered  in  relation  to  offerings  and 
sacrifices  and  other  external  forms  of  worship  (ver.  22).    1.  It  is  often  lets  regarded 
by  men  than  such  forms.    They  mistake  the  proper  meaning  and  purpose  of  them, 
entertain  false  and  superstitious  notions  concerning  them,  and  find  it  easier  and  more 
according  to  their  sinful  dispositions  to  serve  God  (since  they  must  serve  him  some- 
how) by  them  Aian  in  self-denial  and  submission  to  his  will.    It  is  indeed  by  no 
means  an  uncommon  thing  for  those  who  are  consciously  leading  a  sinful  life  to  be 
diligent  and  zealous  in  outward  religious  worship,  and  make  use  of  the  fruit  of  theii 
disobedience  "  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord,"  imagining  that  it  will  be  pleasing  to  him 
and  make  compensation  for  their  defects  in  other  things.    2.  It  is  ahsolvtely  neces- 
sary in  order  that  they  may  be  acceptable  to  God.     The  spirit  of  obedience  and  love 
is  the  soul  of  external  services  of  every  kind,  and  without  it  they  are  worthless. 
"  To  love  him  with  all  the  heart  is  more  than  all  whole  burnt  offerings  and  sacrifices  " 
(Mark  xii.  33).     The  one  ought  never  to  be  disjoined  from  the  other,  but  it  is  often 
done ;  and  they  are  set  in  contrast  to  each  other.     "  If  we  were  to  say  charity  is 
better  than  church-going,  we  should  be  understood  to  mean  that  it  is  better  than  such 
church-going  as  is  severed  from  charity.    For  if  they  were  united  they  would  not  be 
contrasted.    The  soul  is  of  more  value  than  the  body.     But  it  is  not  contrasted 
unless  they  come  into  competition  with  one  another,  and  their  interests  (although 
they  cannot  in  truth  be  so)  seem  to  be  separated  "  (Pusey,  '  Minor  Prophets,'  Hosea 
vi.  6).    "  The  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  is  abomination  "  (Prov.  xxi.  27).     3.  It  is  in- 
comparably superior  to  them,  considered  as  needful  and  appointed  modes  of  serving 
God  (apart  from  the  "  wicked  mind "  with  which  they  are  sometimes  observed). 
Because — (1)  The  one  is  universal;  the  other  is  partial,  and  really  included  in  it   (2) 
The  one  is  moral,  the  other  ceremonial.    It  is  a  "  weightier  matter  of  the  law. 
(3)  The  one  is  of  a  man  himsdf,  the  willing  sacrifice  of  his  own  will ;  the  other  of 
only  ^portion  of  his  powers  or  possessions.     And  "how  much  better  is  a  man  than 
a  sheep  1 "    (4)  The  one  is  essential,  being  founded  upon  the  natural  relation  of  man 
to  God  ;  the  other  is  circumstantial,  arising  from  man's  earthly  and  sinful  condition. 
"Angels  obey,  but  do  not  sacrifice."     (5)  The  one  is  the  reality,  the  other  the 
symbol.     (6)  The  one  is  the  end,  the  other  the  means.     Sacrifice  is  the  way  of  the 
sinner  back  to  obedience,  and  the  means  of  his  preservation  therein.     Even  the 
one  perfect  sacrifice  of  Christ  would  not  have  been  needed  if  man  had  been  obedient. 
Its  design  is  not  merely  to  afford  a  sufficient  reason  for  the  remission  of  punishment 
in  a  system  of  moral  government,  but  also  to  restore  to  obedience  (Titus  ii.   14). 
(7)  The  one  is  temporary,  the  other  is  eternal.     The  sacrifices  of  the  former  dis- 
pensation have  now  been  abolished ;  and  how  much  of  the  present  form  of  Divine 
service  will  vanish  away  when  we  behold  the  face  of  God  I     But  love  and  obedi- 
ence will  "never  fail."    Since  obedience  is  thus  the  one  thing,  the  essential,  more 
important  than  anything  ebe,  it  shonld  hold  the  supreme  place  in  our  hearts  and 
lives. 

II.  The  idolateous  characi'eb  of  disobedience  (ver.  22).  In  proportion  to  the 
excellence  of  obedience  is  the  wickedness  of  disobedience.  1.  It  is  a  common  thing 
for  men  to  make  light  of  it,  especially  in  actions  to  which  they  are  disposed,  or 
which  they  have  committed,  being  blinded  by  their  evil  desires  and  passions.  2.  In 
the  sight  of  God  every  act  of  disobedience  is  exceedingly  hateful.  "  Thou  art  of 
purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil "  (Hab.  i.  13)  without  punishing  it.  3.  In  the  light 
of  truth  it  is  seen  to  be  the  same  in  principle  as  those  transgressions  on  which  the 
severest  condemnation  is  pronounced,  and  which  are  acknowledged  to  be  deserving 
of  the  strongest  reprobation.  It  is  probable  that  Saul  had  already  taken  measures 
to  put  down  the  "  sin  of  divination  "  (ch.  xxviii.  9),  and  prided  himself  upon  his  zeal 
against  idolatry ;  but  he  was  acting  in  the  spirit  of  that  which  lie  condemned,  and 
was  an  idolater  at  heart.  For  he  was  turning  away  from  God,  resisting  and  reject- 
ing him,  and  making  an  idol  of  self,  which  is  done  by  all  who  (in  selfish  and  super- 
stitious fear  or  desire)  seek  divination  (witchcraft)  and  trust  in  an  idol  ("  which  is 
nothing  in  the  world  ")  and  teraphira  (household  gods — ch.  xix.  13).  "  'The  declin- 
ations from  religion,  besides  the  privative,  which  is  atheism,  and  the  branches  thereof, 
are  three — heresies,  idolatry,  and  witchcraft.  Heresies  when  we  serve  the  true  God 
with  a  false  worship  ;  idolatry  when  we  worship  false  gods,  supposmg  them  to  be 


OH.  XV.  1—35.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  286 

true ;  and  witchcraft  when  we  adore  false  gods,  knowing  them  to  be  wicked  and 
false — the  height  of  idolatry.  And  yet  we  see,  though  thes&be  true  degrees,  Samuel 
teacheth  us  that  they  are  all  of  a  nature,  when  there  is  once  a  receding  from  the 
word  of  God  "  (Bacon,  'Advancement  of  Learning').  "All  conscious  disobedience 
is  actual  idolatry,  because  it  makes  self-will,  the  human  I,  into  a  god  "  (Keil). 
"  Little  children,  keep  yourselves  from  idols  "  (1  John  v.  21). 

III.  The  just  condemnation  op  the  disobedient  (ch.  xxviii.  18).  1.  The 
punishment  ui  the  disobedient  is  the  appropriate  fruit  of  his  disobedience.  "Be- 
cause thou  hast  rejected  me,"  &c.  Saul  wished  to  reign  without  God,  and  have  his 
own  way  ;  what  he  sought  as  a  blessing  he  obtains  as  a  curse.  Sinners  say,  "  Depart 
from  us,"  &c.  (Job  xxi.  14)  ;  and  the  most  terrible  sentence  that  can  be  pronounced 
upon  them  is,  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  iniquity  "  (Ps.  vi.  8 ;  Matt.  vii_.  23). 
"  God  rejects  no  one  unless  he  is  before  rejected  by  him."  2.  It  involves  grievous 
loss  and  misery — the  loss  of  power,  honour,  blessedness ;  the  experience  of  weakness, 
reproach,  unhappiness,  which  cannot  be  wholly  avoided,  even  though  mercy  be  after- 
wards found.  3.  Judgment  is  mingled  with  Bifrcy.  Although  Saul  was  discrowned  as 
theocratic  king,  he  did  not  cease  to  live  or  to  reign  as  "legal  king."  He  was  not 
personally  and  entirely  abandoned.  God  sought  his  salvation  to  the  last.  "His 
rejection  involved  only  this — (1)  That  God  would  henceforth  leave  him,  and  withdraw 
from  him  the  (special)  gifts  of  his  Spirit,  his  counsel  through  the  Urira  and  Thummim 
and  by  his -servant  Samuel ;  and  (2)  that  in  a  short  time  the  real  deposition  would 
be  followed  by  tangible  consequences — the  kingly  ruins  would  be  destroyed,  and 
the  kingdom  would  not  pass  to  his  descendants "  (Hengstenberg,  '  Kingdom  of 
God,' iL  89).— D.  . 

¥618.24 — 31.  (GiLGAL.) — Insincere  confession  of  sin.  "  I  have  sinned  "  (vers.  24, 
30).  On  hearing  the  sentence  of  his  rejection,  Saul  at  length  confesses  his  sin.  The 
words  of  Samuel  have  some  effect  upon  him,  but  not  the  full  effect  they  should  have 
had.  For  his  confession  does  not  proceed  from  a  truly  penitent  heart  (see  ch.  vii. 
6),  and  it  is  not  followed  either  by  the  reversal  of  his  sentence  or  the  forgiveness  of 
his  sin.  It  was  like  that  of  Pharaoh  (Exod.  ix.  27),  of  Balaam  (Num.  xxii.  34), 
and  of  Judas  (Matt,  xxvii.  4) — springing  from  "the  sorrow  of  the  world,  which 
worketh  death  "  (2  Cor.  vii.  10).     Notice— 

I.  Its  chabactebistics.  It  was  made — 1.  Under  the  pressure  of  circumstances, 
rather  than  as  the  free  expression  of  conviction.  Confession  comes  too  late  when  it 
is  extorted  by  the  demonstration  of  sin  which  can  no  longer  be  denied.  Some  mem, 
like  Saul,  conceal  their  sin  so  long  as  they  can,  and  cotifess  it  only  when  they  are 
compelled.  2.  From  the  fear  of  consequences  (vers.  23,  26),  and  not  from  a  sense  of 
the  essential  evil  of  sin.  This  is  the  most  common  characteristic  of ■  insincerity.  As 
Saul  confessed  his  sin  from  the  fear  of  losing  his  kingdom,  so  do  multitudes  from 
fear  of  death,  and  live  to  prove  their  insincerity  by  their  return  to  disobedience. 
"  There  are  two  views  of  sin :  in  one  it~is  looked  upon  as  a  wrong  ;  in  the  other  as 
producing  loss — loss,  for  example,  of  character.  In  such  cases,  if  character  could  be 
preserved'before  the  world,  grief  would  not  come  ;  but  the  paroxysms  of  misery  fall 
upon  our  proud  spirit  when  our  guilt  is  made  public.  The  most  distinct  instance  we 
have  of  this  is  in  the  life  of  Saul.  In  the  midst  of  his  apparent  grief,  the  thing  still 
uppermost  was  that  he  had  forfeited  his  kingly  character ;  almost  the  only  longing 
was  that  Sanmel  should  honour  him  before  the  people.  And  hence  it  comes  to  pass 
that  often  remorse  and  anguish  only  begin  with  exposure  "  (Eobertson).  3.  To  the 
servant  of  God,  and  to  gain  his  approval,  and  notto  God,  and  to  obtain  his  favour.  "  Thy 
words  "  (ver.  24).  "  Now  therefore ''  (as  if  on  the  ground  of  his  confession  he  could 
justly  claim  pardon),  "  I  pray  thee,  pardon  my  sin  "  (ver.  26).  Many  confess  their 
sin  to  men  without  confessing  it  to  God,  and  attach  to  their  confession  a  worth  that 
does  not  belong  to  it.  4.  With  an  extenuation  of  guilt,  rather  than  with  a  full 
acknowledgment  of  its  enormity.  "  I  feared  the  people,  and  obeyed  their  voice  " 
(vers.  24,  16).  He  returns  to  his  first  excuse,  which  he  puts  in  a  different  form.  _  If 
what  he  said  was  true,  what  he  had  done  was  wrong  (Exod.  zxiii.  2).  There  is  a 
higher  law  than  the  clamour  of  a  multitude.  True  penitents  do  not  seek  to  palliate 
their  mn,  but  make  mention  of  its  greatness  as  a  plea  for  Divine  mercy  (Ps.  xxv.  11) 


286  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xv.  1—36 

6.  With  an  entreaty  for  public  honour,  rather  than  in  deep  humiliation  before  God 
and  man.  "  Honour  me  now,  I  pray  thee,  before  the  elders  of  the  people,  and  befora 
Israel  "  (ver.  30).  "  If  Saul  had  been  really  penitent,  he  would  have  prayed  to  be 
humbled  rather  than  to  be  honoured  "  (Gregory).  6.  With  repeated  promises  of 
rendering  worship  before  the  Lord,  rather  than  a  serious  purpose  to  obey  his  voice 
(vers.  25,  30).  He  does  not  seem  even  yet  to  have  laid  to  heart  the  truth  which  had 
been  declared  by  the  prophet;  and  he  probably  looked  upon  public  worship  by 
sacrifice  as  something  peculiarly  praiseworthy,  and  sought,  by  urging  Samuel  to 
remain  and  offer  it,  to  promote  his  own  honour  in  the  sight  of  the  people,  and  not 
as  the  expression  of  penitence  and  the  means  of  forgiveness  "  The  most  prominent 
feature  in  the  character  of  Saul  was  his  insincerity."  And  yet,  in  his  repeated  pro- 
mises to  worship  the  Lord,  and  his  urgent  entreaties  of  Samuel,  there  was  doubtless 
an  element  of  good  that  might  not  be  despised  (1  Kings  xxi.  29). 

"The  blackest  night  that  veils  the  sky, 
Of  beauty  hath  a  share  ; 
The  darkest  heart  hath  signs  to  tell 
That  God  still  lingers  there." 

II.  Its  conbequenceb.  In  the  language  and  conduct  of  Samnel  there  was — 1.  A 
reiteration  of  the  sentence  of  rejection.  Thrice  it  was  declared  that  Jehovah  had 
determined  that  Saul  should  no  longer  reign  under  his  sanction  and  by  his  aid  (vers. 
26,  28).  Although  he  may  not  have  known  all  that  the  sentence  involved,  he  felt 
that  its  import  was  alarming.  An  insincere  confession  of  sin  darkens  the  gathering 
cloud  instead  of  dispersing  it.  2.  A  confirmation  of  it  hy  an  impressive  sign,  the 
occasion  of  which  is  afforded  by  the  sinner  himself  (ver.  27).  Thereby  it  comes 
home  to  him  with  greater  force.  8.  An  intimation  of  the  transfer  to  a  better  man 
of  the  dignity  which  has  been  forfeited  by  sin.  This  was  the  second  time  that  an 
announcement  of  a  truly  theocratic  king  was  given  (ch.  xii.  14) ;  and  whilst  it 
showed  that  the  Divine  purpose  could  not  be  defeated,  however  it  might  be  striven 
against,  it  must  have  been  peculiarly  painful  to  Saul.  The  dreadful  secret  was  a 
constant  burden  to  him,  and  when  he  recognised  the  man  in  whom  the  prediction  was 
about  to  be  fulfilled,  it  excited  his  envy  and  hatred  toward  him.  When  any  one  is 
not  right  with  God,  every  favour  shown  to  another  fills  him  with  grief  and  wrath 
(Gen.  iv.  5).  ^.  A  declaration  of  the  unchangeable  purpose  of  God.  "  The  Strength  " 
(Perpetuity,  Confidence,  Eefuge,  Victory)  "  of  Israel  will  not  lie  nor  repent,"  &c.  (ver. 
29).  Saul  evidently  thought  of  him  as  capable  of  acting  in  an  arbitrary,  capricious, 
and  inconstant  manner,  like  himself ;  but,  inasmuch  as  he  formed  his  purposes  with 
perfect  knowledge,  and  acted  on  immutable  principles,  and  there  was  no  real  change 
in  the  heart  of  the  transgressor,  there  could  be  no  reversal  of  his  sentence.  "  He 
cannot  deny  himself  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  12).  If  in  some  things  his  purposes  toward  men 
appear  to  change  because  men  alter  their  relative  position  toward  him  (as  the  sun 
appears  to  change  by  the  rotation  of  the  earth,  causing  day  and  night),  in  others  they 
abide  the  same  for  ever,  and  he  who  sets  himself  against  them  must  be  overthrown. 
It  is  now  certain  that  he  cannot  again  be  a  theocratic  king  ;  but  his  renewed  impor- 
tunity, in  which,  perchance,  notwithstanding  its  apparent  selfishness,  the  prophet  sees 
a  gleam  of  hope,  is  followed  by — 6.  An  indication  of  pity  toward  the  foolish  and 
fallen  king.  "And  Samuel  returned  after  Saul ;  and  Saul  worshipped  Jehovah  "  (ver. 
31).  May  he  not  even  yet  be  led  to  true  repentance  ?  Although  the  birthright  is 
given  to  another,  there  is  a  blessing  for  him  who  weeps  and  prays  (Gen.  xxvii.  38 — 
40).  His  request  is  granted.  He  has  what  he  desires  and  is  prepared  to  receive. 
He  is  still  the  king  after  the  people's  heart.  He  shall  continue  such.  The  sentence 
shall  not  be  published,  nor  any  special  effort  be  put  forth  for  his  dethronement.  It 
would  result  in  general  confusion.  The  just  and  merciful  purposes  of  God  toward 
the  people  in  giving  him  for  their  king  are  not  yet  fulfilled,  and  they  will  slowly 
ripen  to  their  accomplishment.  6.  An  exhibition  of  judgment  upon  an  obstinate 
offender  (ver.  32).  One  of  the  reasons,  doubtless,  why  Samuel  "  turned  again  aftel 
Baiil  "  was  that  he  might  execute  on  Agag  the  Divine  sentence  which  he  had  faith- 
Wssly  remitted.    "The  terrible  vengeance  executed  on  the  fallen  monarch  by  Samuej 


OH.  XT.  1--36.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  281 

is  a  measure  of  Saul's  delinquency."  It  is  also  a  solemn  warning  to  him  of  the  doom 
which  sooner  or  later  comes  upon  every  impenitent  and  persistent  transgressor. 

Observations : — 1.  It  is  not  confession  of  sin,  but  the  spirit  in  which  it  is  made,  that 
renders  it  acceptable  to  God.  2.  Sincerity  is  the  foundation  of  a  truly_  religious 
character.  3.  Though  mercy  long  lingers  over  the  sinner,  yet  if  it  b«  despised  doom 
comes  at  last. — D. 

Ver.  29.  (Gilgal.) — The  unehangecMe  One  oflsrad. 

"  And  also  the  Strength  of  Israel  will  not  lie  nor  repent  i 
For  he  is  not  a  man,  that  he  should  repent. " 

The  word  rendered  Strength  in  the  A.  V.  (netsach,  here  used  for  the  first  time)  has  a 
varied  signification  (splendour,  victory,  truth,  confidence,  perpetuity,  &c.),  but  is  used 
in  this  place  in  the  sense  of  steadfastness,  constancy,  and  unchangeableness.  Jehovah, 
the  prophet  says,  is  the  Immutability,  or  unchangeable  One,  of  Israel.  He  is  not 
like  man,  inconstant,  unreliable,  changeable.  He  is  not  such  an  one  as  Saul  imagined 
him  to  be;  does  not  vacillate  in  his  thoughts,  feelings,  or  purposes;  but  acts  on 
immutable  principles,  and  performs  the  word  which  he  has  spoken ;  and  hence  the 
sentence  of  rejection  cannot  be  reversed.  His  unchangeableness  is  often  declared  in 
the  Scriptures.  It  is  implied  in  the  ngme  of  Jehovah.  It  was  dwelt  upon  by 
Moses  (Deut.  xxzii.  4,  18,  31),  perceived  by  Balaam  (Num.  xxiii.  19),  and  asserted 
by  Hannah  in  her  song  of  praise  (ch.  ii.  2).  And  although  it  is  often  disbelieved  oi 
misinterpreted,  it  is  a  source  of  strength  and  consolation  to  all  by  whom  it  is  pro- 
perly understood  and  realised.     Observe  that  it — 

I.  Accords  with  apparent  changeableness  in — 1.  The  creation  of  the  world 
and  the  varied  operations  of  his  hand.  It  is  not  stoical  indifference  (without  affec- 
tion) nor  absolute  quiescence  (without  activity).  He  is  the  living  God,  and  freely 
exercises  his  boundless  power  in  producing  infinite  changes.  "  Over  all  things, 
animate  and  inanimate,  flows  the  silent  and  resistless  tide  of  change."  But  whilst  he 
is  "  in  all,  above  all,  and  through  all,"  he  is  separate  and  distinct  from  all ;  and  the 
creation  of  the  world  and  all  the  mutations  of  matter  and  force  are  only  expres- 
sions of  his  eternal  and  unchangeable  thought.  The  physical  universe  is  the 
garment  in  which  the  Invisible  clothes  himself  and  manifests  himself  to  our  appre- 
hension (Ps.  cii.  25 — 27  ;_  civ.  2).  2.  The  revelations  of  his  character  and  the  suc- 
cessive dispensations  of  his  grace.  These  are  not  contrary  to  one  another.  They  are 
simply  the  clearer  and  more  perfect  manifestations  of  him  who  is  always  "the  same ; " 
adapted  to  the  need  and  capacity  of  men.  God  deals  with  them  as  a  parent  with 
his  children,  affording  them  instruction  as  they  are  able  to  bear  it.  3.  The  relations 
in  which  he  stands  to  men,  and  his  diversified  dealings  with  them.  They  sometimes 
appear  the  opposite  of  each  other.  At  one  time  he  approves  of  individuals  and 
nations,  and  promises  them  manifold  blessings,  whereas  at  another  he  condemns  and 
punishes  them.  Hence  he  is  said  to  repent.  But  the  change  arises  from  a  change- 
in  men  themselves.  The  Glory  of  Israel  always  shines  with  undimmed  lustre ;  but 
they  shut  their  eyes  and  turn  their  backs  upon  the  light,  so  that  to  them  it  becomes 
darkness.  And  it  is  his  unchangeable  holiness  that  necessitates  this  result;  fot  if  hr 
were  "  altogether  such  an  one  as  themselves,"  they  might  expect  (like  Saul)  to  enjoj 
his  favour  whilst  they  contiiuied  in  sin.  "  With  the  pure  thou  wilt  show  thyself 
pure ;  and  with  the  froward  thou  wilt  show  thyself  froward  "  (Ps.  xviii   26). 

II.  Denotes  real  unchangeableness  in — 1.  The  perfections  of  his  character. 
Change  is  an  element  of  imperfection,  and  no  such  element  can  exist  in  the  abso- 
lutely perfect  One.  With  him  "there  is  no  variableness,  neither  shadow  caused  by 
turning  "  (James  i.  17).  "  In  him  there  is  no  darkness  at  all "  (1  John  i.  5).  And  it 
is_"impossibleforGod  to  lie"  (Heb.  vi.  18).  2.  The  principles  of  his  government : 
wisdom,  truth,  equity,  goodness,  &c.  In  these  things  he  delights,  and  from  them  he 
never  departs.  They  stand  like  rocks  amidst  a  sea  of  perpetual  change.  They  are 
more  immutable  than  the  laws  of  nature,  being  the  foundation  on  which  those  laws 
rest,  and  inseparable  from  the  Divine  character.  "The  word  of  our  God  "  (in  which 
Ibey  are  expressed)  "  shall  stand  for  ever  "  (Isa.  xl.  8  ;  li.  6).     "  Till  Ijeaven  and 


288  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xv.  1—35 

earth  pass,"  &c.  (Matt.  v.  18).  8.  The  purposes  of^  his  heart,  fonned  in  peifect 
knowledge  of  all  that  will  take  place,  and  effected  in  harmony  with  the  principles 
before  mentioned.  Some  of  these  purposes  are  hidden  (Deut.  xxiz.  29).  Others  are 
revealed,  and  include  the  general  conditions  of  peace  and  happiness,  and  the  results 
of  their  observance  or  neglect  (promises  and  threatenings),  also  particular  events, 
occurring  either  independently  of  the  free  action  of  men,  or  in  connection  with  it, 
whether  in  the  t7ay  of  opposition  or  co-operation,  as,  e.  g.,  the  setting  up  of  a  theo- 
cratic kingdom,  the  advent  and  death  of  the  Messiah  (Acts  iv.  27,  28),  and  his 
universal  reign.  "  The  counsel  of  the  Lord  standeth  for  ever"  (Ps.  xxxiii.  10,  Jl  ; 
Prov.  xix.  21 ;  Isa.  xlvi.  10 ;  Jer.  iv.  28).  "  I  am  Jehovah,  I  change  not ;  therefore 
ye  eons  of  Jacob  are  not  consumed  "  (Mai.  iii.  6).  "  When  we  find  predictions  in 
Scripture  not  executed,  we  miist  consider  them  not  as  absolute,  but  conditional,  or,  as 
the  civil  law  calls  it,"  an  interlocutory  sentence.  God  declared  what  would  follow  bj 
natural  causes,  or  by  the  demerit  of  man,  not  what  he  would  absolutely  do  himself. 
And  though  in  many  of  these  predictions  the  condition  is  not  expressed,  it  is  «inder- 
Btood  "  (see  Jer.  xviii.  7,  8 ;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  13,  14  ;  Jonah  iii.  4  ;  iv.  2). 

III.  Incites  to  human  oonstanct  in — 1.  Faith.  He  never  disappoints  the  trust 
that  is  reposed  in  him.  His  covenant  with  his  people  is  firm  and  sure;  "for  the 
mountains  shall  depart,  and  the  hills  be  removed,"  &c.  (Isa.  liv.  10).  "  All  the 
promises  of  God  in  him  are  yea,  and  in  him  Araeri  "  (2  Cor.  i.  20).  What  an  in- 
centive is  thus  afforded  to  each  believer,  afid  the  whole  Church,  to  "  abide  in  him  "  1 
"  Whose /ai<A  follow,  &c.  Jesus  Christ  (is)  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  foi 
ever;  (therefore)  be  not  carried  about  (like  a  ship  driven  by  varying  winds)  wit) 
divers  and  strange  doctrines  ;  for  it  is  a  good  thing  that  the  heart  be  established  with 
grace"  (Heb.  xiii.  7 — 9).  2.  Love.  Only  the  unchangeable  One  can  be  a  true, 
satisfying,  and  enduring  rest  of  the  affections  ;  for  all  earthly  objects  change  and 
pass  away,  and  must  leave  the  immortal  spirit  desolate.  His  unchanging  love  should 
keep  our  love  to  him  and  to  each  other  burning  with  a  steady  flame  (John  xiii.  1, 
o4  ;  Jude  21).  3.  Rightecmsness.  (1)  Which  consists  in  conformity  to  the  constant 
obedience  of  Christ  to  the  righteous  and  unalterable  will  of  the  Father.  (2)  Which 
is  faithfully  assured  of  enduring  blessedness  (Rev.  xxii.  14).  "  He  that  doeth  the 
will  of  God  abideth  for  ever"  (1  John  ii.  17).  (3)  But  without  which  there  will  be 
an  irrevocable  loss  of  the  most  glorious  crown  and  kingdom.  The  persistently 
rebellious  dash  themselves  to  pieces  against  the  unchangeable  holiness  and  justice  of 
God.— D. 

Vers.  32,  33.  (Gilgal.) — The  execution  of  Agajg.  Agag  was  put  to  death,  perhaps 
by  the  hand  of  Samuel;  more  probably  by  other  hands  under  his  order,  for  it  is 
common  to  speak  of  ofiicial  persons  doing  what  they  simply  command  to  be  done 
(John  ziz.  1).  "  In  ancient  time  persons  of  the  highest  rank  were  employed  to 
execute  the  sentence  of  the  law  (Jether,  the  eldest  son  of  Gideon,  Doeg,  Benaiah). 
Sometimes  the  chief  magistrate  executed  the  sentence  of  the  law  with  his  own 
hands"  (Paxton's  '  Illustrations,'  iv.  171).  The  act  was  one  of  g'eat  severity.  It 
should,  however,  be  remembered  that — 1.  The  Amalekite  king  had  committed  great 
atrocities  (ver.  38),  and  was  the  chief  representative  of  cruel  and  irreconcilable 
enemies  of  Israel.  2.  Amalek  lay  under  a  ban  of  extermination  which  had  been 
pronounced  by  Jehovah  (Bxod.  xvii.  14 ;  Num.  xxiv.  20),  and  was  now  required  to 
be  fully  carried  into  effect.  Samuel  acted  in  obedience  to  a  higher  will  than  his  own; 
not  from  personal  reveTige,  but  in  his  public  capacity,  doing  what  Saul  (from  no  feel- 
ings of  humanity)  had  failed  to  do,  and  giving  honour  to  Jehovah  before  his  altar. 
"There  must  indeed  have  been  inadequate  ideas  of  the  individuality  of  man  a.r\d  of 
the  rights  of  human  life  before  a  diKpensation  could  have  been  received  which 
enforced  wars  of  extermination — wars  which  would  now  be  contrary  to  morality ; 
for  the  reason  that  our  ideas  on  the  subject  of  human  individuality  and  the  rights  of 
life  are  completely  changed,  and  that  we  have  been  enlightened  on  these  subjects,  upon 
wnich  the  early  ages  of  mankind  were  in  the  dark  "  (Mozley,  •  Ruling  Ideas  in  Early 
Ages,'  p.  161).  3.  The  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  case  necessitated  some  such 
exhibition  of  the  authority  and  justice  of  Jehovah  for  the  maintenance  of  the 
theocracy,  and  the  reproof  and  warning  of  the  people  who  had  shared  in  the  sin  of 


ol .  XV.  1—35.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  289 

their  king,  "  Such  a  sinking  age  could  be  saved  from  imminent  dissolution  only  by 
extreme  severity.  He  who,  however  kindly  disposed  in  other  respects,  was  most 
direct  and  inexorable  in  carrying  out  what  seemed  urgently  needed,  he  alone  could 
now  become  the  true  physican  of  the  times,  and  the  successful  founder  of  a  better 
age  "  (Ewald).     We  have  bore — 

I.  A  NOTORIOUS  OFFENDRR  MEETING  HIS  JUST  DOOM.  1.  Although  sentence  upon 
an  evil  work  is  not  speedily  fixecuted,  it  is  not  reversed.  The  long-suffering  of  God 
waits,  "  as  in  the  days  of  Noah "  (2  Pet.  iii.  20),  when  judgment  was  suspended 
for  120  years  ;  but  "  he  spared  not  the  old  world "  (2  Pet.  ii.  5).  2.  Justice 
requires  that  incorrigible  sinners  should  be  punished  with  significant  severity.  "As" 
(in  the  same  manner  as)  "  thy  sword,"  &c.  3.  Death  is  naturally  bitter  to  men, 
and  especially  to  those  who  have  heavy  guilt  upon  their  consciences.  The  last 
words  of  Agag  were,  "Surely  the  bitterness  of  death  is  past."  4.  When  sinners 
deem  themselves  most  secure,  then  "sudden  destruction  cometh  upon  them." 
Having  been  spared  so  lonjf,  he  imagined  that  the  danger  was  over,  and  little 
thought  that  the  venerable  p-^phet  was  the  messenger  of  wrath.  "  The  feet  of  the 
avenging  deities  are  shod  with  wool,  but  they  strike  with  iron  hands." 

II.  An  amiable  peophet  clothed  with  holy  SEVERiTy.  1.  The  more  a  mar 
loves  righteousness,  the  more  intensely  does  he  hate  sin.  "Ye  that  love  the  Lord, 
hate  evil;"  What  woes  wero  ever  so  terrible  as  those  that  fell  from  the  lips  of 
Christ  ?  2.  A  good  man  may  inflict  punishment  on  the  wicked  without  feelings  of 
personal  revenge  against  them.  "  Our  Lord  declared  the  inferiority  of  the  legal 
position  of  the  Old  Testament  not  because  the  desire  of  retribution  ought  to  be 
excluded  from  the  religion  of  reconciliation,  but  because  it  ought  not  to  predominate 
in  it "  (Tholuck).  3.  When  some  fail  to  carry  out  the  purposes  of  God,  others  are 
bound  to  make  up  for  their  defect,  and  sometimes  to  do  things  for  which  they  do 
not  seem  well  adapted,  and  which  do  not  harmonise  with  their  general  character 
(1  Kings  xviii.  40).  "  When  kings  abandoned  their  duty  God  often  executed  his  law 
by  the  prophets"  (Grotius).  4.  That  which  is  severity  to  one  must  often  be  done, 
provided  it  be  not  contrary  to  justice,  for  the  good  of  all. 

III.  An  OBSTINATE  PEOPLE  TAUGHT  A  SALUTARY  LESSON.      1.   No  excuse  Can  justify 

disobedience  to  the  commands  of  God.  Doubtless  the  people,  if  called  to  account, 
would  have  been  as  ready  as  Saul  to  ofEer  excuses  for  the  part  they  took  in  sparing 
Agag  and  the  best  of  the  sheep,  &c.  2.  They  who  fail  to  obey  these  commands 
deprive  themselves  of  invaluable  blessings.  The  sunshine  of  heaven  is  beclouded, 
and  the  sentence  of  rejection  on  their  king,  although  at  present  little  known,  will  ere 
long  produce  disastrous  effects  in  them.  3.  God's  work  must  be  done,  and  if  one 
refuses  to  do  it,  another  is  raised  up  for  the  purpose.  As' with  individuals,  so  with 
nations  (Num.  xiv.  21 ;  Eom.  xi.  22).  4.  Those  who,  although  the  professed 
people  of  God,  contend  against  his  purposes  must  share  the  fate  of  his  open 
enemies.  "  If  ye  shall  atiU  do  wickedly  ye  shall  be  consumed,  both  you  and  your 
king"(ch.  xii.  25).— D. 

Vers.  34,  36.  (Gilgai,.) — A  mdancholy parting.  The  interview  between  Samuel 
and  Saul  was  now  ended.  "  It  was  a  fearful  meeting ;  it  was  followed  by  a  lifelong 
parting."  The  earlier  course  of  Saul  (from  the  time  the  prophet  met  him  in  the  gate 
at  Ramah)  was  marked  by  modesty,  prudence,  generosity,  and  lofty  spiritual  im- 
pulses, and  was  one  of  brilliant  promise.  His  subsequent  course  (from  his  first 
wrong  step  before  the  war  of  Michmash),  although  distinguished  by  external  pros- 
perity, was  marked  by  self-will,  presumption,  disobedience,  and  selfishness,  and  was 
one  of  rapid  degeneracy.  "  How  must  the  prophet  have  lamented  as  he  saw  the 
wreck  of  that  early  brightened  life  I  "  On  his  part,  more  especially,  the  separation 
was — 

I.  NbedfitIi,    a  good  man  is  compelled  to  separate  from  those  to  whom  he  has 

given  his  counsel  and  aid — 1.  When  from  lack  of  sympathy  and  opposition  of  aim 
e  can  no  longer  effectively  co-operate  with  them.     2.  When  he  cannot  hope  to 
exert  a  beneficial  influence  upon  them.    3.  When  his  continuance  with  them  afiordn 
a  sanction  to  a  course  which  he  cannot  approve.     Bis  parting  is  a  condemnation  of 
it|  and  is  rendered  necessary  by  truth  and  righteousness.     "  God's  ambassador  waa 
1  BAM.  g 


290  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xv.  1—35. 

recalled  from  him  ;  the  intercourse  of  the  God  of  Israel  came  to  an  end  because 
Saul,  sinking  step  by  step  away  from  God,  had  by  continued  disobedience  and 
increasing  impenitence  given  up  communion  with  God "  (Erdmann).  "Had  he 
spared  this  spiritual  child,  when  to  spare  him  would  have  been  contrary  to  the 
fundamental  law  of  the  theocracy,  the  worst  possible  precedent  would  have  been 
afforded  for  future  ages  by  this  first  king  "  (Ewald). 

II.  Respectful.  Samuel  acceded  to  the  request  of  Saul  to  honour  him  before  the 
people;  and  although  it  is  not  stated  how  far  he  participated  with  him  in  worship, 
yet  he  evidently  avoided  an  open  and  violent  rupture  with  him,  and  gave  him  honour, 
as  civil  ruler,  to  the  last.  Respect  is  due  "not  only  to  the  good  and  gentle,  but  also 
to  the  froward,"  on  account  of— ^1.  The  authority  and  power  that  may  be  intrusted 
to  them  in  the  providence  of  God  (Rom.  xiii.  1).  2.  The  natural  dignity  of  man — 
great  in  ruin,  capable  of  restoration,  and  susceptible  to  the  influence  of  kindness  or 
contempt.  Jesus  did  not  resent  the  kiss  with  which  Judas  betrayed  him,  but  said, 
"  Friend,  wherefore  comest  thou  hither  ?  "  3.  The  requirements  of  social  order  and 
peace.  Saul  was  even  yet  the  best  king  the  people  were  fit  to  receive,  and  the  con- 
duct of  Samuel  indicated  the  duty  of  submission,  which,  in  the  spirit  of  their  king, 
they  were  not  always  disposed  to  render  (ver.  24 ;  ch.  xiv.  45). 

III.  SoKBOWFUl,.  "  Nevertheless  Samuel  mourned  for  Saul."  With  heavy  heart 
and  weary  feet  the  old  prophet  took  his  way  up  from  Gilgal  to  Ramah,  and  mourned 
for  Saul,  who,  on  the  opposite  hill  of  Gibeah,  pursued  his  wilful  way,  bringing  upon 
himself  and  Israel  inevitable  and  overwhelming  woe ;  alive,  yet  dead;  so  near, yet  so 
completely  lost.  1.  What  object  is  more  mournful  than  a  soul  "  going  astray  "  from 
God  ?  2.  What  sorrow  is  too  great  at  such  a  sight  ?  3.  How  vast  is  that  Divine 
sorrow  of  which  the  human  is  the  product  and  reflection  I  "  And  the  Lord  repented," 
&c.  The  prophetic  spirit  is  one  of  wide  and  deep  sympathy  at  once  with  God  and 
man,  and  it  was  perfectly  possessed  by  "  the  Man  of  sorrows."  "  Samuel  mourned 
for  Saul,  but  we  do  not  hear  that  Saul  mourned  for  himself." 

IV.  Final.  He  "  came  no  more  to  see  Saul " — gave  him  counsel  no  more  as 
aforetime,  which  indeed  was  not  desired ;  and  he  only  saw  him  once  again,  when  he 
forced  himself  into  his  presence  (ch.  xix.  24).  When  good  men  are  compelled  by 
the  conduct  of  the  wicked  to  separate  from  them,  the  parting — 1.  Deprives  the  latter 
of  incalculable  benefits,  however  lightly  they  may  be  estimated  at  the  time.  2.  Tends 
to  increase  the  moral  distance  between  them,  and  render  the  restoration  of  their 
Intercourse  more  and  more  impossible.  3.  Is  certain  to  be  hereafter  bitterly  but 
vainly  regretted  (ch.  xxviii.  15,  18).  Oh,  the  sad  and  perpetual  separations  that  are 
caused  by  sin  I  The  paths  of  Samuel  and  Saul  (like  those  of  Moses  and  Pharaoh, 
Paul  and  Demas)  may  be  compared  to  the  courses  of  two  ships  that  meet  on  the 
ocean,  and  sail  near  each  other  for  a  season,  not  without  danger  of  collision,  and  then 
part  asunder,  the  one  to  reach  a  "  desired  haven,"  the  other  to  make  shipwreck  and 
beoome  a  castaway. — D. 

Ver.  26;  xvi  1 — 4.  {^VLka)— Recalled  to  the  path  of  duty.  "Go,  I  will  send 
thee  to  Jesse  the  Bethlehemite."  1.  The  greatest  and  best  of  men  experience  seasons 
of  sorrow,  depression,  and  doubt,  and  sometimes  fail  in  the  fulfilment  of  duty.  It 
was  thus  with  Abraham,  Moses,  and  Elijah,  and  with  others  in  later  ages.  It  was  the 
same  with  Samuel,  though  to  a  less  extent  than  almost  any  other.  His  grief  for  Saul 
was  excessive.  He  surrendered  himself  to  it  without  seeking  the  consolation  and 
help  by  which  it  might  be  mitigated,  and  suffered  it  to  interfere  with  the  work  which 
he  might  yet  accomplish  on  behalf  of  Israel ;  and  hence  he  was  reproved  by  God. 
"  The  excellent  prophet  here  displays  something  of  human  weal^ness.  Samuel  here 
looked  on  the  vessel,  made  by  the  invisible  hand  of  God  himself,  utterly  broken  and 
minisbed,  and  his  emotion  thereat  shows  his  pious  and  holy  afilection ;  yet  he  is  o  it 
without  sin  "  (Galvin)._  2.  The  failure  of  good  men  often  appears  in  those  things  in 
which  they  are  pre-eminently  excellent.  .  Samuel  exhibited  extraordinary  sympathy 
with  the  purposes  of  God  concerning  his  people,  unquestioning  obedience  to  every 
indication  of  his  will,  and  strong  faith,  and  hope,  and  dauntless  courage  in  its  fulfU- 
ment.  Yet  here  we  find  him  a  prey  to  "  the  grief  that  saps  the  mind,"  apparently 
hopeless  and  desponding,  and  smitten  with  fear  like  Elijah  when  '*  he  arose  and  went 


OH.  XY.  1— as.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  191 


for  his  life  "  on  hearing  the  threat  of  Jezebel.  "  Such  things  would  seem  designed 
by  God  to  stain  the  pride  of  all  flesh,  and  to  check  all  dependence  upon  the  most 
eminent  or  confirmed  habits  of  godliness  "  (A.  Fuller).  The  strongest  are  as  depend- 
ent on  God  as  the  feeblest.  3.  A  higher  voice  than  that  of  their  own  troubled  and 
fearful  hearts  speaks  to  men  of  sincerity,  and  in  communing  with  it  they  are  led  into 
a  clearer  perception  of  duty  and  to  gird  themselves  afresh  for  its  performance.  The 
"  spirit  of  faith  "  regains  its  ascendancy  over  them.  And  in  going  forth  to  active 
service  they  find  new  strength  and  hope  at  every  step.  The  night  gives  place  to 
the  morning  dawn,  and 

"  They  feel,  although  no  tongue  can  prove, 
That  every  cloud  that  spreads  above 
And  veileth  love,  itself  is  love  "  (Tennyson,  '  The  Two  Voicet '). 

Consider  the  way  of  duty,  trodden  by  the  good  man,  as- 

I.  Prescribed  bt  God,  whose  will  is  the  rule  of  human  life,  and  is — 1.  Indicated 
in  many  ways — the  word  of  truth,  providential  circumstances,  reason,  and  conscience, 
and  "  that  awful  interior  light  which  the  dying  Saviour  promised,  and  which  the 
ascending  Saviour  bestowed — the  Spirit  of  God."  2.  Sometimes  obscured  by  frus- 
trated effort,  grievous  disappointment,  immoderate  grief,  desponding  and  doubtful 
thoughts  (Matt.  xi.  2,  3 ;  Acts  xviii  9 ;  xxiii.  11).  3.  Never  long  hidden  from  those 
who  are  sincerely  desirous  of  doing  it,  and  seek  for  the  knowledge  of  it  with  a  view 
to  that  end  (vers.  2,  3  ;  1  Kings  xix.  15). 

II.  Beset  BY  DANGER.  "How  can  I  go?  If  Saul  hear  of  it,  he  will  kill  me."  The 
question  was  not  simply  an  inquiry  for  direction,  but  also  an  expression  of  fear ;  and 
it  may  possibly  have  arisen  from  indications  of  Saul's  wilfulness  such  as  afterwards 
appeared  (ch.  xix.  22).  1.  Danger  is  sometimes  formidable,  even  to  the  bravest  of 
men.    2.  It  is  exaggerated  by  despondency,  doubt,  and  fear. 

"  Thy  soul  is  by  vile  fear  assailed,  which  oft 
So  overcasts  a  man,  that  he  recoils 
From  noblest  resolution,  like  a  beast 
At  some  false  semblance  in  the  twilight  gloom  "  (Dante). 

B.  No  danger  in  the  way  of  duty  is  equal  to  that  which  will  be  certainly  found  in 
departing  from  it.  "  In  the  way  of  righteousness  there  is  life,  and  in  the  pathway 
thereof  there  is  no  death." 

III.  PuEStJED  WITH  FIDELITY.  "  And  Samuel  did  that  which  the  Lord  spake " 
(ver.  4).  His  hesitation  was  only  for  a  moment,  and  with  further  light  his  faith 
revived  and  was  displayed  in  fearless  devotion.  Fidelity  to  duty — 1.  Demands  the 
renunciation  of  self  and  many  cherished  plans  and  purposes.  2.  Appears  in  trustful, 
practical,  and  unreserved  obedience.  Samuel  went  in  dependence  upon  the  promise, 
"  I  will  show  thee  what  thou  shalt  do,"  &c.  3.  Sometimes  necessitates  a  prudent 
reserve.  There  was  no  deception  in  withholding  a  reason  for  the  action  directed, 
beyond  that  which  lay  on  the  surface  of  the  action  itself.  To  reveal  it  would  be  to 
defeat  the  end  designed.     And  fidelity  is  sometimes  best  shown  by  silence. 

IV.  Terminating  in  safety  and  hope.  1.  Threatened  danger  is  averted. 
2.  Promised  guidance  is  obtained.     3.  A  brighter  day  dawns,  and 

"  God's  purposes  will  ripen  fast, 
Unfolding  eveiy  hour." 

Samuel  returns  to  Eamah  in  peace,  and  with  renewed  zeal  devotes  his  remaining  days 
to  the  work  of  training  a  body  of  younger  prophets  (ch.  xix.  20),  whose  influence, 
together  with  a  change  of  dynasty,  wUl  save  the  nation  and  promote  the  establish- 
ment of  the  kingdom  of  God.  "  Let  us  ask  ourselves  whether  the  Jewish  nation 
would  have  played  any  part  as  a  '  main  propelling  agency  of  modem  cultivation,'. if 
its  monarchy  had  been  allowed  to  take  the  form  which  Saul  would  have  given  it,  if 
he  had  made  religion  a  creature  of  the  kingly  power,  and  war  an  instrument  of 
rapine,  and  not  of  justice,  and  we  shall  see  that  Samuel's  view  of  the  matter  was  tht 

V  i 


SM  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xv.  1—86. 


true  one,  and  in  accordance  with  the  proper  vocation  of  •  prophet"  (Stiachey, 
•Jewish  Hist  and  Politics  ').— D. 

Ver.  36.  (Bamah.) — Samuel  a  man  of  sorrows.  "  Nevertheless  Samnel  monmed 
for  Saul."  There  are  many  kinds  of  sorrow  in  the  world.  One  is  natural,  such  as 
is  felt  by  men  in  temporal  afSiction.  Another  is  spiritual,  such  as  is  felt  by  a  peni- 
tent for  his  sin.  A  third  is  sympathetic,  benevolent,  Divine,  such  as  is  feU  by  a 
godly  man  over  the  ungodly.  "  I  beheld  the  transgressors,  and  was  grieved."  Of 
this  last  Samuel  had  experience  throughout  his  life  (ch.  iii.  16 ;_  iv.  11;  vii._2; 
viii.  3,  6),  and  more  especially  ^t  the  persistent  transgression  and  irrevocable  rejec- 
tion of  Saul.     Observe  of  such  sorrow,  that — 

I.  It  is  occasionbd  by  a  deflobablb  sight.  Look  at  it.  A  aool — 1.  Failing 
to  fulfil  the  purpose  for  which  it  was  made,  and  "  coming  short  of  the  glory  of 
God."  2.  Falling  into  degradation,  misery,  and  woe.  A  ruined  temple  I  A  wan- 
dering star  1  (Jude  13).  A  discrowned  monarch  I  A  despairing  spirit !  Oh,  what  a 
contrast  between  what  it  might  have  been  and  what  it  is  here  and  will  be  hereafter  1 
3.  Inciting  others  to  pursue  the  same  path. 

II.  It  is  an  evidbncb  op  exalted  piety,  inasmuch  as  it  shows — 1.  Genuine  eeal 
for  the  honour  of  God,  whose  law  is  "  made  void,"  whose  goodness  is  despised,  Mid 
whose  claims  are  trampled  in  the  dust,  2.  Tender  compassion  toward  men.  "  Charity 
to  the  soul  is  the  soul  of  charity."  3.  Intense  sympathy  with  the  noblest  of  men, 
with  the  Son  of  God,  and  with  the  eternal  Father  himself.  "  I  have  great  heaviness 
and  continual  sorrow  in  my  heart,"  &c.  (Bom.  ix.  1 — 3).  "0  that  thou  hadst 
known,"  &c.  (Luke  xix.  42).  "  0  that  thou  hadst  hearkened  to  my  commandments  1 " 
(Isa.  xlviii.  18). 

III.  It  is  sometimes  impeopeely  indulged  (ch.  xvi.  1),  as — 1.  When  it  is 
mingled  with  feelings  of  personal  disappointment  and  mortification,  and  of  dissatis- 
faction with  the  ways  of  God.  2.  When  it  is  allowed  to  become  a  prolonged  and 
all-absorbing  emotion,  to  the  exclusion  of  those  considerations  and  feelings  by  which 
it  ought  to  be  modified  and  regulated.  3.  When  it  produces  despondency  and  feai 
(ch.  xvi.  2),  weakens  faith,  and  hinders  exertion. 

IV.  Its  impbopeb  indulgbncb  is  Divinely  cobbboted.  By  means  of — 1.  Gentle 
rebuke,  indicating  that  it  is  useless,  unreasonable,  and  reprehensible.  2.  Clear  and 
deep  conviction  of  the  over-ruling  purpose  of  God,  and  unreserved  submission  to  it. 
"  At  that  time  Jesus  answered  and  said,  I  thank  thee,  0  Father,"  Sea.  (Matt,  xi.  26). 
8.  Benewed,  benevolent,  and  hopeful  activity. — D. 

Ver.  31. — Tried  again  and  r^eeted,  God  proves  his  servants,  ana  aoes  not  show 
them  the  fulness  of  his  favour  and  confidence  till  they  have  been  tested,  Abraham 
was  tried  and  found  faithful;  so  was  Moses;  so  was  David;  so  was  Daniel. 
Abraham,  indeed,  was  not  without  fault,  nor  Moses  either.  David  once  sinned 
grievously.  But  all  of  these  were  proved  true  at  heart  and  trustworthy,  Saul  is  the 
conspicuous  instance  in  the  Old  Testament  of  one  who,  when  called  to  a  high  post  in 
Jehovah's  service,  and  tested  therein  again  and  again,  offended  the  Lord  again  and 
again,  and  was  therefore  rejected  and  disowned.  1.  The  question  on  which  the  king 
was  tested  was  the  same  as  before.  Would  he  obey  the  voice  of  the  Lord,  and  rule  as 
his  lieutenant,  or  would  he  be  as  the  kings  of  the  neighbouring  nations  and  tribes,  and 
use  the  power  with  which  he  was  invested  according  to  his  own  will  and  pleasure  ? 
On  this  critical  question  the  prophet  Samuel  had  exhorted  both  Saul  and  the  people 
when  the  monarchy  was  instituted.  If  the  king  erred,  he  could  not  plead  that  he 
had  not  been  forewarned.  The  accepted  principle  of  modem  constitutional  govern- 
ment is  that  the  ruler  exists,  and  is  bound  to  act  for  the  public  good,  and  not  for  hia 
own  aggrandisement  or  pleasure.  At  root  this  is  the  very  principle  which  Samuel 
inculcated  3000  years  ago.  The  Old  Testament  required  a  king  to  reign  in  the  fear 
of  the  Lord,  and  loyally  execute  bis  will.  The  New  Testament  describes  the  ruler 
as  a  "minister  of  God  for  good."  Now  the  Divine  will  and  the  public  weal  are 
really  the  same,  and  the  moat  advanced  political  principle  of  modem  intelligenoe 
is  no  other  than  the  old  doctrine  of  the  Bible.  There  is  no  Divine  right  of  kings  to 
iul«  as  they  think  proper.    That  doctrine  of  base  political  subservience  ii  opposed 


OH.  XT.  1—36.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  «98 

to  both  the  spirit  and  the  letter  of  the  sacred  writings.    The  king  is  for  God,  not 
God  for  the  king.    The  king  is  for  the  people,  not  the  people  for  the  king.    The 
voice  of  the  people  may  not  always  be  the  voice  of  God,  but  the  good  of  the  people 
is  always  the  will  of  God.    2.  The  test  to  which  the  king  was  now  subjected  was, 
like  the  former  one,  specific,  and  publicly  applied.     Would  he  obey  the  Lord  in  the 
extermination  of  Amalek  or  no  ?    And  he  disobeyed.     If  there  was  one  of  all  the 
Amalekite  race  who  deserved  to  forfeit  his  life,  it  was  the  king,  Agag,  a  ruthless 
chief,  whose  sword,  as  Samuel  expressed  it,  had  "  made  women  childless ; "  yet  him 
Saul  spared  when  he  showed  no  mercy  to  others.     It  waB  not  at  all  from  a  feeling  of 
humanity  or  pity.     To  have  scrupled  about  shedding  the  blood  of  a  hereditary  foe 
would  not  have  occurred  to  any  Oriental  warrior  of  the  period.     But  Saul  would 
reserve  the  royal  captive  to  grace  his  triiuiph,  and  be  a  household  slave  of  the  king  of 
Israel.     It  was  the  pride  of  the  chiefs  and  kings  of  that  age  to  reduce  the  princes 
whom  they  had  conquered  to  slavery  in  their  courts.    Adonibezek  is  said  to  have  kept 
seventy  such  captives,  whose  hands  and  feet  he  had  mutilated  to  unfit  them  for  war, 
and  who,  as  slaves,  gathered  from  his  table.     Besides  Agag,  the  best  of  the  sheep 
and  cattle  belonging  to  Amalek  were  spared  by  Saul  and  his  army.    They  used  their 
success  to  enrir.h  themselves,  and  forgot  that  the  sentence  of  God  against  that  nation 
was  the  only  justification  of  the  war.    3.  The  Divine  censure  on  the  disobedient  king 
was  pronounced  by  Samuel.    The  prophet  was  deeply  grieved.     He  had  loved  the 
young  man  on  whose  lofty  head  he  had  poured  the  sacred  oil,  and  whose  failure  to 
fulfil  the  early  promise  of  his  reign  had  already  caused  him,  if  not. much  surprise, 
distress  unfeigned.    And  Samuel  was  concerned  for  the  nation.     If  the  new  govern- 
ment wag  so  soon  discredited,  and  Saul  forfeited  his  kingly  seat,  what  but  anarchy 
could  come  upon  Israel,  and  with  anarchy,  subjection,  as  before,  to  the  Philistines  oi 
some  other  warlike  nation  of  the  heathen  ?    The  prophet  fulfilled  his  commission, 
however  painful ;  gravely  reproved  the  king,  brushed  aside  his  excuses  and  evasions, 
and  refused,  not  without  a  touch  of  scorn,  his  ofiered  bribe  of  animals  for  sacrifice. 
4.  Samuel  took  occasion  to  declare  that  "  to  obey  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  to 
hearken  than  the  fat  of  rams."    These  words  contain  the  very  quintessence  of  the 
testimony  of  the  prophets ;  not  Samuel  only,  but  Hosea,  Micah,  Isaiah,  Jeremiah,  and 
in  fact  all  the  g^eat  teachers  whom  Jehovah  sent  to  his  ancient  people.     Sacrificial 
oblations  could  never  be  accepted  in  lieu  of  practical  obedience,  and  a  rebellious, 
wilful  temper  was  as  offensive  to  the  Lord  as  any  kind  of  idolatry.    Priests  and 
Levites  were  appointed  for  religious  ceremonial,  but  the  great  function  of  the 
prophets  was  to  maintain  the  supremacy  of  what  is  moral  over  what  is  ceremonial, 
and  to  lift  up  fearless  voices  for  mercy  and  truth,  judgment  and  righteousness, 
integrity  and  probity,  reverence  for  Jehovah,  and  obedience  to  his  revealed  will. 
Such  was  the  testimony  of  the  Lord  Jesus  himself,  as  the  greatest  of  prophets. 
He  recognised  and  respected  the  sacrifices  appointed  in  the  law,  but  did  not  in  his 
conversations  or  discourses  dwell  on  them.    His  aim  was  to  cause  men  to  hear  the 
word  of  God,  and  do  it.     And  such  is  the  message  or  burden  of  all  New  Testament 
prophets,  and  of  those  who  know  how  to  guide  and  teach  Christians.    To  be  lax  and 
mdulgent  on  questions  of  moral  conduct,  while  strict  about  services  aua  offerings  to 
God  and  the  Church,  is  the  part  of  a  false  prophet    The  true  prophet,  while  wit- 
nessing to  free  forgiveness  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  will  enjoin  all  who  seek  that 
forgiveness  to  cease  to  do  evil  and  learn  to  do  well,  will  faithfully  declare  to  them 
that  they  cannot  be  kept  in  the  love  of  God  if  they  are  not  obedient  to  his  word. 
6.  The  behaviour  of  Saul  imder  reproof  betrayed  a  shifty,  superficial  character.     He 
showed  no  real  sense  of  sin,  or  desire  of  Divine  forgiveness.     David,  during  his 
reign,  committed  a  more  heinous  offence  against  domestic  and  social  morality  than 
anything  that  Saul  as  yet  had  done ;  but  he  was  pardoned  and  restored  because 
when  charged  with  the  sin — "  Thou  art  the  man  " — ^he  confessed  it,  and  excused  not 
himself.    And  then  he  cried  to  God,  "  Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  1  shall  be  dean." 
But  Saul,  when  charged  with  disobedience,  showed  no  shame  or  sorrow  on  its 
account.     He  at  once  put  himself  in  a  defensive  attitude,  stooped  to  subterfuge, 
laid  the  blame  on  others,  had  no  feeling  but  a  desire  to  escape  consequences.    Htt 
would  propitiate  the  Lord  and  his  prophet  by  sacrifices ;  but  his  former  religiona 
■eligibility  waa  now  almost  quite  gone  from  him,  and  he  was  beoonung,  like  Emo,  • 


894 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[CH.  XVI.  1 — 23. 


"profane  person,"  hairl  and  godless.  It  is  pitiful  to  see  that  the  king  looked  no 
higher  than  to  Samuel,  and  asked  no  more  than  that  the  prophet  would  pardon  him, 
and  favour  him  so  far  as  to  join  with  him  while  he  publicly  worshipped  the  Lord. 
Evidently  his  object  was  to  have  his  credit  upheld  by  the  venerated  presence  of 
Samuel ;  and,  on  his  repeating  the  request,  the  prophet  thought  fit  to  yield  to  hia 
wish,  probably  to  avoid  the  weakening  of  the  royal  influence,  and  the  premature  fall 
of  the  monarchy.  6.  The  rejection  of  Saul  took  no  sudden  effect.  Gravely  and 
sadly  it  was  pronounced  by  Samuel ;  but  it  brought  about  no  immediate  catastrophe. 
None  the  less  was  it  a  sure  and  fatal  sentence.  We  know  that  Saul  was  not 
dethroned.  He  had  a  long  reign,  and  died  on  the  battle-field.  But  the  process  was 
already  begun  which  led  him  to  dark  Gilboa,  which  led  one  better  than  him  to 
Hebron  and  to  Jerusalem ;  and  the  remainder  of  this  book  is  occupied  in  showing  how 
the  Divine  rejection  of  Saul  took  effect,  and  how  the  Lord  brought  forward  and 
trained  the  son  of  Jesse  for  the  kingdom.  It  is  a  thought  full  of  solemnity,  that  a 
man  may  long  keep  his  place  and  hold  his  own  in  Christian  society  who  yet  is 
rejected  by  the  Lord,  and  is  growing  at  heart  more  and  more  profane,  till  at  last  the 
evil  spirit  rules  him  instead  of  the  good,  and  he  dies  as  one  troubled  and  God- 
forsaken. The  process  may  be  long,  but  it  is  none  the  less  tragical.  May  God  keep 
us  from  the  beginnings  of  declension,  and  from  all  excusing  of  our  sins,  or  laying  of 
the  fault  upon  others  I    Lord,  take  not  thy  Holy  Spirit  from  us  I — F. 


OHOIOB  OF  DAVID  TO  BE  ISKAEL'8  KIKQ,  AND  DECLINE  OF  aiULB  KINQDOM. 

CHS.  XVI. — XXXI.) 

EXPOSITION. 
Datid  Anointed  as  thb  futube  King,  and  his  fibst  iNTBODUcrioir  to  Sauu 

(oh.  XVI.) 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

Choice  of  David  as  svccessok  to  Saul 
(vers.  1 — 13).  Ver.  1. — How  long  wilt  thou 
mourn  1  The  grief  of  Samuel  was  prolonged 
almost  to  a  sinful  extent,  nor  can  we  wonder 
at  it.  We  who  see  Saul's  whole  career,  and 
know  how  deeply  he  fell,  are  in  danger  of 
iiscredlting  his  high  qualities  ;  but  those 
who  were  witnesses  of  his  military  skill  and 
prowess,  and  saw  him  and  his  heroic  son  raising 
the  nation  from  its  feebleness  and  thraldom 
to  might  and  empire,  must  have  given  him 
an  ungrudging  admiration.  Both  David's 
dirge  (2  Sam.  i.  19  —  27)  and  Samuel's 
long  mourning,  and  the  unqualified  obe- 
dience which  he  was  able  so  quickly  to 
extort  from  a  high-spirited  people  unused  to 
being  governed,  bear  decisive  testimony  to  his 
powers  as  a  mler  and  commander  m  war. 
But  God  now  warns  Samuel  to  mourn  no 
longer.  Saul's  rejection  has  become  final, 
and  God's  prophet  must  sacrifice  his  personal 
feelings,  and  prepare  to  can-y  out  the  pur- 
pose indicated  in  ch.  xiii.  14  ;  xv.  28.  We 
must  not,  however,  conclude  that  Samuel's 
sorrow  had  only  been  for  Saul  personally  ; 
there  was  danger  for  the  whole  nation  in  his 
conduct.  If  wilfulness  and  passion  gained  in 
him  the  upper  hand,  the  band  of  authority 
would  be  loosed,  and  the  old  feebleness  and 


anarchy  would  return,  and  Israel  become  even 
more  hopelessly  a  prey  to  its  former  troubles. 
Samuel,  therefore,  is  to  go  to  Bethlehem 
and  anoint  there  a  son  of  Jesse.  As  this  place 
lay  at  some  distance  from  Ramah,  and  out  of 
the  circuit  habitually  traversed  hy  Samuel  as 
judge,  he  probably  had  but  a  "encral  know- 
ledge of  the  family.  Evidently  lie  had  no 
acquaintance  with  David  (vei-s.  11.  12) ;  but 
as  Jesse  was  a  man  of  wealth  and  importance, 
his  reputation  had  probably  reached  the  pro- 
phet's ears. 

Ver.  2. — And  Samuel  sale!,  How  can  I  ^o  1 
if  Saul  hear  it,  he  will  kill  me.  Saul  was 
actually  king,  and  the  anointing  of  another 
in  his  stead  would  be  regarded  as  an  act  of 
open  treason,  and  the  stirrinj;  ap  of  civil  war. 
This  was  not  indeed  intended.  The  anoint- 
ing of  David  was  a  prophetic  indication  of 
the  man  whom  God,  in  his  o"ti  way  and  at 
his  own  time,  would  place  uvon  daul's  throne, 
without  either  scheming  or  action  thereto  on 
the  part  either  of  Samuel  or  of  David.  Its 
value  would  chiefly  lie  in  the  careful  training 
he  would  receive  from  Samuel ;  but  when 
David  was  king,  it  would  also  greatly 
strengthen  his  position ;  for  it  would  be 
known  that  from  his  boyhood  he  had  been 
marked  out  for  his  high  ofSce.  Never  did 
man  mount  a  throne  with  purer  hands  than 
David;  and  if  Saul  would  have  permitted  it, 


OH.  XVI.  1—23.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


29S 


he  would  have  been  a  faithful  and  loyal  ser- 
vant to  the  last.  It  was  Saul  really  who 
thrust  the  kingdom  upon  David.  As  regards 
Samuel's  fears,  headstrong  as  Saul  was,  he 
owed  too  much  to  the  prophet  to  have  put 
him  to  death ;  but  he  would  have  visited  the 
act  upon  Jesse  and  his  family  with  revengeful 
violence,  and  Samuel  would  henceforward 
have  lost  all  freedom  of  action,  even  if  he 
were  not  cast  into  prison,  or  banished  from 
the  land.  God  therefore  commands  him  to 
take  an  heifer  with  him,  and  say,  I  am  come  to 
sacrifloe  to  Jehovah.  The  question  has  been 
asked.  Was  there  in  this  any  duplicity  ?  In 
answer  we  may  ask  another  question  ;  Is  it 
always  necessary,  or  even  right,  to  tell  in  all 
eases  the  whole  truth  1  If  so,  quarrels  and 
ill-feeling  would  be  multiplied  to  such  an 
extent  that  social  life  would  be  unendurable. 
All  charitable,  well-disposed  persons  suppress 
much,  and  keep  a  guard  over  their  lips,  lest 
'  they  should  stir  up  strife  and  hatred.  Now 
here  there  was  to  be  no  treason,  no  inciting 
to  civil  war.  David,  still  a  child,  was  to  be 
set  apart  for  a  high  destiny,  possibly  without 
at  the  time  fully  knowing  what  the  anointing 
meant,  and  certainly  with  the  obligation  to 
take  no  step  whatsoever  towards  winning 
the  crown  that  was  to  descend  upon  his  head. 
This  was  his  probation,  and  he  bore  the  trial 
nobly.  And  what  right  would  Samuel  have 
had,  not  merely  to  compel  David  to  be  a 
traitor,  but  to  place  Jesse  and  his  family  in 
a  position  of  danger  and  difficulty  ?  To  have 
anointed  David  publicly  would  have  forced 
Jesse  to  an  open  rupture  with  the  king,  and 
he  must  have  sought  safety  either  by  fighting 
for  his  life,  or  by  breaking  up  his  home,  and 
fleeing  into  a  foreign  land.  David  in  course 
of  time  had  thus  to  seek  an  asylum  for  his 
parents  (ch.  xxii.  3,  4),  but  it  was  through  no 
fault  of  his  own,  for  he  always  remained 
true  to  his  allegiance.  Even  when  David  was 
being  hunted  for  his  life,  he  made  no  appeal  to 
Samuel's  anointing,  but  it  remained,  what  it 
was  ever  intended  to  be,  a  secret  sign  and 
declaration  to  him  of  God's  preordained  pur- 
pose, but  of  one  as  to  which  he  was  to  take 
no  step  to  bring  about  its  fulfilment.  It  was 
a  pledge  to  David,  and  nothing  but  misery 
would  have  resulted  from  its  being  prema- 
turely made  known  to  those  who  had  no 
right  to  know  it.  God  wraps  up  the  flower, 
which  is  in  duo  time  to  open  and  bear  fruit, 
within  many  a  covering  ;  and  to  rend  these 
open  prematurely  is  to  destroy  the  flower  and 
the  fruit  that  is  to  spring  from  it  And  so 
to  have  anointed  David  openly,  and  to  have 
made  him  understand  the  meaning  of  the 
act,  would  have  been  to  destroy  David  and 
frustrate  the  Divine  purpose. 

Ters.  3 — 6. — Call  Jesse  to  the  sacrifice. 
The  word  nsed  is  zebach,  and  means  a  sacrifice 
followed  by  a  feast,  at  which  all  the  elders  of 


the  town,  and  with  them  Jesse  and  his  oldei 
sons,  would  be  present  by  the  prophet's  invit- 
ation. It  is  plain  that  such  sacrifices  were 
not  unusual,  or  Saul  would  have  demanded  a 
reason  for  Samuel's  conduct.  As  the  ark 
remained  so  long  in  obscuiity  at  Kirjath- 
jearim,  and  the  solemn  srr\ices  of  the  taber- 
nacle were  not  restored  untLl  Saul  at  some 
period  of  his  reign  removed  it  to  Nob, 
possibly  Samuel  may  have  instituted  this 
practice  of  occasionally  holding  sacrifices, 
now  at  one  place  and  now  at  another,  to  keep 
alive  a  sense  of  religion  in  the  hearts  of  the 
people ;  and  probably  on  such  occasions  he 
taught  them  the  great  tnithsof  the  law,  thus 
combining  in  his  person  the  oflSces  of  prophet 
and  priest.  Nevertheless,  the  elders  of  the 
town  trembled  at  his  coming.  More  literally, 
"  went  with  trembling  to  meet  him."  Very 
probably  such  visitations  often  took  place 
because  some  crime  had  been  committed  into 
which  Samuel  wished  to  inquire,  or  because 
the  people  had  been  negligent  in  some  duty. 
And  though  conscious  of  no  such  fault,  yet 
at  the  coming  of  one  of  such  high  rank  their 
minds  foreboded  evil  He  quiets,  however, 
their  fear&  and  bids  them  sanctify  them- 
selves ;  i.  e.  they  were  to  wash  and  purify 
themselves,  and  abstain  from  everything  un- 
clean, and  put  on  their  festal  garments  (Exod. 
xix.  10  ;  and  comp.  1  Sam.  zxi.  6).  It  is 
added.  He  sanctified  Jesse  and  his  sons,  i.  e. 
he  took  especial  care  that  no  legal  impurity 
on  their  part  should  stand  in  the  way  of  the 
execution  of  his  errand. 

Vers.  6 — 10. — When  they  were  come.  I.e. 
to  the  house  of  Jesse,  apparently  in  the  in- 
terval between  the  sacrifice  and  the  feast 
The  latter  we  learn  in  ver.  11  did  not  take 
place  until  after  David  had  been  sent  for. 
But  many  hours  would  elapse  between  the 
sacrifice  and  the  feast,  as  the  victim  had  to 
be  skinned  and  prepared  for  roasting,  and 
finally  cooked.  'This  interval  was  spent  in 
Jesse's  house  ;  and  when  he  saw  there  Eliab, 
the  first-born,  and  observed  his  tall  stature 
and  handsome  face,  qualities  which  Samuel 
had  admired  in  Saul,  he  said,  i.  e.  ia  him- 
self, felt  sure,  that  the  goodly  youth  wai 
Jehovah's  anointed  (see  on  ch.  li.  10,  85  ;  z. 
1,  &c.),  but  is  warned  that  these  external 
advantages  do  not  necessarily  imply  real 
worth  of  heart ;  and  as  Jehovah  looketh  on 
the  heart,  his  judgment  depends,  not  on 
appearances,  but  on  reality.  As  Eliab  is 
thus  rejected,  Jesse  makes  his  other  sons  pass 
before  the  prophet.  Next  Abinadab,  who  has 
the  same  name  as  a  son  of  Saul  (ch.  xxxL  2) ; 
then  Shammah,  so  called  again  in  ch.  xviL 
13,  but  Shimeah  in  2  Sam.  xiii  3,  and 
Shimma  in  1  Chron.  ii  13,  where,  however, 
the  Hebrew  is  exactly  the  same  as  in  2  Sam. 
xiii.  3.  After  these  four  other  sons  follow, 
of  whom  one  apparently  died  young,  m  onlj 


19< 


TUB  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  XVI.  1 — 23 


seven  »re  recorded  in  1  Chron.  U.  18 — IB, 
whereas  these  with  David  make  eight  To 
all  these  seven  the  Divine  voice  within 
Samuel  gave  no  response,  and  he  said  unto 
Jesse,  Jehovah  hath  not  chosen  these. 

Vers.  11,  12.— Are  here  all  thy  ohildrenl 
The  word  literally  is  lads,  na'anm.     The 
elder  sons  must  have  been  nearly  or  quite 
grown  up,  but  David  was  probably  a  mere 
boy,  and  as  such  had  not  been  thought  worthy 
of  an   invitation,   but   had   been   left  with 
the  servants  keeping  the  sheep.    The  prophet 
now  orders  him  to  be  summoned,  and  marks 
his  value  in  God's  sight  by  saying,  We  will 
not  sit  down  till  ho  come  hither.     The  verb 
literally  means,  we  vdll  not  gurround,  i  e. 
the  table,  though  at  this  time  the  Jews  did 
sit  at  meals,  instead  of  reclining  on  couches, 
as  in  the  days  of  Amos  and  our  Lord.     We 
gather,  moreover,  from  Samuel's  words  that 
the  selection  of  the  son  that  was  to   be 
anointed  took  place  while  the  preparations 
were  being  made  for  the  feast.     At  the  pro- 
phet's command  David  is  fetched  from  the 
flock,  which  was  probably  near  the  house, 
and  on  his  arrival  the  prophet  sees  a  luddy 
boy,  t.  «.  red-haired,  correctly  rendered  in 
the  Vulgate  nifus,  the  colour  loved  by  all 
painters  of  manly  beauty,  and,  from  the  deli- 
cacy of  complexion  which  accompanies  it, 
especially  admired  in  the  East,  where  men 
are  generally  dark-haired  and  sallow-faced. 
Moreover,  he  was  of  a  beautiful  countenance. 
The  Hebrew  says,   "  with  beautiful  eyes," 
and  so  the  Syriae  and  Septuagint  rightly.   He 
was  also  goodly  to  look  to,  i.  e.  to  look  at. 
These  last  words  give  the  general  idea  of  the 
beauty  of  his  face  and  person,  while  his  bright 
hair  and  delicate  complexion  and  the  beauty  of 
his  eyes  are  specially  noticed  in  the  Hebrew. 
Ver.  13. — Then  Samuel  took  the  horn  of 
oil,  and  anointed  him  in  the  midst  of  his 
brethren.     Did  he  or  they  understand  the 
meaning  of  the  act  ?    We  think  not.     Cer- 
tainly Eliab  (oh.  xvii  28)  had  no  idea  of  any 
special  greatness  being  in  store  for  his  brother. 
Most  probably  both  Jesse  and  his  sons  re- 
garded David  as  simply  selected  to  be  trained 
in  Samuel's  schools ;  and  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  he  was  so  trained.     Samuel  gave 
unto  David  that  which  Saul  had  not  received 
— long  and  careful  training ;  and  David  pro- 
fited by  it,  and  at  Naiothin  Eamah  perfected 
his  skill,  not  only  in  reading  and  writing,  but 
in  poetry  and  music.     Saul  and  David  were 
both  men  of  extraordinary  natural  ability;  but 
the  one  is  always  shy,  awkward,  and  with  all 
the  defectsof  an  uneducated  man ;  while  David 
is  altogether  the  contrary.    But  Samuel  gave 
his  youthful  pupil  something  better  than  ao- 
complishihents — he  carefully  educated  him 
in  the  law  of  God,  and  led  his  mind  onward 
to  all  that  was  good.     It  was  Samuel's  last 
lad  erewnisg  work.   Prophecy  and  monarchy 


were  both  of  his  institution,  as  orderly  ele- 
ments of  the  Jewish  state ;  he  also  trained 
the  man  who  more  nearly  than  any  other 
approached  unto  the  ideal  of  the  theocratic 
king,  and  was  to  Israel  the  type  of  their 
coming  Messiah.     It  was  Samuel's  wisdom 
in  teaching  his  young  men  music  which  gave 
David  the  skill  to  be  the  sweet  singer  of  the 
sanctuary ;  and  we  may  feel  sure  also  that 
when  David  arranged  the  service  of  the  house 
of  God,  and  gave  priests  and  Levites  their  ' 
appointed  duties  (1   Chron.  xxiii. — xxvL), 
the  model  which  he  set  before  him  was  that 
in  which  he  had  so  often  taken  part  with 
Samuel  at  BamaL    As  Eliab,  Abinadab,  and 
Shammah  were  hut  lads  (ver.   11),  David 
must  have  been  very  young,  and  many  years 
have  elapsed  between  his  anointing  and  his 
summons  to    Saul's   presence  and   combat 
with  Goliath  ;  and  they  were  thus  well  spent 
in  the  prophet's  company,  whence  at  proper 
intervals  he  would  return  to  his  father's  house 
and  resume  his  ordinary  duties.     The  Spirit 
of  Jehovah  came  upon  David  from  that  day 
forward  (comp.  ch.  x.  6,  9).     In  modem 
language  we  should  say  that  David's  charac- 
ter grew  and  developed  nobly,  both  intellect- 
ually and  morally.     With  far  more  ethical 
truth  the  Israelites  saw  in  the  high  qualities 
which  displaj'ed  themselves  in  David's  acts 
and  words  the  presence  and  working  of  a 
Divine  Spirit    It  was  a  "  breathing  of  Jeho- 
vah "  which  moved  David  onward,  and  fos- 
tered in  him  all  that  was  morally  great  and 
good,  just  as  it  was  "  the  breath  of  God  " 
which  at  the  creation  moved  upon  the  &ce  of 
the  waters  to  call  this  earth  into  being  (Gen. 
L  2).  _  Samuel  rose  up  and  went  to  Bamah. 
His  mission  was  over,  and  he  returned  to  his 
ordinary  duties  ;  but,  doubtless,  firat  he  made 
arrangements  that  David  should  in  due  time 
follow  him  thither,  that  he  might  be  trained 
for  his  high  office  under  Samuel'a  direct 
influence  and  control. 

David's  inteoduotion  to  Kino  Saul 
(vers.  14—23).  Vers.  14,  16.— From  this 
time  forward  David  is  the  central  figure  of 
the  history.  Saul  has  been  rejected,  and 
though,  as  being  the  actual  king,  he  must 
still  play  his  part,  more  especially  as  his 
decline  goes  on  side  by  side  with  David's 
growth  in  every  kingly  quality,  yet  the 
record  of  it  is  no  longer  given  on  Saul's 
account  Interesting,  then,  as  may  be  the 
information  concerning  the  mental  malady 
with  which  Saul  was  visited,  yet  the  object 
of  this  section  is  to  acquaint  us  with  the 
manner  in  which  David  was  first  brought 
into  connection  with  him.  From  the  de- 
scription given  of  David  in  ver.  18  It  is 
evident  that  there  has  been  a  considerable 
interval  of  time  between  this  and  the  prevloui 
section.  David  is  no  longer  a  child,  but  a 
" mighty  valiant  man."    The  connection  is 


CH.  XVL  1—23.] 


THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


tn 


ethical,  uid  lies  in  the  contrasted  moral  state 
of  the  two  men,  as  shown  in  the  two  parallel 
statements:  "the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  came 
upon  David  ; "  ''  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  de- 
parted from  Saul."  There  was  a  gradual 
decline  and  debasement  of  his  character ;  and 
as  David  grew  from  a  child  into  a  hero  in 
war  and  a  scholar  in  peace,  so  Saul,  from 
being  a  hero,  degenerated  into  a  moody  and 
resentful  tyrant.  An  evil  spirit  from  Jeho- 
vah troubled  him.  Really,  as  in  the  margin, 
terrified  him ;  that  is,  Saul  became  subject 
to  fits  of  intense  mental  agony,  under  which 
his  reason  gave  way,  and  temporaiy  insanity, 
accompanied  by  outbreaks  of  violence,  came 
on.  It  is  very  difficult  for  us  with  our  richer 
language  to  give  the  exact  force  of  the 
Hebrew ;  for  the  word  rendered  spirit  is 
literally  wiTid,  air,  hreath.  A  student  of 
Hebrew  can  trace  the  word  niach  through  all 
its  modifications,  from  its  physical  significa- 
tion as  the  material  wind,  to  its  metaphysical 
meaning  as  an  influence  from  God ;  and  then 
still  onward  up  to  the  beings  who  minister 
before  God,  and  of  whom  the  Psalmist  says, 
' '  He  maketh  his  angels  to  %e  winds  "  (Ps.  civ. 
i) ;  till  finally  we  reach  up  unto  the  third  per- 
son of  the  blessed  Trinity :  and  then,  as  with 
this  full  'knowledge  of  the  Divine  nature  we 
read  backward,  we  find  the  presence  of  theHoly 
Ghost  indicated,  where  to  the  Israelite  pro- 
bably there  was  mention  only  of  a  material 
agency.  Jost,  in  his  '  History  of  the  Jews 
since  the  time  of  the  Maccabees,'  vol.  L  p. 
12,  says  that  Saul  Bufiered  under  that  form 
of  madness  called  hypoohond/ria,  and  that 
the  Jews  gave  this  the  name  of  had  air,  the 
words  translated  here  "  evil  spirit ; "  for  they 
held,  he  says,  that  "the  devil  inhabited  the 
air."  So  St.  Paul  speaks  of  the  "  wicked 
spiritual  beings  that  are  in  high  places,"i.  e.  in 
the  loftier  regions  of  the  atmosphere  (Ephes. 
vi  12).  A  study  of  Saul's  character  makes 
it  probable  that,  as  is  often  the  case  with 
men  of  brilliant  genius,  there  was  always  a 
touch  of  insanity  in  his  mental  constitution. 
His  joining  in  the  exercises  of  the  prophets 
(ch.  X.  10 — 12)  was  an  outburst  of  eccentiic 
enthusiasm ;  and  the  excitement  of  his  be- 
haviour in  the  occurrences  narrated  in  ch.  xiv. 
indicate  a  mind  that  might  easily  be  thrown 
off  its  balance.  And  now  he  seems  to  have 
brooded  over  his  deposition  by  Samuel,  and 
instead  of  repenting  to  have  regarded  himself 
as  an  ill-used  man,  and  given  himself  up  to 
despondency,  until  he  became  a  prey  to  me- 
lancholy, and  his  mind  was  overclouded.  His 
servants  rightly  regarded  this  as  a  Divine 
punishment,  but  their  words  are  remark- 
able. Behold,  an  evil  spirit  firom  God  terri- 
fieth  thee.  And  so  a^in,  in  ver.  16,  the  evil 
spirit  from  God,  as  if  they  were  unwilling 
to  ascribe  to  Jehovah,  their  covenant  Deity, 
the  sending  of  this  evil  "influence,"  while 


rightly  they  saw  that  evil  aa  well  as  good 
must  come  from  the  Almighty,  inaamndi  ai 
all  things  are  in  his  hand,  and  whatever  ia 
must  be  by  his  permission.  The  writer  of 
the  book  has  no  such  scruples ;  he  rails  it 
"an  evil  spirit  from  Jehovah,"  because  it 
was  Jehovah,  their  own  theocratic  Eing,  who 
had  dethroned  Saul,  and  withdrawn  from  him 
his  blessing  and  protection. 

Vers.  16 — 18. — A  cunning  player  on  an 
harp.  Literally,  one  skilful  in  striking  the 
chords  on  the  harp.  In  Saul's  case  music 
would  have  a  soothing  influence,  and  turn 
the  current  of  his  thoughts.  His  officers 
suggest,  therefore,  that  search  should  be 
made  for  an  expert  musician,  and  Saul  con- 
sents ;  whereupon  one  of  the  servants  recAi^- 
mended  the  son  of  Jesse.  The  word  used 
here  is  not  the  same  as  that  found  in  vers. 
15,  16,  17.  There  we  have  Saul's  officers; 
here  it  is  TuCarim,  "  young  men."  Thus  it 
was  a  youth  of  David's  own  age,  who  had 
probably  been  with  him  at  Naioth  in  Ea- 
mah,  that  described  him  to  Saul.  The  de- 
scription is  full  and  interesting,  but  it  has 
its  difficulties.  David  is  not  only  skilful  in 
music,  of  which  art  he  would  have  had 
ample  scope  to  manifest  his  powers  in  the 
service  of  the  sanctuary  at  Ramah,  but  he  is 
also  a  mighty  valiant  man,  and  a  man  of 
war,  and  prndent  in  matters,  or,  rather, 
intelligent  in  speech  (see  margin),  as  well  as 
handsome  and  successfuL  Nevertheless,  in 
ch.  xvii  S3 — 36  David  appears  as  a  youth 
about  to  make  his  first  essay  in  fighting ; 
and  though  the  two  exploits  mentioned 
there,  of  killing  the  lion  and  the  bear,  might 
justify  his  friend  in  calling  him  a  mighty 
valiant  man,  literally,  "a  hero  of  valour, 
they  do  not  justify  the  words  a  man  of  war. 
It  is  strange,  moreover,  that  Saul  should 
be  so  entirely  ignorant  of  David's  person 
and  lineage  as  he  is  represented  in  the  narra- 
tive in  ch.  xvii.,  if  thus  David  was  court 
musician,  though  reference  is  made  there 
to  this  visit  of  David  to  Saul  in  ver.  15. 
Possibly,  however,  David  and  this  youth 
may  have  served  together  in  repelling  some 
marauding  expedition  of  the  Philistines,  and 
though  David  may  not  have  actually  done 
much, — nothing,  at  all  events,  so  well  worth 
repeating  to  Saul  as  the  combats  with  the 
wild  beasts,  —  yet  he  may  have  achieved 
enough  to  convince  his  friend  that  he  had 
in  him  the  qualities  of  a  man  of  war,  i.  e.  of 
a  good  soldier.  For  the  rest,  we  must  con- 
clude that  this  first  visit  of  David  was  a  verv 
short  one,  and  that  after  playing  before  Saul 
and  beingapproved  of,  he  then  returned  home 
ready  to  come  again  whenever  summoned, 
but  that  Saul's  malady  did  not  immediately 
return,  and  so  a  sufQcient  interval  elapsed 
for  Saul  not  to  recognise  him  when  b«  saw 
him    under   altered    ciicumstances.     Baul'i 


298 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL 


i.eH.  xTi.  1—23. 


aaeation,  "Whose  son  is  this  stripling?" 
(bh.  xvii  56)  seems  to  imply  that  he  had  a 
sort  of  confused  idea  about  him,  without 
being  able  exactly  to  recall  who  he  was. 
The  ultimate  consequences  of  this  introduc- 
tion to  Saul,  as  well  as  its  immediate  effect, 
are  all  narrated  here  after  the  usual  manner 
of  Old  Testament  history  (see  ch.  vii.  13). 

Vers.  19,  20. — Saul  sent  messengers  to 
fetch  David,  the  description  of  him  as  a 
brave  soldier  being  even  more  to  the  king's 
liking  (see  ch.  xiv.  52)  than  his  skill  in 
music.  &s  a  great  man  might  not  be  ap- 
proached without  a  present  (ch.  iz.  7  ;  z.  4), 
Jesse  sends  one  consisting  of  produce  from 
his  farm.  It  consisted  of  an  ass  of  bread — a 
strange  expression  ;  but  there  is  little  doubt 
that  a  word  has  been  omitted,  and  that  we 
should  read,- with  the  Syriac,  "And  Jesse 
took  an  ass,  and  laded  it  with  bread,  and  a 
skin  of  wine,  and  a  kid."  It  was  not  an  ass 
laden  with  bread,  as  in  the  A.  V.,  but  all 
three  things  were  placed  upon  the  animaL 

Vers.  21  —  23.  —  David  came  to  Saul, 
and  itood  before  him.  The  latter  phrase 
meana,  "  became  on*  of  his  regular  attend- 


ants." This,  and  )it&  Mmg  appointed  one  of 
Saul's  armour-bearer*  happened  only  after 
the  lapse  of  some  time.  The  armour-bearer, 
like  the  esquire  in  the  middle  ages,  had  to 
carry  his  lord's  lance,  and  sword,  and  shiold, 
and  was  always  a  tried  soldier,  and  one 
whom  the  king  trusted.  It  was  apparently 
after  the  combat  with  GoUath  that  Saul  sent 
to  Jesse,  and  asked  that  David  might  be 
always  with  him ;  and  until  his  jealousy 
burst  forth  David  was  very  dear  to  him,  and 
his  music  exercised  a  soothing  influence  upon 
his  melancholy.  At  first,  probably,  these 
fits  of  insanity  came  upon  Saul  only  at  dis- 
tant intervals,  but  afterwards  more  fre- 
quently, and  with  such  loss  of  self-control  that 
he  more  than  once  tried  to  murder  David,  and 
even  Jonathan,  his  own  son.  We  have,  then, 
here  a  summary  of  the  relations  of  Saul  to 
David  until  the  nnfortunate  day  when  the 
king  heard  the  women  ascribe  to  the  youth- 
ful soldier  the  higher  honour  (ch.  xviii.  7) ; 
and    thenceforward  these   friendly  feelings 

fave  way  to  a  growing  dislike  which  deprived 
aul  of  a  faithful  servant,  and  finally  ccst 
him  his  crown  and  life  on  Mount  Gilboa. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1 — 8. — 77ie  progression  of  Providence.  The  facta  er* — 1.  Samuel  is  aroused 
from  his  sorrow  for  Saul  by  a  command  from  God  to  anoint  a  son  of  Jesse. 
2.  Being  in  fear,  he  is  directed  to  go  and  ofier  sacrifice  and  await  further  instruc- 
tions. 3.  Arriving  at  Bethlehem,  he  quiets  the  trembling  elders  and  makes  prepar- 
ation for  the  sacrifice.  It  was  natural  for  Samuel  in  his  retirement  to  cherisli 
sorrow  for  Saul ;  and  his  brooding  over  disappointment  would  become  more  habitual 
as  no  active  measures  were  as  yet  taken  to  provide  a  successor.  The  section  before 
u8  introduces  a  new  phase  in  the  development  of  God's  purposes.  The  part  which 
Samuel  was  called  on  to  play,  and  the  spirit  in  which  he  set  about  it,  bring  out  some 
truths  of  general  import. 

I.  Providence  peooeeds  in  its  obdbblt  courbb  irrespective  of  personal 
DISAPPOINTMENTS  AND  FAILURES.  Saul  was  a  failure ;  Samuel  was  disappointed  ;  and 
to  human  appearance  a  pause  of  very  uncertain  duration  must  be  made  in  the  pro- 
gress of  events.  The  attitude  of  Samuel  was  one  of  sorrowful  waiting.  He  could 
only  nurse  his  grief.  To  man  it  was  as  though  a  break  had  occurred  in  the  con- 
tinuous unfolding  of  the  D.'vine  t.urpose8  in  relation  to  the  Messianic  kingdom.  But 
this  was  only  in  appearance.  God  will  not  have  his  great  purpose  in  Christ  arrested 
in  realisation  by  the  failure  of  one  or  the  brooding  grief  of  another.  During  the 
separation  of  Samuel  from  Saul  the  unseen  hand  had  been  guarding  and  guiding  a 
youth  at  Bethlehem,  and  now  that  his  age  and  the  circumstances  of  the  family  were 
ripening  for  action,  the  sorrowing  prophet  must  rouse  himself  to  share  actively  in 
the  coming  order  of  events.  In  everi/  age  God  has  his  purposes  to  fulfil,  and  they 
continue  to  unfold  notwithstanding  the  unfaithfulness  of  some  and  the  complaining 
voice  of  others.  The  changes  experienced  by  men  are  only  incidents  of  a  moment ; 
the  providence  of  God  is  one  and  continuous.  In  the  process  of  establishing  the 
Messianic  kingdom,  one  by  one  men  and  kingdoms  rose  and  disappeared, — ^the  people 
raged  and  submitted,  wept  and  rejoiced,  were  now  true  and  now  false, — but  all  the 
while  the  one  Will  was  working  on  to  the  setting  of  the  .true  King  in  Zion.  In  the 
history  of  the  Christian  Church,  men  of  the  type  of  Saul  have  been  discarded  and 
others  of  Samuel's  spirit  have  wept  in  solitude  j  but  neither  the  failure  nor  the  pro- 
tracted lorrow  have  been  allowed  to  arrest  the  silent,  sure  progression  towards  tha 


OH.  XTi.  1—23.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  29t 

goal  of  human  existence.  A  careful  survey  shows,  that  as  the  wholesome  economy 
of  the  globe  is  preserved  and  its  ultimate  issue  being  attained  amidst  and  even  by 
the  storms  of  life,  so  there  is  a  wise  and  merciful  Providence  working  on  in  unbroken 
lines  towards  the  realisation  of  the  promise  made  to  Abraham :  "  In  thy  seed  shall  all 
the  nations  of  the  earth  be  blessed." 

II.  God's  servants  should  adapt  themselves  to  the  progression  of  his 
PROVIDENCE.  Men  of  Samuel's  type  must  rouse  themselves  and  join  freely  and 
confidently  in  the  blessed  progression.  New  conditions  are  daily  arising.  The 
instrumen+s  for  the  realising  of  the  Divine  purpose  are  limited  only  by  his  creative 
power.  The  earth  is  his,  and  he  raises  up  a  David  when  a  David  can  best  furnish 
the  next  link  in  the  unbroken  chain.  Faculties  and  aptitudes  need  only  circum- 
stances to  develop  them  into  direct  forces  in  the  Messianic  line.  Samuel  must 
brace  himself  to  this  aspect  of  things,  and  share  in  the  honour  and  the  toil  of 
covering  the  failures  of  some  by  drawing  out  the  better  qualities  of  others.  We 
must  guard  against  the  tendency  to  settle  down  into  a  Tnournfid,  inactive  mood 
because,  forsooth,  the  lines  of  Providence  seem  to  us  to  be  involved  and  past  all  dis- 
entanglement. There  are  men  whose  delight  it  is  always  to  sing  in  the  minor  key. 
They  overlook  the  fact  that  God's  will  is  being  wrought  out  in  spite  of  necessarily 
imperfect  creatures.  There  is  a  voice  calling  on  all  such  to  arise,  to  cease  to  feed  their 
soul  on  regrets,  to  believe  that  the  "covenant  is  ordered  in  all  things,  and  is  sure." 

III.  We  should  avoid  a  prejudgment  of  God's  ways  based  on  partial 
KNOWLEDGE.  The  fear  of  Samuel  finds  its  counterpart  in  the  fear  of  many  when 
called  to  undertake  arduous  duties.  In  his  case  it  was  based  on  partial  information, 
and,  therefore,  while  natural,  was  unreasonable.  He  appears  to  have  concluded 
beforehand  that  he  was  to  go  and  at  once  set  up  an  actual  king,  and  summon  Israel  to 
turn  tlieir  allegiance  from  Saul  to  the  new  monarch.  No  doubt  this  would  be  exasper- 
ating to  Saul,  and  by  many  might  be  regarded  as  treason.  His  reference  to  Saul's 
killing  him  would  not,  therefore,  express  mere  fear  of  death  so  much  us  his  view  of 
consequences  which  it  was  desirable  to  avoid  by  a  less  obtrusive  policy.  Samue' 
had  no  right  to  prejudge  the  appointment  of  God.  He  was  simply  told  to  go  tu 
Bethlehem  with  his  horn  of  oil,  for  that  a  king  was  to  be  forthcoming  from  the  sons 
of  Jesse.  We  possess  only  partial  information  concerning  many  of  the  purposes 
and  methods  of  God.  We  are  not  justified  in  forming  a  judgment  of  all  his  acts  by 
what  is  made  known  to  us.  The  morality  of  all  he  commands  is  ever  the  same, 
whatever  the  future  developments  may  be.  Every  day  will  bring  its  light.  We 
must  not  put  more  into  God's  words  than  he  intends.  If  he  says,  "  Fill  thine  horn 
with  oil  and  go  to  Jesse,"  we  must  not  make  that  mean  that  we  are  to  raise  a  standard 
of  rebellion  and  place  ourselves  in  peril.  Men  do  put  into  Scripture  what  is  not 
there,  and  then  see  consequences  which  arouse  anxiety. 

IV.  Duty  requires  that  we  place  ourselves  in  a  position  to  obtain  further 
light.  •  Samuel,  instead  of  dwelling  on  his  fear,  arising  from  an  unwise  prejudgment 
of  God's  acts,  was  directed  to  go  and  do  the  one  thing,  and  then  look  out  for  what  next 
to  do  (ver.  3).  He  was  to  obey,  and  so  be  in  a  position  to  learn  whether  the  next  stop 
was  to  raise  publicly  a  standard  of  rebellion  around  a  new  king,  or  privately  to  anoint 
the  coming  man  and  let  him  await  the  removal  by  death  of  the  people's  leader.  We 
have  here  an  important  practical  rule.  By  doing  each  duty  fully  as  it  comes  tfe 
qualify  for  more  light  and  greater  aptitude  for  succeeding  duties.  When  bent  on 
the  performance  of  duty,  which  in  its  issues  may  involve  consequences  serious  and 
untraceable,  it  is  well  to  associate  religious  exercises  with  them.  It  is  as  true  for  us 
as  for  Samuel  that,  in  our  sphere,  the  Lord  will  show  us  what  next  to  do.  Faithful- 
ness day  by  day  in  small  things  will  make  us  keen  to  recognise  the  Divine  voice 
with  reference  to  greater  things. 

Vers.  6  —  13.  —  Human  and  Divine  judgments  contrasted.  The  facts  are — 1. 
Samuel,  being  impressed  with  the  appearance  of  Eliab,  concludes  that  he  is  the  com- 
ing king.  2.  An  intimation  is  given  that  Eliab  is  not  the  man,  and  the  reason 
assigned  for  the  imperfect  judgment  of  Samuel  is,  that  man  looks  on  the  outward 
appearance,  but  God  on  the  heart.     3.  It  being  found  that  the  other  sons  were  not 


300  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [.oh.  xvl  1— 19. 

ohoBcn  of  God,  inqniiy  is  made  concerning  the  absent  one.  4.  On  the  youngest 
being  broaght,  Samuel  at  once  recognises  him  as  the  chosen  of  God,  and,  in  obedienc* 
to  the  voice  of  God,  anoints  him  in  the  midst  of  the  family.  6.  Henceforth^  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  rests  on  David.  We  have  here  the  introduction  of  an  entirely 
new  feature  in  the  development  of  Israel's  mission  in  the  world.  The  former  choice 
of  a  king  was  virtually  man's.  The  initiation  of  the  choice  was  taken  in  the  desire 
to  have  a  king  to  embody  their  idea  of  government  (ch.  viii.  6, 19,  20).  In  this  case 
the  people  are  not  consulted  or  heeded.  God  selects  the  man  according  to  bis 
knowledge  of  what  is  best.  The  human  device  had  failed ;  the  Divine  choice  can 
now  come  in  with  impressiveness.  Yet  human  .instrumentality  brings  to  pass  God's 
purpose.  Samuel,  however,  is  influenced  by  the  appearance  of  things,  and  has  to 
learn  that  even  the  judgment  of  the  wise  and  good  is  liable  to  err.  The  essential 
imperfection  of  man's  judgment  as  compared  with  God's  is  explained  by  the  fact 
that  man's  knowledge  does  not  enter  into  the  realities  of  things  as  does  God's. 

I.  Life  is  a  series  of  judgments.  In  every  act  of  perception  there  is  involved 
an  intuitive  judgment ;  and  in  every  comparison  of  different  objects,  as  also  in  every 
cofrse  of  silent  reasoning,  a  decision  is  arrived  at  which  helps  to  form  the  stock  of 
ideas  constituting  our  knowledge.  Thus  do  we  acquire  opinions  respecting  the  value 
of  men  ind  things.  In  some  persons  there  is  a  tendency  to  criticise  human  actions 
and  words,  and  to  proceed  from  what  is  clear  to  the  senses  to  a  deliberate  judgment 
on  the  invisible ;  but  in  all  there  is  a  necessity  of  nature  by  which,  apart  from 
criticism,  some  estimate  is  formed  of  every  one  coming  under  our  observation.  This 
necessity  of  our  nature  is  full  of  advantage.  It  is  the  means  of  enrichment  to  th« 
mind ;  it  furnishes  a  basis  for  friendship ;  it  preserves  from  treachery ;  it  facilitates 
the  intercourse  of  life ;  and  when  the  series  of  judgments  is  formed,  under  the  guid- 
ance of  such  light  as  Christ  gives,  it  constitutes  an  imperishable  fount  of  enjoyment 
when  this  life  is  past. 

II.  God  also  has  his  judgment  of  things.  It  is  not  correct  to  speak  of  God's 
knowledge  in  the  terms  applicable  to  man  ;  for  he  does  not  pass  from  the  small  to 
the  great,  the  obscure  to  the  clear,  the  sensible  to  the  invisible.  Yet  it  may  be  said 
of  God  that  there  is  in  his  mind  a  clear  judgment  respecting  each,  as  to  what  it 
essentially  is,  and  what  its  value  in  the  great  economy  of  the  universe.  To  say  that 
God  knows  us  altogether  is  another  way  of  saying  that  he  has  a  judgment  of  our 
character  and  position.  It  is  a  solemn  fact  for  us  that  the  Eternal  adjudges  our 
actions  and  thoughts  one  by  one  as  they  arise  (Bev.  xx.  12),  and  the  day  of  judg- 
ment will  be  a  summary  of  the  judgments  passed  on  our  actions  one  by  one  as  they 
occur.  If  men  only  had  more  faith  in  God,  and  did  but  let  a  knowledge  of  his 
estimate  of  actions  influence  their  lives,  what  wonders  we  should  see  1 

III.  Man's  judgment  and  God's  judgment  are  often  vert  different.  Possibly, 
while  the  distinction  between  infinite  and  finite  exists,  there  can  never  be  a  perfect 
coincidence  of  the  human  and  Divine  judgment,  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  term. 
But  apart  from  this  there  are  several  aspects  of  the  truth  affirmed  and  illustrated  in 
the  case  of  Samuel.  1.  The  constitution  of  things.  We  know  and  judge  only  of 
the  appearance  of  things.  The  material  universe,  even  when  subjected  to  the 
scrutiny  of  the  most  correct  scientific  appliances,  and  reduced  to  the  last  analysis 
of  elements,  is  only  known  on  tJie  outside.  What  the  ultimate  relation  of  the 
primary  forces  to  the  one  almighty  Power,  and  why  they  work  in  certain  observed 
lines  to  which  we  give  the  name  "  laws,"  we  know  not.  The  same  is  true  of  mind. 
It  is  a  vast  world,  on  the  outer  fringe  only  of  which  we  at  present  can  gaze.  Not 
so  God's.  As  Author  and  Upholder  of  all,  he  has  an  estimate  of  the  internal,  essential 
constitution  of  things  more  perfect  than  our  estimate  of  the  outward  appearance. 
Hence  the  folly  of  men  professing  to  say  what  cannot  be ;  or  that  the  universe,  as 
seen  by  us  in  operation,  is  to  be  and  has  been  always  thus.  Hence  the  wisdom  of 
submitting  to  the  revealed  truth  of  God  when  it  touches  on  his  relation  to  the  order 
of  things  and  the  mysteries  of  his  own  ineffable  Being  (Matt,  xxviii.  19 ;  John  vii. 
28).  2.  T/ie  worth  of  lines  of  action.  Man's  judgment  is  freely  expressed  in  refer- 
ence to  certain  lines  of  action  pursued  by  what  are  called  the  "  great."  The  heroes 
of  the  world  have  often  won  admiration  for  deeds  which,  had  man's  judgment 
been  based  on  a  finer  perception  of  what  constitutes  greatness,  would  have  been 


OK.  xn.  1— IS.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  SOI 

bnri«d  in  oblivion.  Have  not  the  most  costly  monninents  been  raised  to  warriors  T 
Is  not  the  world's  idea  of  "  glory  "that  of  conquering  by  force  of  arms,  or  the  enjoy- 
ment of  wealth  and  splendour  ?  The  judgment  of  God  is  not  thus.  Be  looks  on 
the  heart  of  things.  True  greatness  lies  in  saving,  healing,  curing,  elevating,  purify- 
ing, binding' in  bonds  of  peace  and  good-will.  Imagine  Jesus  Christ  raising  an  Are 
de  Triomphe  I  Imagine  him  conferring  highest  honours  on  men  of  great  and  bloody 
victories  f  Imagine  him  pointing  to  wealth  as  the  goal  of  a  youth's  ambition  I  The 
noblest  men  are  those  who  best  reproduce  the  spirit  and  deeds  of  the  Son  of  Ood. 

5.  Human  character.  Man's  judgment  of  character  is  necessarily  imperfect ;  for 
woids  are  not  always  a  revelation  of  the  inner  man,  but  the  reverse,  and  the  seat  of 
motive  is  not  pierced  by  the  human  eye.  There  is  often  a  worse  heart  than  appears 
on  the  surface  of  a  man's  conduct,  and,  also,  a  better  heart  than  a  man  sometimes 
gets  credit  for.  We  are  too  apt  to  be  influenced  by  prejudice;  social  considerations, 
personal  interests,  and  to  estimate  the  principles  of  others  by  the  narrow  standard  of 
our  own.  Some  men  are  suspicious,  or  self-righteous,  or  limited  in  their  area  of 
observation,  and  therefore  they  can  never  be  sure  of  their  judgment  of  other  men. 
Others  are  easily  caught  by  what  is  fair  and  conformable  to  castom,  and,  like 
Samuel,  they  spring  to  hasty  conclusions.  It  is  better  often  to  fall  into  the  hands 
of  God  than  of  man.  On  the  other  hand,  God's  judgmemt  of  us  is  perfect.  The 
most  secret  avenue  of  thought  and  feeling  is  naked  and  open  to  his  eye.  He  reads 
as  entirely.  His  knowledge  is  not  inferential  from  words  and  actions,  but  is  that  of 
the  disposition  and  hidden  motive  (Ps.  cxxziz.).  4.  Fitness  for  pontion.  Samuel 
was  in  error  in  supposing  that  the  qualities  which  might  be  inferred  from  his  out- 
ward appearance  to  exist  in  Eliab  would  enable  him  to  perform  the  part  required  of 
a  true  king  in  Israel.  God  done  knew  the  high  spiritual  work  to  be  done  by  the 
coming  king,  and  he  alone  could  see  the  latent  qualities  in  David  by  which  it  could 
be  performed.  At  best  our  judgment  is  guess-work.  We  especially  feel  this  in 
seeking  to  fill  up  secular  ofBces,  and  more  so  when  making  appointments  to  spiritual 
duties  (Acts  i.  24 ;  1  Tim.  v.  22). 

General  lessons : — 1.  There  is  abundant  scope  in  life  for  caution,  patience,  charity 
in  onr  estimate  of  others.  2.  The  best  qualities  of  life  are  not  always  those  which 
come  to  the  surface  on  first  acquaintance.  3.  It  should  be  an  effort  to  be  inwardly 
such  as  God  will  approve,  and  then  all  else  will  follow  in  due  course.  4.  Reticence 
in  reference  to  the  character  of  others  is  the  sign  of  a  proper  estimate  of  onr  powers. 

6.  It  should  be  a  spring  of  comfort  to  the  sincere  that  God  knows  them  and  approves 
when  man  errs  in  judgment. 

Vers.  12, 13. — TAe  coming  hinq.  The  facts  are — 1.  The  personal  appearance  of 
David  is  pleasing.  2.  Samuel  is  mstmcted  to  anoint  him  as  the  chosen  of  God.  3. 
Subsequent  to  the  anointing  the  Spirit  of  God  rests  on  David.  4.  Samuel,  having 
performed  this  important  duty,  retires  to  Ramah.  Samuel,  like  many  a  servant  of 
God  in  public  affairs,  carried  in  his  heart  a  great  secret.  He  sought  the  coming 
king,  but  not  a  word  was  said  to  indicate  to  the  family  of  Jesse  the  specific  object 
of  his  mission.  For  anything  they  knew,  the  selection  of  one  of  the  family  might 
be  designed  for  some  purpose  connected  with  Samuel's  work  not  yet  made  plain. 
The  command  to  anoint  was  based,  not  on  any  discovery  of  qualities  from  mere 
outward  appearance,  though  these  were  not  unfavourable,  but  on  God's  knowledge 
^'^  the  inner  life.  Man's  king  had  been  chosen  because  of  his  being  an  average 
representative  of  the  age,  and  an  embodiment  of  the  physical  and  mental  qualities 
agreeable  to  the  people.  The  coming  king  was  chosen  because  God  knew  him  to  be 
the  best  representative  of  the  spiritual  vocation  of  Israel  in  the  world.  The  coming 
king  may  be  regarded  as — 

I.  A  TTPK.  Events  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  were  so  ordered  of 
God  as  to  shadow  forth  the  Christ,  and  both  Old  and  New  Testaments  especially  speak 
of  David  as  the  type  of  the  true  King  in  Zion.  This  is  seen  in  several  respects. 
1.  In  qualities.  0£  course  no  man,  no  words,  no  institutions  can  adequately  set 
forth  the  qudities  of  the  "  express  image  "  of  the  Father's  person.  But,  in  compari- 
son with  others,  David  certainly  shadowed  forth  more  than  any  one  some  of  the 
features  of  character  so  prominent  in  Christ.     NegaMvdy,  there  was  an  absence  of 


801  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xvi.  1—33. 

the  qualities  on  which  men  were  accustomed  to  depend.  Great  physical  strengtn, 
lofty  stature,  overpowering  physique  were  not  his.  And  so  in  Christ  there  was  an 
absence  of  the  outward  form  which  men  of  low  type  count  powerful.  He  was  not 
apparently  competent  to  subdue  the  world  by  the  only  force  which  men  take  count 
of.  But,  positively,  there  was  in  this  coming  king  an  adumbration  of  the  higher 
spiritual  qualities  which  shone  so  brightly  in  Christ.  The  allusions  to  his  personal 
appearance  are  both  to  indicate  that  he  was  not  the  embodiment  of  mere  physical 
force,  and  that  he  did  possess  what  was  of  more  value,  namely,  vigour  and  fresh- 
ness, capable  of  buoyant  effort  in  any  good  endeavour;  grace  of  spirit — gentle, 
approachable,  one  of  whom  the  poor  and  needy  need  not  be  afraid ;  sincerity  and 
ingenuousness  of  mind,  free  from  double  motives  and  self-seeking ;  love  of  what  is 
right  and  good  because  right  and  good,  uncorrupted  by  long  and  dubious  association 
with  the  world's  business ;  sympathy  with  God  that  finds  joy  in  quiet  fellowship 
with  him  by  prayer  or  holy  psalm  ;  aspirations  after  the  future  elevation  of  mankind 
to  a  holier  life  ;  subordination  of  spirit  to  a  higher  will,  for  the  working  out  of  the 
covenant  made  with  his  people.  He  who  sees  not  as  man  sees  knew  that  these 
qualities  were  actually  or  germinally  in  the  youngest  son  of  Jesse.  How  fully  the 
same  were  in  Christ  is  evident  from  his  life  and  words  and  sacrificial  work.  2.  In 
object.  Saul's  reign  was  a  failure  in  so  far  as  concerned  the  elevation  of  the  nation 
to  its  proper  position.  The  object  for  which  the  coming  king  was  anointed  was  to 
deliver  Israel  from  thraldom,  fear,  and  degradation,  and  enable  them  to  more 
worthily  subserve  the  ulterior  spiritual  ends  of  their  existence  as  a  nation.  In  large 
measure  David  did  this.  In  this  he  was  certainly  a  type  of  him  who  was  chosen  for 
the  deliverance  of  a  larger  community  from  worse  evils  ;  and  that,  too,  with  refer- 
ence to  a  permanent  order  of  things  stretching  beyond  the  day  of  Judgment  (John 
xvii. ;  1  Cor.  XV.).  8.  In  call  and  preparation.  Leaving  out  the  fact  that  Beth- 
lehem was  the  place  of  birth  to  David  and  Christ,  we  may  notice  two  or  three  corre- 
spondences. This  youth  was  specially  chosen  of  God  irrespective  of  popular  voice  ; 
he  grew  up  in  quietude,  awaiting  the  opening  of  events  before  entering  on  his  pre- 
destined work  ;  and  was  anointed  with  the  abiding  presence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and 
so  gradually  became  qualified  for  his  important  duties.  Emphatically,  Christ  was 
"the  Chosen  One,"  "Elect,"  "Precious;"  in  youth  he  grew  in  wisdom  and  stature, 
far  removed  from  the  worries  of  public  business,  and  received  the  anointing  of 
the  Spirit  "without  measure." 

II.  A  MODEL.  Confining,  attention  to  the  qualities  of  this  coming  king,  and  the 
objects  that  in  due  course  he  set  before  himself,  he  may  be  regarded  as  the  model  king. 
It  had  been  well  for  Israel  had  all  subsequent  kings  shared  these  qualities  and  kept 
before  them  the  same  lofty  spiritual  ends.  And  although  civilisation  in  the  West 
differs  from  that  of  the  East  in  David's  age,  yet  it  would  be  a  great  boon  to  the 
nations  if  all  kings  and  queens  would  adopt  and  manifest  the  same  principles,  and 
seek  to  harmofiise  all  the  people's  habits  and  aspirations  with  Messiah's  kingdom. 
Likewise,  as  each  Christian  is  to  be  a  "king"  unto  God  (Bev.  i.  6),  we  may  see  in 
the  qualities  and  aspirations  of  this  model  king  what  manner  of  persons  we  ought 
to  be. 

III.  A  CONTRAST.  This  is  obvious.  Saul  was  man's  man ;  David  was  G<iii^ 
Saul  was  man's  device  for  saving  the  people  (ch.  viii.  5,  19,  20)  ;  David  was  God's 
provision  for  raising  them  to  the  Messianic  standard.  Man's  device  failed — the 
instrument  partook  too  largely  of  the  weaknesses  of  the  people  to  be  raised  ,  God's 
provision  succeeded,  in  so  far  as  related  to  national  freedom,  higher  spirituhreleva- 
tion,  and  actual  furtherance  of  Messianic  purposes.  The  contrast  is  suggestive  of  a 
wider  expedient  and  a  more  blessed  provision.  Mankind  was  in  need  of  deliseranoe 
from  the  evils  consequent  on  sin.  During  long  ages  the  human  expedient  of  "  wis 
dom"  was  tried,  but  in  vain.  But  "  after  that  in  the  wisdom  of  God  the  world  by 
wisdom  knew  not  God,  it  pleased  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them 
that  believe."  The  Cptrist  has  become  the  Deliverer.  His  gospel  is  the  power  of 
God  unto  salvation.  By  him  the  highest  and  most  blessed  issues  are  wrought  out 
for  mankind.  The  contrast  may  be  traced,  also,  in  respect  to  our  personal  deliver- 
ance and  elevation  to  the  loftiest  position  attainable  by  human  nature.  Our  bare 
boman  reason,  human  morality,  human  force  of  will  must  issue  in  trouble.   W©  need 


OH.  XVI.  1—23.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  SOS 

the  Anointed  One,  the  God-given  Saviour.     He,  transfusing  our  natural  powers  vdth 
his  glorious  energy,  will  make  us  "  more  than  conquerors. 

General  lessons: — 1.  Great  natures  may  be  nurtured  in  lowly  places  while  engaged 
in  quiet  pursuits.  2.  Amidst  the  intricacies  of  life  God  keeps  his  eye  on  his  loved 
ones,  and  calls  them  forth  in  due  time.  3.  Aspirations  are  awakened,  but  insight 
into  the  future  is  not  perfected  at  once.  David  was  stimulated,  but  knew  not  all  at 
first.  4.  Full  confidence  is  felt  when  God  reveals  his  call:  then  the  "horn,"  not 
the  vial  (ch.  z.  1),  may  be  used.  6.  To  God's  true  servants  the  Holy  Spirit  come« 
Bs  abiding  Helper,  to  teach,  sanctify,  comfort,  and  elevate. 

Vera.  14 — ^23. — Disquietude  caused  by  sin.  The  facts  are — 1.  Saul,  being  left  to 
himself,  is  troubled  by  an  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord.  2.  His  servants,  }n  their  concern 
for  his  peace,  suggest  music  as  an  alleviation,  and  obtain  permission  to  provide  it. 
3.  David,  being  famed  for  music,  is  sent  for,  and  finds  favour  with  Saul.  4.  The 
music,  of  David  brings  relief  to  Saul's  troubled  spirit.  The  narrative  relates  the 
effect  of  God's  judicial  abandonment  of  Saul  to  the  impenitent  spirit  he  had  deliber- 
ately cherished  (ch.  xv.  23 — 29).  The  transaction  between  him  and  Samuel  in 
reference  to  his  sm  and  rejection  had  been  private,  and  during  the  interval  from  the 
departure  to  Bamah  (ch.  xv.  34)  up  to  the  date  of  the  reference  in  ch.  xvi.  14,  the  secret 
knowledge  of  this  fact  had  wrought  its  subjective  efEect  on  the  mind  of  Saul.  The 
secrecy  of  the  business  is  a  clue  to  much  that  follows.  It  matters  not  to  our  purpose 
what  sense  be  put  on  "  an  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord  j "  the  fact  is  clear  that  dis- 
quietude of  mind  follows  on  transgression  duly  brought  home  to  conscience  yet  not 
repented  of,  and  that  this  disquietude  is  aggravated  by  secrecy. 

I.  The  causes  of  mental  disquietude.  There  are  instances  of  mental  dis- 
quietude (Ps.  xlii.  5 ;  John  xii.  27 ;  xiv.  1)  differing  in  character  and  cause  from 
that  before  us.  In  the  case  of  Saul  there  was  a  strange  blending  of  sullen  remorse, 
despondency,  instability,  passion,  fear,  and  desperation.  He  was  sometimes  beyond 
self-control,  and  his  outbursts  aroused  the  apprehensions  of  his  attendants.  The 
manifestations  of  a  disquieted  spirit  will  be  partly  determined  by  natural  tempera- 
ment, and  partly  by  external  conditions,  and  partly  by  bodily  health.  But  of  the 
class  of  which  Saul's  is  an  example,  the  general  causes  are  akin  to  those  which 
operated  in  him.  1.  A  secret  consciousness  of  sin.  That  Saul  had  done  wrong  in 
the  matter  of  the  sacrifice  (ch.  xiii.  13),  the  rash  vow  (ch.  xiv.  45),  and  the  Amalekites 
(ch.  XV.  18,  19)  he  knew  full  well ;  that  the  people  knew  that  something  was  amiss 
with  him  is  evident  from  their  deliverance  of  Jonathan  and  Samuel's  slaying  of  Agag ; 
but  that  their  knowledge  of  Saul's  conduct  was  co-extensive  with  his  own  is  not  pro- 
bable. The  more  private  interviews  with  Samuel  had  brought  him  face  to  face  with 
sin  as  it  appeared  to  the  Lord.  His  admission,  "  I  have  sinned  "  (ch.  xv.  24),  being  a 
conviction  without  true  repentance,  remained  in  his  memory  after  his  final  separation 
from  Samuel.  The  fact  that  his  people  did  not  know  all  only  served  to  make  the  sad 
secret  of  guilt  more  distressing.  Now  it  is  impossible  for  a  man's  spirit  to  be  at  ease 
when  he  carries  with  him  at  home  and  abroad  a  thorough  conviction  of  being  guilty 
before  God.  His  sin  haunts  him  as  a  ghost.  It  creates  a  desire  to  flee  from  himself. 
It  causes  him  to  feel  that  he  is  a  disgraced,  degraded  being,  the  bearer  of  a  dark 
secret,  the  subject  of  a  remorse  that  will  not  die.  2.  Knowledge  of  loss  of  a  goodly 
heritage.  Saul's  mind  dv/elt  much  in  the  past.  He  remembered  the  comparative 
innocence  of  rural  life,  when  seeking  his  father's  asses ;  the  unexpected  honour 
shadowed  forth  by  the  prophet ;  the  private  anointing ;  the  bestowment  of  special 
gifts  that  won  the  confidence  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets ;  the  high  and  elevating 
intercourse  concerning  the  manner  of  the  kingdom,  and  the  solemn  proclamation  of 
his  kingship  over  the  chosen  race.  Now  all  that  was  gone.  It  was  of  the  past  in  a 
double  sense.  The  splendid  prospects  had  faded ;  the  rejection  by  God  had  been 
privately  announced  by  one  whose  word  never  failed.  But  the  future  had  to  be 
feared,  and  Saul,  when  daring  to  look  into  it,  saw  and  felt  that  Providence  was 
against  him.  The  same  elements  of  disappointment,  bitter  regret,  and  fearful  fore- 
boding enter  into  the  life  of  others.  How  many  a  man  in  crowded  cities  is  forced  by 
conscious  secret  guilt  to  look  back  on  a  splendid  heritage  of  good  gone  for  ever  I 
How  many  feel  that,  though  friends  and  the  world  may  flatter,  Ood  has  turned  awav 


804  THE  FIRST  ROOK  OF  SAM  [ch.  xvi.  1—23. 


his  face,  and  that,  being  bent  on  their  secret  guilty  way,  the  whole  force  of  Providence 
is  against  them  in  the  future  I  3.  Fear  of  exposure.  Samuel  took  no  steps  to  de- 
throne Saul  or  to  alienate  the  people  from  him.  He  kept  the  secret  of  rejection,  and 
expressed  tlie  Divine  will  only  in  ceasing  to  hold  oflScial  intercourse  with  Saul,  and 
in  quietly  selecting  David  as  one  favoured  of  God.  Saul  knew  his  coming  doom  in 
rough  outline.  The  dread  of  this  was  foreshadowed  in  the  prayer  that  Samuel  would 
not  openly  dishonour  him  before  the  people  (ch.  xv.  30).  A  moody  temperament, 
naturally  subject  to  impulse,  would  easily  be  urged,  under  this  dread,  now  to  do- 
spending  and  melancholy,  and  now  to  the  sudden  grasping  at  a  shadow  of  hope ;  an  J 
the  alternations  of  hope  and  despair  could  not  but  induce  a  nervous  condition  wliich, 
while  a  guilty  secret  was  covered,  might  express  itself  in  painful  irritability.  The 
fear  of  exposure  drives  men  in  upon  themselves,  and  induces  an  abnormal  condition  of 
mind  and  nerve.  Guilty  men,  who  will  not  sincerely  repent  and  seek  rest  in  Christ, 
know  that  judgment  is  coming,  but  they  take  care  to  hide  that  truth  from  others,  and 
often  bear  a  terrible  strain  on  their  spirits.  4.  Secret  persistence  in  wrong.  Saul 
had  said,  "  I  have  sinned,"  but  lie  never  repented.  No  doubt  he  regretted  the  conse- 
quences that  flowed  from  his  preference  of  self  to  the  will  of  God ;  but  he  still  loved 
to  have  his  own  way.  The  spirit  that  prompted  to  set  aside  God's  command  for  his 
own  choice  was  unchanged.  It  in  itself  was  a  state  of  war;  but  still  it  was  restive, 
unsubdued ;  it  chafed  under  restraint  and  conviction  of  rejection,  and  sometimes 
would  break  out  in  fury  that  its  preferences  should  thus  be  chastised.  "As  a  bullock 
unaccustomed  to  the  yoke."  It  is  this  element  of  cherished  sin,  this  persistent  con- 
tinuance in  the  original  state  of  mind  that  contracted  guilt,  which  poisons  the  entire 
life.  It  sets  the  whole  man  at  war  with  God,  and  renders  irksome  what  to  a  peni- 
tent, lowly  heart  would  be  meekly  borne.  Truly  when  men  sin,  and  "  will  have  it 
80."  they  are  so  far  left  to  themselves  as  to  work  out  in  their  life  all  manner  of 
miseries. 

II.  Temporary  alleviations  of  mental  disquietude.  The  servants  of  Saul 
were  true  philosophers  in  seeking  diversion  for  their  master.  In  cases  of  trouble, 
diversion  from  self  and  the  causes  of  trouble  always  affords  relief.  This  is  lecognised 
by  guilty  men,  who  seek  diversion  in  business,  or  pleasure,  or  public  affairs.  It  is  a 
rule  with  some  wicked  men  to  plunge  more  deeply  into  public  or  private  business  in 
proportion  as  conscience  has  to  be  quieted.  The  diversion  was  of  a  nature  to  soothe 
the  nervous  system.  Music  has  in  it  something  refined  and  pure  and  remote  from 
the  turmoil  and  confusion  of  sinful  life.  As  a  curative  or  alleviative  element  in 
certain  sicknesses  its  power  has  not  been  suflSoiently  developed.  Saul  felt  the  charm, 
and  for  a  while  the  irritation  consequent  on  internal  conflict  was  toned  down.  The 
diversion  would  have  increased  effect  if  associated  with  spiritual  song.  There  is 
evidence  that  David  cultivated  psalmody  in  his  early  years ;  and  who  can  tell  the 
subduing  influence  on  the  restless  Saul  as  David  poured  forth  to  his  harp  strains  of 
love  and  trust  and  hope  in  Godl  We  see  constantly  that  even  the  boldest  of 
impenitent  sinners  are  touched  by  sweet,  simple  hymns,  which  seem  to  call  back  a  lost 
purity,  and  open  up  a  gleam  of  hope  for  the  most  depraved.  The  songs  of  Zion  are 
as  the  echo  to  many  of  long-lost  music.  Their  power  over  men  should  be  diligently 
used.  But  in  all  cases  of  mere  diversion  the  benefit  is  transitory.  The  old  enmity 
remains.     The  old  fears  come  back  in  force.     The  true  remedy  has  not  been  sought. 

III.  The  radical  cure  is  one  and  constant.  What  would  have  been  ths 
course  of  Providence  had  he  truly  repented  we  know  not.  But  looking  at  his  sin  and 
the  rejection  from  the  kingdom  in  the  light  of  Scripture,  we  can  see  what  would 
have  been  the  safe  and  happy  course.  Had  Saul  been  true  to  the  passing  impulse  of 
tenderness,  he  would  have  ceased  in  his  persistence  in  sin,  and  have  humbled  himself 
before  God,  and  sought  mercy  in  the  appointed  way.  Retirement  to  private  life 
would  then  have  been  no  great  burden,  but  rather  a  willing,  loving  homage  to  the 
holiness  of  God.  The  troubled  spirit  would  have  found  rest,  Tlie  cure  for  the 
internal  miseries  of  men  lies  in  self-renunciation  and  placing  the  soul  at  the  mercy  of 
the  great  Saviour.  We  must  cease  to  seek  rest  and  peace  apart  from  his  loving 
embrace. 

General  lessons : — 1.  We  should  faithfully  search  out  how  much  of  our  restlesi- 
BMi  in  daily  life  is  due  to  unforgiven  sin.     2.  In  all  our  efforts  to  alleviate  mental 


-H.  XVI.  1—23.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  306 

distraM  we  shonld  pay  dne  regard  to  moral  oatued,    8.  The  longer  the  delay  in 
repenting  of  sin,  the  more  difficult  it  becomes. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 


xvii.  II.  Courtier  and  outlaw  life-^ha.  xviii. — xxxi. ;  2  Sam.  i.  III.  Eoyal  life 
in  Hebron  and  Jerusalem — 2  Sam.  ii. — xxiv.  ;  1  Eangs  i.,  ii. ;  1  Chron.  x. — xzix.) 
While  Saul  pursued  his  own  way  at  Q-ibeah,  and  Samuel  mourned  for  him  at  Ramah, 
there  dwelt  at  Bethlehem  (twelve  miles  from  the  latter  place)  a  shepherd  youth  who 
was  destined  to  attain  peerless  renown  as  "a  man  of  war,"  a  ruler  over  men,  an 
inspired  poet  and  prophet,  and  (because  of  his  fulfilling  the  idea  of  a  truly  theocratic 
king  more  perfectly  than  any  othei>  a  type  of  One  to  whom  is  given  "  a  name  which 
is  above  every  name."  Once  and  again  the  prophet  had  declared  that  Saul  would  be 
replaced  by  a  worthier  successor  (ch.  ziii.  14 ;  zv.  28) ;  but  who  that  successor 
should  be  he  knew  not  until  the  inner  voice  said,  "Arise,  anoint  him:  for  this  is  he" 
(ver.  12).  David  (the  beloved)  was  sixteen  or  eighteen  years  of  age.  His  personal 
appearance  is  minutely  described.  In  comparison  with  the  gigantic  Saul,  and  even 
his  eldest  brother,  he  was  of  short  stature  (ver.  7).  He  had  reddish  or  auburn  hair, 
and  a  fresh,  florid  complexion,  which  were  rare  among  his  black-locked  and  swarthy 
countiymen ;  a  pleasing  countenance,  keen,  bright  eyes,  and  a  graceful  form.  He 
also  possessed  great  physical  strength,  courage,  intelligence,  sagacity,  and  power  of 
expression  (ver.  18)  ;  above  all,  a  firm  trust  in  God  and  ardent  love  toward  him. 
Many  influences  combined  to  make  him  what  he  was,  and  to  develop  his  extra- 
ordinary gifts;  which,  after  his  anointing,  advanced  rapidly  towards  perfection. 
"  It  is  impossible  to  draw  a  line  of  distinction  between  his  life  before  and  after  his 
designation  by  Samuel ;  but  we  may  well  believe  that  those  elements  of  charactei 
were  already  forming  which  began  to  shine  forth  when  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  camo 
upon  hira."  "  Royalty  was  inborn  in  him."  Among  the /ormaiive  influences  t«fBTie<.\ 
to  were  those  of — 

I.  Family  belationship.     1.  He  belonged  to  one  of  the  most  honourable  fatnUit 
in  Judah,  the  foremost  tribe  of  Israel.     His  ancestor,  Nahshon,  was  prince  of  tli 
tribe  fNum.  ii.  3;   vii.  12);   another,  Salmon,  married  Rahab,  "who  received  tli' 
spies  in  peace  "  (Matt.  i.  6)  ;  another,  Boaz  (great-grandfather  of  David),  marrie( ' 
Ruth  the  Moabitess, "  a  truly  consecrated  flower  of  heathendom  turning  longingly  to  Hk 
light  of  Divine  revelation  in  Israel"  (Ruth  iv.  17).     His  father,  Jesse  (Isa.  xi.  1),  wli 
would  often  speak  of  them,  had  attained  "  a  good  old  age  "  (ch.  xvii.  12),  was  in  pro 
perous  circumstances,  had  eight  sons,  of  whom  David  was  the  youngest,  and  tw 
daughters-in-law  (2  Sam.  xvii.  26),  whose  children — Abishai,  Joab,  and  Asahel  (son 
of  Zeruiah), '  and  Amasa  (son  of  Abigail) — ^were  old  enough  to  be  his  compamons. 
Peculiar  physical,  mental,  and  moral  qualities  often  characterise  certain  families,  are 
transmitted  from  one  generation  to  anotLer,  and  are  sometimes  concentrated  in  a 
single  individual ;    and  great  family  traditions  tend  to  excite  noble  impulses  and 
aspirations.     2.  He  was  connected  (through  Tamar,  Rahab,  Ruth)  with  several  Gen- 
tile races.     This  served  to  enlarge  liis  sympathies,  and  accounts  for  his  friendly 
intercourse  with  them  (ch.  xxii.  3 ;  1  Kings  v.  1).     "  No  prince  of  Israel  was  ever  on 
such  friendly,  intimate  terms  with  the  heathen  about  him  "  ('  Expositor,'  ii.  9).     3. 
He  received  a  godly  training.    Jesse  was  a  man  of  -simple  piety  (vers.  1,6;  ch. 
XX.  6)  ;  his  mother  (whose  name  has  not  been  recorded)  was  a  "  handmaid  of  Jehovah  " 
(Ps.  Ixxxvi.  16  ;  cxvi.  16).     "  How  much  David  owed  to  her  we  cannot  doubt.     The 
memory  of  it  abode  'with  Lim  through  all  the  trials  and  all  the  splendours  of  his  sub- 
sequent career ;  and  hence,  whilst  nowhere  does  he  mention  his  father,  he  seems  in 
these  passages  to  appeal  to  the  memory  of  his  mother's  goodness,  as  at  once  a  special 
token  of  the  Divine  favour  to  himself,  and  an  additional  reason  that  he  should  prove 
himself  the  servant  of  God  "  (W.  L.  .Alexander). 

IL  Obdinaby  occupation.    Whilst  his  brothers  cultivated  fields  and  vineyards  on 
the  slopes  of  Bethlehem,  he  kept  his  father's  sheep  "in  the  wfldemiesa'*  of  Jodali 

1  RAM.  X 


806  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xvi.  1—23. 

\jDh.  xvii.  28),  and  his  lowly  occupation — 1.  Was  adapted  to  nnrture  physical 
tlrength,  agility,  and  endurance ;  to  call  forth  energy,  self-reliance,  and  courage 
amidst  numerous  perils  in  a  wild  country,  from  beasts  of  prey  and  hill  robbers 
(1  Chron.  vii.  21) ;  to  make  him  expert  in  the  use  of  the  sling,  like  the  neighbouring 
Benjamites  (Judges  ix.  16  ;  1  Sam.  xvii.  50 ;  1  Chron.  xii.  2)  ;  and  to  prepare  him  to 
rule  over  men  by  developing  a  sense  of  responsibility,  and  leading  him  to  seek  the 
welfare  and  study  the  increase  and  improvement  of  the  flock  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  70 — 72). 
2.  Left  him  much  alone,  and  afforded  him  leisure  for  meditation  and  the  cultivation 
of  a  taste  for  music,  by  playing  on  the  hand-harp,  which  he  could  easily  carry  with 
him  when  he  "  followed  the  flock,"  and  the  rare  gift  of  song,  in  both  of  which  he  may 
have  greatly  improved,  after  his  anointing,  by  attendance  at  the  school  of  the 
prophets  at  Ramah  (ch.  xix.  18).  To  his  musical  skill  he  owed  his  first  introduction 
to  the  court  of  Saul,  and  by  its  means  he  became  "the  sweet  singer  of  Israel." 
"  With  his  whole  heart  he  sang  songs,  and  loved  him  that  made  him "  (Ecclus. 
xlvii.  8).  3.  Furnished  him  with  the  suggestive  imagery  of  many  of  his  psalms, 
especially  Ps.  xxiii. — '  The  Divine  Shepherd.'  "  It  is  the  echo  of  his  shepherd  life, 
and  breathes  the  very  spirit  of  sunny  confidence  and  of  perfect  rest  in  God." 

III.  The  natural  creation.  To  him  the  visible  universe  was  a  manifestation  of 
the  glory  of  the  invisible,  immanent,  ever-operating  God  (Ps.  civ.).  He  regarded 
nature  "not  as  an  independent  and  self-subsisting  power,  but  rather  as  the  outer 
chamber  of  an  unseen  Presence — a  garment,  a  veil,  which  the  eternal  One  is  ever 
ready  to  break  through  "  (Shairp,  '  Poetic  Inter,  of  Nature ').  Brought  into  direct 
and  constant  communion  with  it,  he  felt  a  boundless  delight  in  contemplating 

"  The  silence  that  is  in  the  stany  sky, 
The  sleep  that  is  among  the  lonely  hills  ;  ** 

in  listening  to  its  mysterious  voices,  and  watching  its  ever-varying  aspects ;  and 
poured  forth  the  thought  and  feeling  of  his  heart  in  songs  of  adoration  and  praise  ; 
as  in  Ps.  xix.  1 — 13 — '  The  heavens  by  day ; '  Ps.  viii. — '  The  heavens  by  night ; ' 
Ps.  xxix.^'The  thunder-storm.'  "What  we  call  the  love  of  nature  is  in  fact  thi 
love  and  admiration  of  the  Deity  (so  far  forth  as  he  is  perceived  in  external  nature) 
The  enthusiasm  with  which  men  surv^  the  endless  vicissitudes  which  the  spectacle 
of  the  universe  exhibits  is  nothing  else  than  the  devotional  temper,  moderated  and 
repressed  by  the  slight  veil  which  sensible  objects  interpose  between  us  and  their 
author"  (D.  Stewart). 

IV.  Historic  revelation.  He  was  instructed  in  "  the  law  of  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  xix. 
7 — 14 — 'The  moral  law'),  and  in  the  wonderful  works  which  he  had  wrought  on 
behalf  of  his  people  in  past  time  (Ps.  cv.)  ;  whilst  the  scenes  amidst  which  his  life 
was  spent  formed  a  pictorial  Bible,  by  which  they  were  more  deeply  impressed  on 
his  memory.  His  acquaintance  with  the  contents  of  the  sacred  records  then  existing 
would  be  greatly  increased  under  the  teaching  of  Samuel.  "Thy  creatures  have 
been  my  books,  but  thy  Scriptures  much  more  '   (E  icon). 

V.  Providential  preservation.  The  same  special  care  which  had  been  exercised 
by  Jehjvali  over  Israel  he  was  taught  to  recognise  in  the  lowly  course  of  his  own 
individual  life.  Once  and  again  he  was  preserved  in  imminent  danger  (ch.  xvii.  37), 
and  thus  his  faith  in  the  ever-watchful  presence  and  providence  of  the  Great  Shep- 
herd grew  strong.  "  Every  Hebrew  might  consider  himself  alone  in  the  presence  of 
God;  the  single  being  to  whom  a  great  revelation  had  been  made,  and  over  whose 
head  an  exceeding  weight  of  glory  was  suspended.  His  personal  welfare  was 
Infinitely  concerned  with  every  event  that  had  taken  place  in  the  miraculous  order  of 
Providence His  belief  in  him  could  not  exist  without  producing,  as  a  neces- 
sary effect,  that  profound  impression  of  passionate  individual  attachment  which  in 
the  Hebrew  authors  always  mingles  with  and  vivifies  their  faith  in  the  Invisible  " 
(A.  H.  Hallara). 

VI.  Religious  inspiration.  Led  by  Divine  grace  from  his  earliest  years  into 
direct  and  loving  communion  with  Jehovah,  he  was  endowed  with  unusual  spiritual 
power,  which,  as  he  faithfully  surrendered  himself  to  it,  wrought  in  him  more  and 
more  mightily,  and  prepared  him  for  his  high  destiny.  And  all  true  spiritual  hfe,  as 
well  as  the  peculiar  endowments  of  the  prophets  and  apostles,  is  a  Divine  inspiration 


cH.  XVI.  1—23.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  807 

(John  iii.  8 ;  Acts  ii.  17).  "  The  morning  of  his  day  this  extraordinary  man  spent 
not  in  colleges  nor  camps  nor  courts,  but  in  following  the  sheep  among  the  pasture! 
of  Bethlehem.  There,  under  the  breathings  of  spring  and  the  blasts  of  winter; 
there,  in  fellowship  with  fields  and  flocks ,  and  silent  stars  ;  there,  with  the  spirit  of 
nature  and  of  God  fresh  upon  him ;  there,  in  the  land  of  vision,  miracle,  and 
angels — ^there  it  was  that  his  character  was  formed,  a  character  which  afterwards 
exhibited  so  rare  a  combination  of  simplicity  and  grandeur,  sensibility  and  power  " 
(0.  Morris). 

Application  (to  the  .young) ; — 1.  The  morning  of  life  is  the  appropriate  season  for 
education — physical,  mental,  moral.  If  neglected,  the  evil  cannot  be  repaired.  2. 
No  educational  advantages  can  be  of  service  without  your  own  diligent  co-operation. 
3.  All  circumstances — adverse  as  well  as  propitious,  solitude  and  society,  work  and 
recreation — may  be  helpful  to  your  highest  progress.  4.  "  Have  faith  in  God,"  the 
secret  of  all  David's  greatness. — D. 

Vers.  4 — 18.  (Bbthibhem.) — David  chosen  and  anointed.  "Arise,  anoint  him: 
for  this  is  he"  (ver.  12).  In  the  exercise  of  his  prophetic  office  Samuel  appears  to 
have  been  accustomed  to  visit  one  place  or  another,  rebuking  crime  and  sin.  Hence 
his  presence  at  Bethlehem  (clad  in  a  mantle,  his  white  hair  flowing  over  his 
shoulders,  holding  a  horn  of  consecrated  oil  in  his  hand,  and  attended,  perhaps,  by  " 
servant),  driving  before  him  a  heifer  for  sacrifice,  filled  the  elders  with  constema 
tion.  Having  quieted  their  fears,  he  showed  special  honour  to  Jesse  and  his  sons 
by  inviting  them  to  be  his  principal  guests  at  a  sacrificial  feast.  By  the  express 
direction  of  God  he  allowed  his  seven  sons,  who  were  introduced  to  him,  to  pass  by 
without  amy  mark  of  distinction ;  and,  having  delayed  the  feast  until  his  youngest 
son  came,  poured  upon  his  head  the  sacred  oil,  and  "  anointed  him  from  amongst  his 
brethren."  "As  far  as  outward  appearances  go  he  simply  chooses  him  as  his  closest 
companion  and  friend  in  the  sacrifice  "  (Ewald).  The  act  may  have  been  regarded 
as  "  somehow  connected  with  admission  to  the  schools  Of  the  prophets,  or  more  pro- 
bably with  some  work  for  God  in  the  future,  which  at  the  proper  time  would  be 
pointed  out."  Its  main  significance  was  known  only  to  the  prophet,  and  was  not 
revealed  by  him  at  the  time  to  any  one  else.  Consider  the  Divine  choice  of  David 
(representing  that  of  others)  to  eminent  spiritual  service  and  honour,  as — 

I.  Differing  from  the  natural  judgment  of  men  (vers. '6,  7).  They  are 
accustomed — 1.  To  judje  according  to  the  ^^ outward  appearance"  which  alone  i.s 
clearly  perceived,  which  is  often  deemed  of  greater  worth  than  properly  belongs  to 
it,  and  which  is  erroneously  supposed  to  be  united  with  corresponding  inward  reality. 
On  this  account  Saul  suited  the  popular  desire.  2.  To  prefer  the  eldest  hefore  the 
youngest;  an  arrangement  which  is  an  imperfect  one,  and  often  set  asid?  by  the 
choice  of  God,  who  thus  exhibits  his  superior  knowledge  and  maintains  his  sovereign 
right.  3.  Even  the  oldest  and  wisest  of  men  fall  into  error  when  left  to  themselves . 
Not  only  did  Jesse  and  the  brethren  of  David  look  upon  him  as  unfit  for  anything 
but  the  lowliest  occupation  (ch.  xvii.  28),  and  unworthy  to  be  called  to  the  sacred 
feast,  but  Samuel  himself  thought  at  first  that  in  Eliab  the  Lord's  anointed  was 
before  him.  The  stone  which  the  builders  refuse  becomes  (by  the  operation  of  God, 
and  to  the  surprise  of  men)  "  the  head  stone  of  the  comer." 

II.  Determined  by  a  right  state  of  heart,  which — 1.  In  the  sight  of  God  is 
of  greater  value  than  anything  else,  and  essential  to  the  worth  of  everything  else. 
2.  Implies  such  qualities  as  sincerity,  humility,  trust,  fidelity,  courage,  purity,  anJ 
unselfish,  generous,  entire  devotion,  which  were  eminently  displayed  by  David.  3 
Renders  capable  of  noble  service,  prompts  to  it,  and  prepares  for  the  highest  honour. 
"  Is  thy  heart  right?  "  (2  Kings  x.  15).  Whatever  great  things  may  lie  in  the  future, 
right-heartedness  is  the  Ajst  condition  of  attaining  them.  "  My  son,  give  me  thine 
heart." 

III.  Distinguishing  its  object  in  a  speciai,  manner  (vers.  11, 12).  1.  Bv  his 
teparationfrom  others,  and  by  directing  their  attention  to  his  worth,  which  hadoeen 
previously  unrecognised.  "  We  will  not  sit  down  till  he  come  hither."  Circum- 
stances often  constrain  attention  to  those  who  have  been  despised.  "The  stone 
which  is  fit  for  the  building  will  not  be  left  in  the  road."    2.  By  indications  of  hia 

x2 


108  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xvi.  1—23. 

being  providentially  dsBtined  to  future  eminence.  David  did  not  liimself  understand 
the  chief  purpose  of  his  anointing,  but  he  must  have  inferred  from  it  that  he  was  not 
always  to  continue  in  "  the  sheep-folds  "  (Ps.  Ixviii.  70),  and  have  been  impelled  to 
/ook  forward  to  a  higher  service  on  behalf  of  Israel.  Possibly  it  was  afterwards 
explained  to  him  by  Samuel  in  more  familiar  intercourse.  3.  By  communicatvms  of 
Divine  grace  and  strength  to  his  inner  life.  "  And  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  came  upon 
David  from  that  day  forward."  It  is  recorded  of  Samson  that  "  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah 
began  to  move  him  at  times  in  the  camp  of  Dan ; "  it  was  the  same  in  the  case  of 
David  (ch.  xvii.  34),  and  in  a  much  higher  manner  (see  ch.  x.  1,  10 ;  xi.  6).  "The 
natural  basis  for  this  symbolism  of  oil  is  its  power  to  dispense  light  and  life,  joy  and 
healing ;  by  which  it  sets  forth  the  Spirit's  dispensation  of  light  and  life,  and  the 
gifts  and  powers  therein  contained  "  (Bahr). 

IV.  Delated  in  the  fulfilment  of  its  ultimatb  aim.  Many  years  must  Bome- 
times  elapse  before  one  who  is  chosen  by  God  for  a  special  work  is  fully  called  to 
its  performance.  Why  such  delay  ?  For — 1.  The  removal  of  obstacles  that  lie  in 
his  path.  Saul  must  be  suffered  to  go  to  the  natural  termination  of  his  melancholy 
career.  2.  The  occurrence  of  circumstances  that  make  it  necessary  and  cause  it  to 
be  generally  desired.  The  people  must  learn  by  experience  the  folly  of  their  former 
cnoice,  and  their  need  of  another  and  different  kind  of  ruler.  3.  His  own  instruction, 
discipline,  and  preparation.  The  proper  course  for  him  who  is  impelled  to  higher 
semce  is  patiently  to  bide  his  time  in  the  humble  and  faithful  discharge  of  the  duty 
that  lies  immediately  before  him.  "  David's  peculiar  excellence  is  that  of  fidelity  to 
the  trust  committed  to  him;  a  firm,  uncompromising,  single-hearted  devotion  to 
the  cause  of  God,  and  a  burning  zeal  for  his  honour.  This  characteristic  virtue  is 
especially,  illustrated  in  the  early  years  of  his  life.  Having  home  his  trial.of  obedi- 
ence well,  in  which  Saul  had  failed,  then  at  length  he  was  intrusted  with  a  soli  of 
discretionary  power  to  use  in  his  Master's  service  "  (J.  H.  Newman). — D. 

Ver.  7.  (Bethlehem.) — Gods  regard  to  the  heart.  "  The  heart  is  the  centr«  of 
(1)  the  bodily  life ;  (2)  the  spiritual-psychical  life — will  and  desire,  thought  and 
conception,  the  feelings  xnd  the  affections ;  and  (3)  the  moral  life,  so  that  all  moral 
conditions — from  the  nighest  mystical  love  of  God  to  the  self-deifying  pride  and 
the  darkening  and  hardening — are  concentrated  in  the  heart  as  the  innermost  life- 
circle  of  humanity"  (Delitzsch,  'Bib.  Psychology,'  p.  295).  The  declaration  that 
"  Jehovah  looketh  on  the  heart"  is  profitable  for — 

I.  The  coekeotion  of  errors  into  which  we  too  commonly  fall  in  relation  to 
others.  1.  The  adoption  of  an  imperfect  standard  of  human  worth : — "  the  outward 
appearance,"  personal  strength  and  beauty ;  wealth  and  social  position ;  cleverness, 
education,  and  refinement  of  manners ;  external  morality,  ceremonial  observances, 
and  religious  zeal.  These  things  are  not  to  be  despised,  but  they  may  exist  whilst 
the  chief  thing  is  wanting — a  right  state  of  heart.  "One  thing  thou  lackest."  2. 
The  assumption  that  we  are  competent  judges  of  the  character  and  worlh  of  others. 
But  we  cannot  look  into  their  hearts ;  and  what  we  see  is  an  imperfect  index  to 
them,  and  liable  to  mislead  us.  3.  The  formation  of  false  judgments  concerning 
them.     How  common  this  is  our  Lord's  words  indicate  (Matt.  vii.  1). 

II.  The  inculcation  op  truths  which  are  often  forgotten  in  relation  to  oureelves. 
1.  That  we  are  liable  to  be  deceived  concerning  the  real  state  of  our  hearts,  and  to 
think  of  ourselves  "more  highly  than  we  ought  to  think"  (Rom.  xii.  3).  2.  That 
the  heart  of  each  of  us  lies  open  to  the  inspection  of  God:  certainly,  directly,  com- 
pletely, and  constantly.  He  beholds  its  deepest  motive,  its  supreme  affection  and 
ruling  purpose.  However  we  may  deceive  ourselves  or  others,  we  cannot  deceive 
him  (1  Chron.  xxviii.  9 ;  Ps.  xliv.  21 ;  Prov.  xv.  11 ;  Jer.  xvii.  9, 10 ;  Luke  xvi.  l5 ; 
Rev.  ii.  23).  '  3.  That  only  a  right  state  of  heart  can  meet  with  his  approval.  It  is 
the  effect  of  his  grace,  and  he  cannot  but  take  pleasure  in  his  own  work ;  but  "the 
neart  of  the  wicked  is  little  worth  "  (Prov.  x.  20). 

IIL  The  enforcement  of  duties  which  ought  to  be  diligently  fulfilled  in  relation 
both  to  ourselves  and  others.  1.  To  seek  supremely  that  our  own  hearts  be  set  right 
and  kept  right — by  self-examination,  self-restraint,  and  fervent  prayer  to  him  "who 
searcheth  the   reins  and  the  hearts"  (Ps.  Ii.  10;   cxxxix.  2.S,   24;   J»r    xnti.  .B3). 


ctt.  XVi.  1— aa,]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  36i 

2.  To  endure  patiently  the  wrong  judgments  that  others  may  form  and  utter  concern- 
ing us.  If  we  sometimes  judge  wrongly  of  them,  need  we  wonder  that  they  should 
judge  wrongly  of  us  ?  "  Unto  God  would  I  commit  my  cause  "  (Job  v.  8).  3.  To 
judge  charitably  of  their  motives,  character,  and  worth.  A  judgment  must  iome- 
times  be  formed  (Matt.  vii.  15 — 20) ;  but  "let  all  your  things  be  done  with  charity" 
(1  Cor.  xvi.  14).— D. 

Vers.  14 — 16.  (Gibeah.) — Menial  and  moral  effects  of  transgression.  The  soul  is 
an  arena  where  light  and  darkness,  good  and  evil,  heaven  and  hell,  strive  for  mastery. 
But  it  is  not  an  unconscious  scene  or  passive  prize  of  the  conflict.  It  is  endowed 
with  the  power  of  freely  choosing  right  or  wrong,  and,  with  every  exercise  of  this 
power,  comes  more  or  less  under  the  dominion  of  the  one  or  the  other.  Saul  was 
highly  exalted,  but  by  his  wilful  disobedience  sank  to  the  lowest  point  of  degrada- 
tion. His  sin  was  followed  by  lamentable  effects  in  his  mental  and  moral  nature, 
and  (since  soul  and  body  are  intimately  connected,  and  mutually  aSect  each  other) 
doubtless  also  in  his  physical  constitution.  His  malady  has  been  said  to  be  "  the 
first  example  of  what  has  been  called  in  after  times  religious  madness "  (Stanley). 
His  condition  was,  in  many  respects,  peculiar;  but  it  vividly  illustrates  the  mental 
and  moral  effects  which  always,  in  greater  or  less  degree,  flow  from  peraistent  trans- 
gression, viz. : — 

I.  The  withdrawal  of  thb  Divine  Spirit.  "  And  the  Spirit  of  Jehovah  departed 
from  Saul  "  (ver.  14 ;  ch.  1. 10).  1.  His  presence  in  men  is  the  source  of  their  highest 
excellence.  What  a  change  it  wrought  in  Saul,  turning  him  into, "  another  man." 
It  imparts  enlightenment,  strength,  courage,  order,  harmony,  and  peace ;  restrains 
and  protects ;  and,  in  the  full  measure  of  its  influence,  quickens,  sanctifies,  and  saves 
(Isa.  xi.  2  J  Gal.  v.  22 ;  Ephes.  v.  9).  2.  His  continuance  in  them  depends  on  the 
observance  of  appropriate  conditions.  He  is  often  compared  with  the  teind,  water, 
and  fire,  the  most  powerful  forces  of  the  natural  world  ;  and  as  there  are  conditiouri 
according  to  which  they  operate,  so  there  are  conditions  according  to  which  he  pats 
forth  his  might.  These  are,  humble  and  earnest  attention  to  the  word  of  the  Loi'd 
sincere  endeavour  to  be  true,  just,  and  good,  and  believing  and  persevering  prayar 

3.  His  departure  is  rendered  necessary  by  the  neglect  of  those  conditions.  "  Thoj- 
rebelled  and  vexed  his  Holy  Spirit,"  &c.  (Isa.  Ixiii.  10 ;  Acts  vii.  61 ;  Ephes. 
iv.  10 ;  1  Thess.  v.  19).  And  with  his  departure  the  effects  of  his  gracious  in- 
fluence also  depart.  Hence  David  prayed  so  fervently,  "Take  not  thy  Holy  Spirit 
from  me." 

II.  S0BJEOTIOK  TO  AN  EVIL  INFLUENCE.  "  And  an  evil  spirit /rom  Jehovah  troubled 
him."  The  expression  is  only  used  once  before  (Judges  ix.  23), — "  God  sent  an  evil 
spirit  between  the  men  of  Abimelech  and  the  men  of  Shechem  "  (producing  discord, 
treachery,  and  strife),  —  and  denotes  a  breath,  influence,  agency,  or  messenger 
(1  Kings  xxii.  22)  which — 1.  Prevails  only  after  the  withdrawal  of  the  Divine  Spirit. 
When  the  soul  ceases  to  be  governed  by  God,  it  lies  open  to  the  power  of  evil,  and 
comes  under  its  dominion.  2.  Is  sent  in  just  retribution  fur  sin.  "  No  man  living 
needs  a  heavier  chastisement  from  the  Almighty  than  the  letting  his  own  passions 
loose  upon  him  "  (Delany).  But  the  expression  means  more  than  this.  "  It  is  a 
spiritual  agency  of  God,  which  brings  to  bear  upon  Saul  the  dark  and  fiery  powers 
of  Divine  wrath  which  he  has  aroused  by  sin  "  (Delitzsch).  Even  that  which  is  in 
itself  good  becomes  evil  to  those  who  cherish  an  evil  disposition.  As  the  same  rays 
of  the  sun  which  melt  the  ice  harden  the  clay,  so  the  same  gospel  which  is  "  a  savoni 
of  life  unto  life  "  in  some  is  "  a  savour  of  death  unto  death  in  others  (2  Cor.  ii.  16). 
And  it  is  God  who  appoints  and  effectuates  the  forces  of  retribution.  "  The  punitive 
justice  of  God  is  a  g^at  fact.  It  is  stamped  on  all  the  darker  phenomena  of  human 
life— disease,  insanity,  and  death.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  sin  to  entail  suffering,  and 
work  itself,  as  an  element  of  punishment,  into  all  the  complicated  web  of  human 
existence"  (Tulloch).  3.  Implies  the  domination  of  the  kingdom  of  darknett, 
Josephus,  speaking  according  to  the  conomon  belief  of  a  later  age,  attributes  the 
malady  oi  Saul  to  demoniacal  agency,  "  It  was  probably  a  kind  of  posaeisionj  at 
least  at  times,  and  in  its  highest  stage.  As  a  punishment  for  having  giv>tn  hun- 
sebE  willingly  into  the  power  of  the  kingdom  ot  darkness,  he  woa  also  abandoned 


•10  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xvi.  1—23 

physically  to  this  power  "  (Herstenberg).    How  fearful  is  that  realm  of  rebellion,  evil 
and  disorder  to  which  men  become  allied  and  subject  by  their  sin  1 

III.  The  experience  op  uncontrollable  fear  ;  "  troubled  him  "  —  terrified, 
choked  him.  1.  In  connectiori  with  the  vjorkitiff  of  peruliar  and  painful  tJwugkts : 
brooding  over  the  secret  of  rejection,  which  miglit  not  be  revealed  to  any  one;  the 
sense  of  disturbed  relationship  with  God,  and  of  liis  displeasure,  the  removal  of  which 
there  was  no  disposition  to  seek  by  hunljle  penitence  and  prayer.  2.  In  the  darken- 
ing aspect  of  present  circumstances  and  future  prospects;  suspicion  and  "royal 
jealousy,  before  which  vanish  at  last  all  consistent  action,  all  wise  and  moderate 
rule"  (Ewald).  3.  In  occasional  melancholy,  despondency,  and  distress,  irrational 
imaginations  and  terrors  (Job  vi.  4),  and  fits  of  violent  and  ungovernable  passion 
(ch.  xviii.  10,  11).  "There  are  few  more  diflScult  questions  in  the  case  of  minds 
utterly  distempered  and  disordered  as  his  was  than  to  determine  where  sin  or  moral 
disease  has  ended,  and  madness  or  mental  disease  has  begun"  (Trench).  Sin  not 
only  disturbs  the  moral  balance  of  the  soul,  but  also  disorders  the  whole  nature  of 
man.  It  is  itself  a  kind  of  madness,  from  which  the  sinner  needs  to  "come  to 
himself  "  (Luke  iv.  17).  "  Madness  is  in  their  hearts,"  &c.  (Eccles.  ix.  3 ;  2  Pet. 
ii.  6). 

IV._  The  tendency  to  rapid  detebioratioh.  1.  In  the  case  of  the  malady 
occasioned  by  sin  there  is  no  self-healing  povjer  in  man,  as  in  many  bodily  diseases, 
but  it  tends  to  become  worse  and  worse.  2.  Its  fatal  course  may  often  be  distinctly 
marked.  "These  attacks  of  madness  gave  place  to  hatred,  which  developed  itself  in 
full  consciousness  to  a  most  deliberately-planned  hostility"  (Keil).  His  courage 
gave  place  to  weakness  and  cowardice ;  general  fear  and  suspicion  fixed  on  a  par- 
ticular object  in  envy  and  hatred,  displayed  at  first  privately,  afterwards  publicly, 
and  becoming  an  all-absorbing  passion.  "  The  evil  spirit  that  came  upon  him  from 
or  by  permission  of  the  Lord  was  the  evil  spirit  of  melancholy,  jealousy,  suspicion, 
hatred,  envy,  malice,  and  cruelty,  that  governed  him  all  the  after  part  of  his  life ;  to 
which  he  gave  himself  up,  and  sacrificed  every  consideration  of  honour,  duty,  and 
interest  whatsoever "  (Chandler).  3.  It  is,  nevertheless,  ajnenable  to  the  remedial 
inJlutneeM  which  Ood,  in  his  inmiite  mercy,  has  provided. 

"  AU  cures  were  tried :  philosophy  talked  long 

Of  lofty  reason's  self-controlling  power  ; 
He  frowned,  but  spake  not.     Friendship's  silver  tonga* 

Poured  mild  persuasions  on  hia  calmer  hour : 
He  wept ;  alas  1  it  was  a  bootless  shower 

As  ever  slaked  the  desert.    Priests  would  call 
On  Heaven  for  aid  ;  but  then  his  brow  would  lower 

With  treble  gloom.     Peace  1    Heaven  is  good  to  all  j 
To  all,  he  sighed,  but  one, — God  hears  no  prayer  for  SanL 

At  length  one  spake  of  Music  "  (Hankinson). 

— D. 

Vers.  19,  20.  (Bethlehem.) — Setting  <mt  in  life.  David,  setting  out  from  his 
father's  house  at  Bethlehem  to  go  to  the  court  of  Saul  at  Gibeah  (a  distance  of  about 
ten  miles),  presents  a  picture  of  many  a  youth  leaving  home  for  more  public  life — to 
enter  a  profession,  learn  a  business,  or  occupy  a  responsible  position.     Notice — 

I.  The  feculiab  character  of  the  step.  1.  Some  such  step  is  necessary.  A 
/oung  man  cannot  always  continue  under  the  paternal  roof.  He  must  go  forth  into 
the  world,  be  thrown  on  his  own  resources,  and  make  his  own  way.  2.  Its  nature 
and  direction  are  commonly  determined  by  his  ability  and  tastes,  and  the  use  he 
makes  of  early  advantages  (ver.  18).  3.  It  is  also  greatly  influenced  by  the  wishes 
of  others.  David  was  sent  for  by  Saul,  and  sent  to  him  by  his  father.  4.  It  is 
ordered  by  Divine  providence.  This  was  plainly  the  case  with  David.  And  we  are 
as  truly  the  children  of  providence  as  he  was.  Ood  has  a  purpose  concerning  eaob 
ofna. 

"  There's  a  Divinity  that  shapeB  out  end*, 
Rough-hew  them  as  we  will." 


OH,  XVI.  1— 23.J  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL,  Sll 

5.  It  opens  a  wider  field  for  the  exercise  of  natural  or  acquired  abilities,  and  tha 
attainment  of  desired  objects.  6.  It  determines  in  most  instances,  the  subsequent 
course  of  life.  It  is  like  the  commencement  of  a  river ;  or  like  the  rolling  of  a  stona 
down  the  mountain-side,  the  course  of  which  is  determined  by  the  direction  and 
impulse  which  it  first  receives. 

II.  The  propbr  spirit  in  which  it  should  be  taken.  1.  Due  consideration ;  not 
thoughtlessly  or  rashly.  2.  Lowly  and  loyal  obedience  to  rightful  claims.  8. 
Cheerful  anticipation  of  new  scenes,  duties,  and  enjoyments.  4.  Not  unmingled 
with  misgiving  and  self-distrust  at  the  prospect  of  new  difficulties  and  trials,  and 
watchfulness  against  new  and  strong  temptations.  6.  Simple  trust  in  God  and 
fervent  prayer  for  his  guidance.  6.  Firm  determination  to  be  true  to  oneself 
faithful  to  God,  and  useful  to  men. 

"  Now  needs  thy  best  of  man ; 
For  not  on  downy  plumes,  nor  under  shade 
Of  canopy  reposing,  fame  is  won  ; 
Without  which  whosoe'er  consumes  his  days 
Leaveth  such  vestige  of  himself  on  earth 
As  smoke  in  air,  or  foam  upon  the  wave  "  (Dante, '  Infeme,'  zzIt.). 

Consider — 1.  That  life  itself  is  a  setting  out  in  a  course  which  will  never  ter- 
minate. 2.  That  the  manner  in  which  this  step  is  taken  will  decide  vour  future 
destiny. — D. 

_  Ver.  23.  (Gibeah.) — The  soothing  influence  of  musici  All  men,  with  rare  excep- 
tions, are  susceptible  to  the  influence  of  music ;  some  men  peculiarly  so.  It  was 
thus  with  Saul  (oh.  x.  10  ;  xix.  23)  ;  and  on  this  account,  perhaps,  his  servants  sug- 
gested the  sending  for  a  skilful  musician  to  soothe  his  melancholy.  The  visit  of 
David  had  the  desired  effect,  and  he  "  went  and  returned  "  (was  going  and  returning) 
"to  feed  his  father's  sheep  at  Bethlehem"  (ch.  xvii.  15,  65 — 58;  xvi.  21,  22 — a 
general,  and  to  some  extent  prospective,  summary  of  his  early  relations  with  Saul). 
Consider  the  soothing  influence  of  music  as — 

I.  Provided  by  Divine  providence.  It  is  one  of  the  manifold  indications  of  the 
goodness  of  God  jn  the  adaptation  of  man  to  his  surroundings  so  as  to  derive  enjoy- 
ment from  them.  The  world  is  full  of  music.  In  trouble  and  agitation  especially 
it  soothes  and  cheers.  "  It  brings  a  tone  out  of  the  higher  worlds  into  the  spirit  of 
the  hearer  "  (Koster).  Its  direct  influence  is  exerted  upon  the  nervous  system,  which 
is  intimately  connected  with  all  mental  activity.  As  the  condition  of  the  brain  and 
nerves  is  affected  by  it,  so  also  it  affects  the  state  of  the  mind. 

"  There  is  in  souls  a  sympathy  Trith  sounds ; 
Some  chord  in  unison  with  what  we  hear 
Is  touched  within  us,  and  the  heart  replies"  (Cowper). 

"  Pythagoras  quieted  the  perturbations  of  the  mind  with  a  harp "  (Seneca,  '  On 
Anger').  Elisha,  when  chafed  and  disturbed  in  spirit,  called  for  a  minstrel,  and  was 
prepared  by  the  soothing  strains  of  his  harp  for  prophetic  inspiration  (2  Kings  iii.  6). 
Divine  providence  ordered  the  visit  of  David  to  Saul,  over  whom  mercy  still  lingered. 
He  was  not  only  freed  from  the  immediate  pressure  of  fear  and  despondency,  but 
also  restored  to  a  mental  condition  which  was  favourable  to  repentance  and  return  to 
God,  Music  is  a  means  of  grace,  and  when  rightly  used  conveys  much  spiritual 
benefit  to  men.  It  is  "  one  of  the  fairest  and  most  glorious  gifts  of  God,  to  which 
Satan  is  a  bitter  enemy ;  for  it  removes  from  the  heart  the  weight  of  sorrow  and  the 
fascination  of  evil  thoughts  "  (Luther).  "  It  is  a  language  by  itself,  just  as  perfect 
in  its  way  as  speech,  as  words ;  just  as  Divine,  just  as  blessed,  AH  melody  and  all 
harmony,  all  music  upon  earth,  is  beautiful  in  as  far  as  it  is  a  pattern  and  type  of  tha 
everlasting  music  which  is  in  heaven  "  (C.  Kiiigsley). 

II.  Productive  op  extraordinary  epfbots.  "  Saul  was  refreshed,  and  was  well, 
and  the  evil  spirit  departed  from  him."  "  The  music  was  more  than  a  mere  palliative. 
It  brought  back  for  the  time  the  sense  of  a  true  order,  a  secret,  inward  harmony,  u 
assurance  that  it  is  near  every  man,  and  that  he  may  enter  into  it "  (Maurice). 


Si  2  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SamCeL  L^a-  xvl  1—23 

"  He  is  Saul,  ye  remember  in  glory, — ere  error  had  bent 
The  broad  brow  from  the  daily  communion  ;  and  still,  though  much  spent 
Be  the  life  and  the  bearing  that  front  you,  the  same,  God  did  choosej 
To  receive  what  a  man  may  waste,  desecrate,  never  quite  lose  "  (Browning,  'Sanl'). 

Many  other  instanceB  of  a  similar  nature,  both  in  ancient  and  modem  times,  hava 
been  recorded.  One  of  the  most  noteworthy  is  that  of  Philip  V.  of  Spain,  who  wag 
restored  from  profoundest  melancholy  by  the  magical  voice  of  Parinelli  (see  Bochart ; 
Burton, ■  Anat.  of  Mel. ; '  Kitto, ' D.  B.  Illus.;'Jacox,' Script. Texts  Illus.;'Bate,  'Cyc. 
of  Illus.*).  "  Psalmody  is  the  calm  of  the  soul,  the  repose  of  the  spirit,  the  arbiter 
of  peace.  It  silences  the  wave  and  conciliates  the  whirlwind  of  our  passions.  It 
is  an  engenderer  of  friendship,  a  healer  of  dissension,  a  reconciler  of  enemies.  It 
repels  the  demons,  lures  the  ministry  of  angels,  shields  us  from  nightly  terrors,  and 
refreshes  us  in  daily  toil "  (Basil). 

III.  Perfected  by  special  endowments  possessed  by  the  musician.  David's 
harp  was  the  accompaniment  of  his  .voice  as  he  sang  "  psalms  and  hymns  nnd 
spiritual  songs  "  (see  Josephus),  expressive  of  the  sympathy,  confidence,  hope,  and 
joy  of  his  soul ;  "  the  prelude  to  the  harpings  and  songs  which  flowed  from  the  harp 
of  the  future  royal  singer."  His  musical  and  poetic  gifts  were  great,  and  they  were 
consecrated  (as  all  such  gifts  should  be)  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  men. 
"Did  the  music  banish  the  demon?  Not  so.  But  the  high  frame  of  mind  into 
which  the  king  was  brought  by  it  sufSced  to  limit  at  least  the  sphere  of  the  opera- 
tion of  the  evil  spirit  within  him  ;  while  the  full,  clear,  conscious  life  of  faith  on  the 
part  of  Saul  would  have  altogether  destroyed  the  power  of  the  wicked  one.  Besides, 
the  silent  intercessions  of  David  sent  up  to  heaven  on  the  wings  of  the  music  of  his 
harp  must  have  contributed  not  a  little  to  the  results  with  which  his  melodies  Were 
crowned  "  (Krummacher).     "  The  Lord  was  with  him  "  (ver.  18). 

IV.  Partial  and  temporary  in  its  wholesome  power.  Saul  was  not  completely 
cured  of  his  malady.  A  breathing-space  was  afforded  him  for  seeking  God,  and 
if  he  had  faithfully  availed  himself  of  it  he  might  have  been  permanently  preserved 
from  its  return.  But  he  failed  to  do  so.  On  the  indulgence  of  envy,  "  the  evil  spirit 
from  God  came  upon  him "  again  (ch.  xviii.  10 ;  six.  10)  with  greater  power  than 
before  (Matt.  xii.  45),  and  that  which  formerly  calmed  and  gladdened  him  now  ex- 
cited him  ta  demoniacal  frenzy  and  murderous  passion.  "It  is  said  that  the  evil 
spirit  departed,  but  not  that  the  good  spirit  returned.  Saul's  trouble  was  alleviated, 
but  not  removed.  The  disease  was  still  there.  The  results  of  David's  harp  were 
negative  and  superficial.  So  is  it  with  the  sinner  still.  There  are  many  outward 
applications  which  act  like  spiritual  chloroform  upon  the  soul.  They  soothe  and 
calm  and  please,  but  that  is  all ;  they  do  not  go  below  the  surface,  nor  touch  the  deep- 
seated  malady  within.  Our  age  is  full  of  such  appliances,  literary  and  religious,  all 
got  up  for  the  purpose  of  soothing  the  troubled  spirits  of  men.  Excitement,  gaiety, 
balls,  theatres,  operas,  concerts,  ecclesiastical  music,  dresses,  performances,  what  are 
all  these  but  man's  appliances  for  casting  out  the  evil  spirit  and  healing  the  soul's 
hurt  without  having  recourse  to  God's  remedy"  (Bonar,  '  Thoughts  and  Themes '). 

Learn — 1.  That  the  excellent  gift  of  music  should  excite  our  admiration  of  the 
Giver, "  the  First  Composer,"  and  our  devout  thankfulness  to  him.  2.  That  it  ought 
not  to  be  perverted  from  its  proper  intention,  and  employed,  as  it  too  frequently  is,  in 
the  service  of  sin  (Isa.  v.  12 ;  Amos  vi.  6).  3.  That  the  soothing  and  elevating 
effect  of  a  "  concord  of  sweet  sounds  "  must  not  be  mistaken  for  the  peace  and  joy 
of  true  religion,  4.  That  nothing  but  the  gospel  of  Christ  and  the  power  of  his 
Spirit  can  efEect  the  moral  and  spiritual  renewal  of  man,  and  restore  him  to  "  his  right 
mind  "  (Mark  v.  16).— D. 

Vers.  12,  13. — The  chosen  one.  The  Iiord  is  never  without  resource.  If  Saul  fail, 
the  God  of  Israel  has  another  and  a  better  man  in  training  for  the  post  which  Saul 
discredited.  This  new  personage  now  appears  on  the  page  of  history,  and  he  will 
occupy  many  pages.  It  is  David,  the  hero,  the  musician,  the  poet,  the  warrior,  tha 
ruler,  a  many-sided  man,  a  star  of  the  first  magnitude.  1,  Mot  chosen  according  to 
the  thoughts  of  men.     Samuel,  who  at  first  hesitated  to  go  to  Bethlehem  on  sa 


CH.  XVI.  1—28.]  TflE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  81i 

dangerons  an  errand  as  the  Lord  prescribed  to  him,  when  he  did  go  was  inclined 
to  be  over-hasty.  AsBuming  that  a  new  king  who  should  supplant  Saul  ought  to  be 
not  inferior  to  him  in  stature  and  strength,  the  prophet  at  once  fixed  on  Eliab,  the 
eldest  son  in  Jesse's  family,  as  the  one  who  should  be  the  Lord's  anointed.  Here 
was  a  man  able  to  cope  with,  or  worthy  to  succeed,  tlie  almost  gigantic  son  of  Eosh. 
But  the  Lord  corrected  his  servant's  mistake.  The  time  was  past  for  choosing  a 
leader  on  the  score  of  "  outward  appearance."  The  Lord  sought  for  the  regal 
position  a  man  whose  heart  would  be  true  and  obedient.  Now  Eliab's  heart,  aa  the 
next  chapter  shows,  was  small,  though  his  body  was  large  ;  his  temper  was  vain  and 
overbearing.  So  he  had  to  pass ;  and  all  his  brothers  who  were  present  at  the  feast 
had  to  pass.  Not  one  of  them  had  such  a  heart  as  the  Lord  required ;  and  it  is  a 
significant  fact  that  we  never  read  of  any  of  these  men  in  after  years  as  playing  any 
honourable  or  memorable  part  in  the  history  of  their  country,  unless  the  Septuagint 
reading  of  1  Chron.  xxvii.  18  be  right,  and  the  Eliab  here  mentioned  held  the  ofSce 
of  a  tribal  chief  under  his  royal  brother.  2.  Chosen,  according  to  the  thoughts  oj 
God.  When  the  young  shepherd,  being  sent  for  by  his  father,  entered  the  chamber 
with  his  bright  hair  and  fair  countenance,  fresh  from  the  fields,  the  Lord  bade  Samuel 
anoint  him.  "  This  is  he."  The  selection  of  the  youngest  eon  is  in  keeping  with 
what  we  find  in  many  Bible  stories.  Divine  choice  traversed  the  line  of  natural 
precedence.  The  Lord  had  respect  to  Abel,  not  to  Cain ;  to  Jacob  rather  than  to 
Esau  ;  to  Joseph  above  his  elder  brethren.  Ephraim  was  blessed  above  Manasseh , 
Moses  was  set  over  Aaron  ;  Gideon  was  the  youngest  in  his  father's  house,  hx  this 
there  is  something  so  pleasing  to  the  imagination  that  it  has  passed  into  the  tales  and 
legends  of  many  nations.  Of  three  brothers,  or  seven  brothers,  it  is  always  the 
youngest  who  surpasses  every  one,  accomplishes  the  difScult  task,  and  rises  to  be  a 
king.  David's  superiority  to  his  brothers  was  intrinsic,  and  the  result  not  of  luck, 
but  of  grace.  The  Lord  had  drawn  his  heart  to  himself  in  the  days  of  youth.  Ac- 
cordingly, where  such  men  as  Saul  and  Eliab  were  weak  David  was  strong.  He  revered 
and  loved  the  Lord,  and  could  therefore  be  depended  on  to  do  God's  wilL  "To 
whom  also,"  says  Stephen,  "  he  gave  testimony,  and  said,  I  have  found  David  the 
son  of  Jesse,  a  man  after  mine  own  heart,  who  shall  fulfil  all  my  will."  The  last 
clause  in  this  extract  shows  what  is  intended  by  the  one  which  goes  before.  David 
was  a  man  after  the  Lord's  heart  in  loyally  doing  his  will.  He  was  not  without  fault ; 
he  certainly  displeased  God  more  than  once  ;  but  he  thoroughly  apprehended  what 
Saul  never  could  understand — that  a  king  of  Israel  must  not  be  an  autocrat,  but 
should  without  question  or  murmur  carry  out  the  paramount  will  of  God.  In  this 
respect  David  never  failed.  He  had  many  trials  and  temptations,  afflictions  that 
might  have  made  him  discontented,  and  successes  that  might  have  made  him  proud ; 
but  he  continued  steadfast  in  his  purpose  of  heart  to  be  the  Lord's,  to  consult  the 
Lord  about  everything,  and  carry  out  his  revealed  will.  3.  Prepared  in  retirement 
for  future  eminence.  There  is  a  sort  of  augury  of  his  career  in  his  father's  words, 
"  Behold,  he  keepeth  the  sheep."  Saul  first  came  before  us  going  hither  and  thither 
in  search  of  asses  that  were  astray,  and  not  finding  them.  So,  as  a  king,  he  went  up 
and  down,  restless  and  disappointed.  But  David  kept  the  flock  intrusted  to  him, 
and,  as  a  king,  he  shepherded  the  flock  of  God.  "  So  he  fed  them  according  to  the 
integrity  of  his  heart,  and  guided  them  by  the  'skilfulness  of  his  hands."  (1)  As  a 
shepherd  David  formed  habits  of  vigilance.  He  had  to  think  for  the  flock,  lead  the 
sheep  to  pasture,  see  that  they  were  regularly  watered,  watch  that  none  strayed  or 
were  lost,  and  look  well  after  the  ewes  and  the  tender  lambs.  All  this  served  to 
make  him  in  public  life  wary,  prudent,  thoughtful  for  others,  a  chieftain  who  deserved 
the  confidence  of  his  followers.  Saul  had  little  or  none  of  this.  He  went  to  and  fro, 
and  fought  bravely,  but  evinced  none  of  that  unselfish  consideration  for  his  people 
which  marks  a  kingly  shepherd.  David  showed  it  all  through  his  career.  He 
watched  over  his  subjects,  thought  for  them,  instructed  and  led  them.  Near  the 
end  of  his  reign  he  committed  an  error  which  brought  disaster  on  Israel ;  and  it  is 
touching  to  see  how  the  true  shepherd's  heart  was  grieved  that  the  flock  should 
suffer  through  his  fault.  He  cried  to  the  Lord,  "  Lo,  I  have  sinned,  and  have  done 
wickedly ;  but  these  sheep,  what  have  they  done  ? "  (2)  As  a  shepherd  David 
proved  and  improved  his  courage.     Shepherds  in  Palestine,  in  those  days,  were 


lU  THE  PIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  zti.  1—23 

obliged  to  protect  their  flocks  from  prowling  beasts  of  prey.  How  many  encounters 
of  this  kind  David  may  have  had  we  do  not  know ;  but  we  learn  from  himself  that, 
while  yet  a  stripling,  he  had  fought  and  slain  both  a  lion  and  a  bear  rather  than  give 
up  one  lamb  or  kid  of  the  flock.  His  was  the  best  sort  of  courage — natural  in- 
trepidity of  a  true  and  brave  spirit,  sustained  and  elevated  by  unquestioning  trust  in 
God.  While  encountering  the  wild  beasts  in  defence  of  his  flock  David  was  being 
titted,  though  he  knew  it  not,  to  face  an  armed  giant  in  behalf  of  Israel,  and  in 
many  battles  afterwards  to  beat  down  the  enemies  of  his  country.  The  springs  of 
his  courage  were  in  God.  "Jehovah  is  my  light  and  my  salvation:  whom  shall  I 
fear  ?  Jehovah  is  the  strength  of  my  life :  of  whom  shall  I  be  afraid  ?  "  (3)  As  a 
shepherd  David  had  leisure  for  music  and  poetry.  As  he  kept  the  sheep  he  learned 
to  play  on  his  harp  with  a  skill  which  was  the  occasion  of  his  first  rise  from  obscurity ; 
and  he  composed  and  sang  sweet  lyrics,  pious  and  patriotic.  Whether  he  looked  up 
to  the  sky,  or  looked  round  on  the  hills  and  valleys,  or  recalled  to  mind  famous 
passages  of  his  nation's  history,  everything  gave  him  a  song  to  Jehovah.  Every 
poet  writes  juvenile  pieces,  which,  though  defective,  show  the  bent  of  his  genius  ; 
and  in  after  years,  if  he  has  not  rashly  published  them,  he  is  able  to  recast  them 
into  new  and  more  perfect  forms  as  his  mind  grows  and  his  skill  improves.  So, 
doubtless,  the  son  of  Jesse,  in  the  pastoral  solitude  at  Bethlehem,  began  to  compose 
lyrics  which  in  more  mature  life,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  threw 
into  the  forms  of  those  Psalms  which  carry  down  his  fame  to  the  end  of  time.  What 
a  contrast  to  the  unhappy  son  of  Eish  I  Saul  had  the  impulse  of  music  and  song 
upon  him  more  than  once  ;  but  he  had  to  be  acted  on  by  others,  and  his  own  spirit 
had  no  inward  harmony.  As  the  years  advanced  hie  life  became  more  and  more 
unmelodious  and  out  of  tune ;  whereas  David's  early  addiction  to  devout  song  and 
minstrelsy  prepared  him  to  be  something  better  than  a  gruff  warrior  in  his  manhood. 
Bom  with  genius  and  sensibility,  he  grew  up  a  man  of  some  accomplishment,  and 
when  called  to  the  throne,  elevated  the  mental  and  spiritual  tone  of  the  nation,  and 
was,  through  a  long  reign,  himself  a  very  fountain  of  musical  culture  and  sweet 
poetic  thought.  4.  Anointed  without  and  within.  Samuel  anointed  the  youth  out- 
wardly, pouring  oil  over  his  head ;  Jehovah  anointed  him  inwardly,  for  "  the  Spirit  of 
the  Lord  came  upon  David  from  that  day  forward."  The  old  prophet  is  a  figure  of 
Jolin  the  Baptist,  another  Nazarene,  and  one  who  carhe  to  prepare  the  way  of  the 
King.  David  suggests  Another,  a  descendant  of  his  own,  bom  in  the  same  Bethlehem, 
and,  like  himself,  lightly  esteemed.  As  Samuel  poured  oil  on  the  head  of  David,  so 
John  poured  water  on  the  head  of  Jesus,  the  Good  Shepherd.  Then  Samuel  retired 
from  view.  So  John  too  retired,  and  made  way  for  him  whom  he  had  baptized.  "  He 
must  increase,  but  I  must  decrease."  The  parallel  goes  still  further.  David  had 
been  a  child  of  grace,  but  on  that  day  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him,  and  he 
got  what  Samuel  cou'd  not  impart — a  Divine  qualification  for  the  work  and  dignity 
to  which  he  was  destined.  Jesus  had  been  holy,  harmless,  and  uiidefiled  from  his 
mother's  womb  ;  but  on  the  day  of  his  baptism  the  Spirit,  as  a  dove,  descended  and 
rested  upon  him,  and  he  got  what  John  could  not  impart — the  Divine  qualification  of 
his  humanity  for  the  work  and  dignity  to  which  he  was  destined  as  the  Christ,  the 
Lord's  Anointed.  "  Now  know  1  that  the  Lord  saveth  his  anointed."  Therefore  He 
will  save  us  who  follow  the  King.  Only  let  the  name  of  the  King  be  our  watchword, 
his  righteousness  our  righteousness,  his  strength  our  strength,  his  mind  our  mind, 
his  anointing  our  anointing.  8o  shall  we  see  him  and  be  with  him  in  his  kingdom 
and  glory. — F. 

Ver.  23. — The  king  and  the  minstrel.  I.  The  complication  of  mental  and  hokal 
DISORDEE.  Saul  was  the  victim  of  cerebral  disease,  but  not  an  innocent  victim.  His 
unhingement  of  mind  was  due  in  large  measure  to  causes  for  which  he  was  morally 
responsible.  The  expression,  "  an  evil  spirit  from  the  Lord  was  upon  him,"  is  just  an 
Old  Testament  way  of  saying  that  the  state  into  which  he  fell,  as  a  result  mainly  of 
his  own  misconduct,  bore  the  character  of  a  Divine  retribution.  From  the  beginning 
there  seems  to  have  been  a  morbid  tendency  in  the  mind  of  Saul.  He  was  at  once 
very  impulsive  and  very  obstinate ;  and  as  his  troubles  and  anxieties  increased,  the 
original  weakness  or  unhealthiness  of  his  brain  became  more  and  more  apparent 


OH.  XVI.  1— 23.J  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  31» 

He  nad  an  evil  conscience  oecause  of  his  disobedience  to  piviae  commands,  and 
though  faithfully  reproved  by  the  prophet  Samuel,  he  does  not  appear  to  have  ever 
sought  pardon  or  healing.  Thus  the  purpose  of  God  to  give  the  kingdom  to  another 
and  a  better  man  weighed  on  him  as  a  dreadful  secret,  and  his  native  melancholy 
deepened.  The  thing  preyed  on  his  mind  till  he  became  wretchedly  suspicious  and 
jealous,  and  at  times  gave  way  to  homicidal  mania.  For  considerable  periods,  as 
during  the  active  struggle  with  the  Philistines,  this  evil  spirit  left  the  king;  but  he 
fell  back  into  his  passionate  gloom.  As  we  trace  his  course,  the  better  lines  of  his 
character  fade  away,  and  the  worse  become  deeper  and  more  obvious. 

II.  The  remedy  applied — its  success  and  its  failure.  In  so  far  as  there  was 
mental  disease,  the  case  called  for  medical  treatment ;  in  so  far  as  it  was  compli- 
cated with  and  grounded  on  moral  disorder,  it  needed  a  moral  corrective.  But  even 
if  there  had  been  any  scientific  treatment  of  insanity  known  at  the  period,  it  would 
have  been  difficult  to  apply  it  to  King  Saul,  and  it  occurred  to  his  attendants  to  try 
the  soothing  charm  of  music.  This  might  be  the  opiate  to  assuage  the  angfuiah  of 
the  spirit— 

"  The  soft  insinuating  balsam,  that 
Can  through  the  body  reach  the  sickly  sooL" 

So  David  was  brought  to  the  court  to  allay,  if  he  could  not  cure,  the  malady  of  the 

king  by  his  skilful  minstrelsy.  It  was  a  wise  experiment.  From  the  readiness  of 
Saul  to  catch  the  fervour  and  join  in  the  strains  of  the  sons  of  the  prophets,  and  from 
the  fact  that  in  his  frenzy  he  "  prophesied  in  the  midst  of  the  house,"  we  infer  that 
his  temperament  was  peculiarly  open  to  musical  impression,  and  are  not  surprised 
that  the  sounds  of  David's  lyre  and  voice,  especially  when  chanting  some  Divine  and 
lofty  theme,  affected  and  in  some  degree  controlled  the  unhappy  king.  As  he 
listened  his  spirit  became  more  tranquil,  and  wicked  thoughts  and  jealousies  lifted 
from  o£E  him,  as  clouds  lift  from  a  mountain  for  a  while,  even  though  they  gather 
again.  The  refining  and  calming  effect  of  music  and  song  no  wise  man  will 
disparage.  It  is  not  religion,  but  it  may  legitimately  and  powerfully  conduce  to 
moral  and  religious  feeling.  Elisha  called  for  a  minstrel,  that  his  mind  might  be 
attuned  and  prepared  to  receive  the  prophetic  impulse.  Martin  Luther  found  the 
inspiration  of  courage  in  the  same  manner.  "  Next  to  theology,"  he  said,  "  I  give 
the  first  place  and  the  greatest  honour  to  music."  Milton,  too,  delighted  in  such 
musical  service 

"  As  may  with  sweetness,  thioogh  mine  ear, 
Dissolve  me  into  ecstasies, 
And  bring  all  heaven  before  mine  eyiNi  * 

David  sang  before  the  clouded  face  of  Saul,  and  "  played  with  his  hand."  So  let 
sweet  and  sacred  minstrelsy  confront  the  sin  and  sorrow  of  the  world.  It  is  better 
than  the  fabled  power  of  Orpheus,  who,  when  he  touched  his  lyre,  moved  the  very 
trees  and  rocks,  and  gathered  the  beasts  of  the  forest  to  listen  to  his  notes.  Another 
myth  regarding  Orpheus  has  indeed  a  noble  meaning  benueath  the  surface  of  the 
story.  When  the  Argonauts  passed  the  island  of  the  sirens,  Orpheus,  on  board  their 
ship,  loudly  chanted  the  praises  of  gods  and  heroes,  so  as  to  drown  the  voices  from 
the  shore,  and  so  he  and  his  comrades  passed  the  fatal  spot  in  safety.  The  moral  is 
obvious.  The  sirens  represent  pleasures  of  sense,  which  begin  with  blandishment, 
but  end  in  cruel  destruction  ;  and  a  powerful  resistance  to  sensual  temptation  is  to 
be  found  in  preoccupation  of  mind  and  heart  with  holy  and  heroic  song.  Yet  the 
moral  power  thus  exerted  has  its  limit,  and  we  see  this  clearly  in  the  case  of  Saul. 
The  king  was  acutely  sensitive  to  the  influence  of  David's  minstrelsy,  but  he  was 
only  charmed,  not  cured  ;  and  even  while  the  youth  played  before  him  he  attempted 
his  life  in  a  paroxysm  of  jealousy.  So  is  many  a  man  thrilled  with  delight  by  sacred 
music  wedded  to  holy  words  in  an  oratorio  or  in  Church  service  who  is  not  delivered 
thereby  from  some  evil  spirit  or  base  passion  that  has  mastered  him.  Alas,  how 
many  men  of  musical  taste  and  sensibility,  some  of  them  of  poetic  capacity  also, 
have  been  ^uite  unable  to  shake  o£E  the  yoke  of  that  most  conspicuous  evil  spirit  of 


SIS 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  xvn.  1 — 19. 


our  time  and  nation,  the  love  of  strong  drink  1  This  infatuation  may  be  quieted  or 
checked  for  a  time,  but  it  is  not  expelled  by  music  ever  so  good  and  true.  The  harp, 
even  David's  harp,  cannot  subdue  the  power  of  sin.  This  requires  the  power  of 
David's  God.  There  is  need  of  a  prayer  of  David,  such  as  Saul  seems  never  to  have 
offered  up:  "Create  in  me  a  clean  heart;  Lord,  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me." 
There  is  need  to  apply  to  the  Son  of  David,  who  cast  out  unclean  spirits  by  his  word, 
and  brought  men  to  their  right  mind,  and  now  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  not 
only  controls,  but  corrects  and  cures  all  the  evils  which  prey  on  the  mind  or  defile  the 
heart  of  man.  The  blackness  of  envy,  the  foulness  of  hatred,  the  demons  of  deceit, 
avarice,  intemperance,  and  cruelty  are  expelled  by  nothing  less  than  the  grace  of 
Christ. 


"And  his  that  gentle  voice  we  hear, 
Soft  as  the  breath  of  even, 
That  checks  each  fatdt,  that  calms  each  f«u, 
And  speaks  of  heaven." 


Adtanck  of  Datid  in  Refutation  bt  tbb  Slauohteb  of  Oolutb  (oh.  xm.). 

EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XVIL 

Ck>UATH's    DEFIANCE    OF    ISBAEL 

1 — 11).  Ver.  1. — The  Philistines  gathered 
together  their  armies.  As  the  oliject  of  the 
historian  is  not  to  give  us  an  account  of  the 
Philistine  wars,  but  only  to  record  the  man- 
ner of  David's  ripening  for  the  kingly  office, 
nothing  is  said  as  to  the  space  of  time  which 
had  elapsed  between  Saul  s  victory  at  Mich- 
mash  and  the  present  invasion.  We  are, 
however,  briefly  told  that  "  there  was  sore 
war  against  the  Philistines  all  the  days  of 
Saul"  (ch.  ilv.  62),  and  apparently  this 
inroad  took  place  very  many  years  after 
Saul's  establishment  upon  the  throne.  The 
Philistine  camp  was  at  Ephes-dammim,  called 
Pas-dammim  in  1  Chron.  xi.  13.  The  best 
explanation  of  the  word  gives  as  its  meaning 
the  .boundary  of  blood,  so  called  from  the 
continual  fighting  which  took  place  there 
upon  the  borders.  Shoclioh,  spelt  more 
correctly  Socoh  in  Josh.  xv.  35,  was  one  of 
fourteen  villages  enumerated  there  as  lying 
in  the  Shephelah,  described  by  Conder 
('  Tent  Work,'  ii.  156)  as  a  region  of  "low 
hills  of  limestone,  foi-ming  a  distinct  district 
between  the  plain  and  the  watershed  moun- 
tains. "  In  this  district  Socoh  lay  north-east 
of  Eleutheropolis  (Beth-jibrin),  midway  be- 
tween it  and  Beth-shemesh,  from  each  of 
which  places  it  was  distant  about  eight  or 
nine  miles.  It  is  now  called  Shuweikeh. 
For  Azekah  see  Josh.  x.  10. 

"Vers,  2,  3.— The  valley  of  Elah.  /.  e.  of 
the  terebinth  tree.  A  valley  between  them. 
Conder  ('Tent  Work,'  ii.  160)  describes  the 
»pot  from  personal  observation  thus :  "  Saul, 
coming  down  by  the  higliway  from  the  land 
of  Benjamin,  encamped  by  the  valley  on  one 
»f  tl)e  low  hills  ;  and  between  the  two  hosts 


was  the  gai  ot  ravine."    In  the  A.  V.  no 

exactness  of  rendering  is  ever  attempted,  and 
both  the  emek,  the  broad  strath  or  valley 
of  Elah,  with  gently  sloping  sides,  and  the 
gaiytlufi  narrow,  precipitous  ravine,  are  equally 
rendered  valley.  Really  the  gai  is  most 
remarkable,  and  fully  explains  how  the  two 
hosts  could  remain  in  face  of  one  another  so 
long  without  fighting  ;  for  Conder  proceeds, 
'"Two  points  require  to  be  made  clear  as  to 
the  episode  of  David's  battle  with  Goliath : 
one  was  the  meaning  of  the  expression  gai  or 
ravine ;  the  other  was  the  source  whence 
David  took  the  'smooth  stones.'  A  visit 
to  the  spot  explains  both.  In  the  middle  of 
the  broad,  open  valley  we  found  a  deep  trench 
with  vertical  sides,  impassable  except  at 
certain  places — a  vaUey  in  a  valley,  and  a 
natural  barrier  between  the  two  hosts.  The 
sides  and  bed  of  this  trench  are  strewn  with 
rounded  and  waterwom  pebbles,  which  would 
have  been  well  fitted  for  David's  sling.  Here, 
then,  we  may  picture  to  ourselves  the  two 
hosts,  covering  the  low,  rocky  hUls  opposit* 
to  each  other,  and  half  hidden  among  ths 
lentisk  bushes.  Between  them  was  the  rich 
expanse  of  ripening  barley,  and  the  red 
banks  of  the  torrent,  with  its  white,  shingly 
bed.  Behind  all  were  the  distant  blue  hill- 
walls  of  Judah,  whence  Saul  had  just  come 
down.  The  mail-clad  champion  advanced 
from  the  west  through  the  low  com,  with  his 
mighty  lance  perhaps  tufted  with  feathers, 
his  brazen  helmet  shining  in  the  sun.  From 
the  east  a  mdrly  boy  in  his  white  shirt  and 
sandals,  armed  with  a  goat's-hair  sling,  came 
down  to  the  brook,  and,  according  to  the 
poetic  fancy  of  the  Rabbis,  the  pebbles 
were  given  voices,  and  cried,  '  By  us  shalt 
thou  overcome  the  giant.'  The  champion 
fell  from   an  unseen  cause,   and  the  wilJ 


OH.  xvu.  1 — 19.] 


THfi  flESr  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


317 


Philistines  fled  to  the  month  of  the  valley, 
where  Gath  stood  towering  on  its  white 
chalk  cliff,  a  frontier  fortress,  the  key  to  the 
high  road  leading  to  the  corn-lands  of  Judah 
-ind  to  the  vineyards  of  Hebron. " 

Vers.  4 — 7. — A  champion.  Literally, 
"a  man  of  the  two  middles,"  i.  e.  one  who 
enters  the  space  between  the  two  armies 
in  order  to  decide  the  contest  by  a  siiisle 
combat.  Of  Gath.  In  Josh.  xi.  21  this  town 
is  mentioned,  together  with  Gaza  and  Ashdod, 
as  still  having  among  its  inhabitants  men  of 
the  race  of  Anak.  Whose  height  was  six 
cubits  and  a  span.  In  our  measure  lils 
height  was  eight  feet  five  and  one-third 
inches  ;  for  the  cubit  is  sixteen  inches,  and 
the  span  (really  the  hand-breadth)  is  five 
and  one-third  inches.  A  span,  sit,  is  eight 
inches,  but  tho  word  used  here  is  zereth. 
See  on  these  measures,  Conder,  '  Handbook,' 
p.  79.  This  height,  though  very  great,  has 
been  attained  to  in  modern  times.  Armed 
with  •  coat  of  mail.  Literally,  "  clothed 
in  a  shirt  of  scales,"  i.  e.  a  corselet  made  of 
metal  scales  sewn  on  cloth  so  as  to  overlap 
one  another.  It  was  flexible,  and  protected 
the  back  and  sides  as  well  as  the  front. 
Five  thousand  shekels  of  brass.  Really 
copper,  as  brass  was  then  unknown.  Conder 
gives  the  shekel  as  equal  to  two-thirds  of  an 
ounce.  This  would  make  the  corselet  weigh  at 
least  two  hundred-weight,  an  enormous  load 
to  carry  even  for  a  short  time.  Goliath's 
other  equipmernts  correspond  in  heaviness, 
and  largely  exceed  the  weight  of  medieval 
suits  of  armour.  Greaves  of  brass  upon  his 
legs.  The  thighs  were  protected  by  the 
i^orselet,  so  that  only  the  legs  required  de- 
fensive armour.  This  would  account  for  the 
weight  of  the  corselet,  as  it  was  much  longer 
than  the  cuirass,  as  worn  by  the  Greeks  and 
Romans.  A  target.  Really,  "  a  javelin." 
ft  was  carried  at  the  back,  ready  to  be  taken 
in  the  hand  and  thrown  at  the  enemy  when 
required.  The  versions  have  a  diiferent  read- 
ing—  magan,  shield,  for  chidon,  javelin. 
The  shield  was  cariied  before  him  by  an 
armour-bearer.  The  staff.  The  written  text 
has  a  word  which  usually  signifies  sfuift, 
arrow,  for  which  the  Kri  substitutes  2(;ood, 
the  noun  actually  found  in  2  Sam.  xxi.  19  ; 
1  Chron.  xx.  6  ;  but  most  probably  the  word 
used  here  is  an  archaic  name  for  the  handle 
or  staff  of  a  spear.  Six  hundred  shekels. 
the  weight  of  the  iron  head  of  the  spear 
would  be  about  twenty-five  pounds.  How- 
ever tall  and  strong  Goliath  may  have  been, 
yet  with  all  this  vast  weight  of  metal  his 
movements  must  have  been  slow  and  unready. 
He  was  got  up,  in  fact,  more  to  tell  upon 
the  imagination  than  for  real  fighting,  and 
though,  like  a  castle,  he  might  have  been 
iuvinoible  if  attacked  with  sword  and  spear, 
he  was  much  too  encumbered  with  defensive 


armour  to  be  cajiable  of  assuming  the  offensive 
against  a  light-armed  enemy.  To  David 
belongs  the  credit  of  seeing  that  the  Philis- 
tine champion  was  a  huge  imposition. 

Vers.  8 — 11.— He  stood  and  cried  unto 
the  armies.  Literally,  "  the  ranks,"  the 
word  being  the  noun  formed  from  the  ver'- 
translated  set  in  array,  just  below.  Th» 
same  word  is  used  throughout  (see  vers 
10,  20,  21,  22,  26,  46).  Am  not  I  a  Philis- 
tine? Hebrew,  "  the  Philistine,"  the  cham- 
pion on  tlieir  side.  I  defy  the  armies. 
Hebrew,  "  I  have  cast  scorn  or  insult  upon 
the  ranks  of  Israel  this  day."  The  sense  is 
not  so  much  that  he  defied  them  as  that 
they  were  dishonoured  by  not  accepting  his 
challenge.  They  were  dismayed.  That  is, 
terrified,  and  made  uncertain  what  to  do 
(comp.  Jer.  1.  86).  We  have  seen  from  Mr. 
Gender's  account  that  each  army  held  an 
impregnable  position  on  the  two  sides  of  the 
ravine,  which  neither  could  cross  without 
the  certainty  of  being  defeated  in  the  attempt 
by  the  other  side.  Under  such  circumstances 
there  seemed  no  way  of  deciding  the  contest 
except  by  a  single  combat.  But  though 
Saul  and  his  warriors  were  too  terrified  at 
Goliath's  appearance  to  venture  to  meet  him, 
still  they  held  their  gi-ound  for  forty  days, 
inasmuch  as  it  was  evidently  impossible  for 
him  to  cross  the  ravine  clad  in  such  cumbrous 
armour,  nor  did  the  Philistines  ventm'C  to 
make  the  attempt,  as  the  Israelites  wouid 
have  taken  them  at  a  manifest  disadvantage. 

David's  visit  to  the  camp  (vers.  12—31). 
The  Vatican  codex  of  the  Septuagint  omits 
the  whole  of  this  section,  and  it  was  inserted 
in  the  Alexandrian  copy  by  Origen.  It  is 
found,  however,  in  the  other  versions ;  and 
possibly  this  treatment  of  David's  history  as 
of  a  person  unknown,  just  after  the  account 
given  of  him  in  ch.  xvi.,  did  not  seem  so 
strange  to  readers  in  old  time  as  it  does  to 
us,  with  whom  reading  is  so  much  more 
easy  an  accomplishment.  It  is,  nevertheless, 
one  of  the  many  indications  that  the  Books 
of  Samuel,  though  compiled  from  contem- 
poraneous documents,  were  not  arranged  in 
their  present  form  till  long  afterwards.  It 
was  only  gradually  that  Samuel's  schools  dis- 
persed throughout  the  country  men  trained 
in  reading  and  writing,  and  trained  up 
scholars  capable  of  keeping  the  annals  oJ 
each  king's  reign.  The  Books  of  Kings  were, 
as  we  know,  compiled  from  these  annals ;  but 
probably  at  each  prophetic  school  there 
would  be  stored  up  copies  of  Psalms  written 
for  their  religious  services,  ballads  such  as 
those  in  the  Book  of  Jasliar.  and  in  the  Book 


318 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[CH.  XVII.  1 — It 


of  fhe  Ware  of  Jehovah,  nairaHves  of  stir- 
ring events  like  this  before  tu,  and  histo- 
ries both  of  their  own  chiefs,  such  as-  was 
Samuel,  and  afterwards  Elijah  and  Elisha, 
and  also  of  the  kings.  There  is  nothing 
remarkable,  therefore,  at  finding  informa- 
tion repeated ;  and  having  had  in  the  pre- 
vions  narrative  an  acconnt  of  a  passing  in- 
troduction of  David  to  Saul  as  a  musician, 
which  led  to  little  at  the  time,  though  sub- 
sequently David  stood  high  in  Saul's  favour 
because  of  his  skill  npon  the  harp,  we 
here  have  David'i  introduction  to  Saul  as  a 
warrior. 

Yen.  12 — 14. — 7esM  .  .  .  went  among 
men  for  an  old  man  in  the  days  of  Saul. 
rhis  translation  is  taken  from  the  Vulgate  ; 
hut  the  Hebrew  is,  "  And  the  man  in  the 
Jays  of  Saul  was  old,  gone  among  men." 
Some  explain  this  as  meaning  "placed," 
L  e.  "reckoned  among  men  of  rank  ;  "  but 
probably  an  aleph  has  dropped  out  in  the 
word  rendered  men,  and  we  should  read 
"gone,"  i.  e.  "  advanced  in  years."  Old  is 
used  in  a  very  indefinite  way  in  the  Books  of 
Samuel;  but  as  Jesse  had  eight  sons,  of 
whom  the  youngest  was  now  gi-own  up,  he 
must  have  been  nearly  sixty.  Went  and 
followed.  Hebrew,  "And  there  went  the 
three  elder  sons  of  Jesse  went  after  Saul  to 
the  war."  Some  grammarians  consider  that 
this  repetition  of  the  verb  is  intended  to  give 
it  the  force  of  a  pluperfect, — they  had  gone, — 
but  it  is  more  probably  an  error,  and  one  of 
the  two  verbs  should  be  omitted. 

Ver.  15. — David  went  and  returned  from 
BanL  This  is  a  very  important  statement, 
as  it  shows  that  the  writer,  in  spite  of  what 
is  said  in  vers.  66 — 68,  knew  that  David  had 
visited  Saul  at  his  court,  and  become  person- 


ally known  to  him.  Apparently  it  had  been 
but  a  short  visit,  possibly  because  after  the 
fit  of  melancholy  had  passed  away  there  wai 
no  return  of  it  for  tlie  present ;  and  if  Davi  J 
had  been  back  at  Bethlehem  for  two  or  three 
years,  a  young  man  changes  so  much  in  ap- 
pearance at  David's  time  of  life  that  it  is  no 
wonder  that  neither  Saul  nor  Abner  recog- 
nised him  in  his  shepherd's  dress.  For  some 
reason,  then,  or  other  David  had  not  re- 
mained with  Saul  at  Gibeah,  but  had  resumed 
his  pastoral  life  at  Bethlehem,  and  the  state- 
ments made  in  ch.  xvi.  21  —  23  belong  to 
the  time  immediately  after  the  combat  with 
Goliath,  and  not  before. 

Vers.  16— 19.— The  Philistine  ....  pre- 
sented himself.  /.  e.  took  his  stand  (see  on 
ch.  X.  23 ;  xii.  7,  16).  This  verse  takes  uj 
the  narrative,  disturbed  by  the  inserted  ex- 
planation about  David's  family  relations. 
The  extraordinary  formation  of  the  ground, 
as  described  in  ver.  3,  shows  how  it  was 
possible  for  this  challenge  to  go  on  for  forty 
days  without  either  army  advancing  or  re- 
tiring. During  this  lonf;  time  it  seems  to 
have  been  the  business  of  the  fi-iends  at  home 
to  supply  the  combatants  with  food,  and  so 
Jesse  sends  David  with  an  ephah,  about  three 
pecks,  of  parched  corn — as  the  word  is  spelt 
in  the  Hebrew  it  means  "parched  pease." 
Also  ten  loaves, and,  for  the  captain  of  their 
thousand,  ten  cheeses — ^rather,  "  ten  slices  oi 
fresh  curd."  David  was  also  to  take  their 
pledge.  Apparently  neither  Eliab  nor  his 
brethren  could  write,  and  therefore  they 
would  send  back  to  their  father  some  token 
previously  agreed  upon  to  show  that  they 
were  in  good  health,  and  had  received  the 
supplies  sent  them.  Now  Saul,  &c.  This 
is  a  part  of  Jesse's  speech,  •  telling  David 
where  he  would  find  his  brethren.  For  were, 
the  right  translation  is, ' '  They  are  in  the  tere- 
binth valley,  fighting  with  the  Philistines." 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — Aggression  not  defence.  The  facts  are — 1.  The  armies  o£  Israel 
and  Philistia  are  drawn  up  in  array,  with  a  valley  between  them.  2.  A  gigantic 
champion,  heavily  armed  and  proud  of  his  strength,  challenges  any  one  of  Saul's 
army  to  a  personal  encounter,  and  with  lofty  words  defies  the  armies  of  Israel. 
3.  Saul  and  his  men  are  in  great  fear.  The  episode  given  by  the  sacred  writer  is 
one  of  those  occurrences  likely  to  arise  under  the  conditions  of  ancient  warfare.  It 
must  be  viewed  by  us  as  one  of  the  events  which  Providence  overruled  for  the 
gradual  introduction  of  David  to  the  notice  of  Israel.  But  in  this  section  we  may 
confine  attention  to  truths  not  immediately  affecting  him. 

I,  We  have  here  AN  exhibition  of  the  war-spirit.  This  giant  was  under  the 
influence  of  a  mere  love  of  fighting  It  was  not  a  question  of  rightness  or  wrong- 
jiesB,  but  of  slaying  or  being  slain.  The  modicum  of  patriotism  was  overlaid  by  the 
lust  of  co7itention.  This  passion  dwells  more  or  less  in  all  men.  Its  mildest  form 
is  a  contentious  spirit — a  quarrelsome  temper,  a  desire  to  try  our  strength  against 
others.  It  has  found  wide  and  pernicious  scope  in  the  history  of  nations.  There  is 
e  tendency  to  foster  this  unhallowed  spirit  even  in  civilised,  so-called  Christian 


OT.  XVII.  1—19.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  31 J 

countries.  The  profession  of  soldier,  the  pomp  of  military  parade,  the  zest  with 
which  battles  are  described,  the  haze  of  glory  thrown  around  the  unutterable  horrors 
of  war,  and  rivalry  among  men  for  distinction  in  action — all  show  that  the  war-spirit 
is  fostered.  Is  it  not  true  that  a  mere  desire  to  find  actual  occupation  in  fighting 
determines  the  first  choice  of  multitudes  in  entering  on  warlike  enterprises  ?  The 
evih  of  this  spirit  are  patent.  In  itself  it  is  a  debasement  of  our  nature.  The  God 
of  peace  and  love  is  our  Father,  and  we  are  to  be  his  children  in  the  spirit  that 
governs  us.  The  execution  of  law  and  right  is  a  totally  different  thing.  Tke  woes 
it  has  brought  on  the  world,  in  deaths,  widows,  orphans,  poverty,  desolations,  debts, 
suspicions,  and  engendered  vices,  can  never  be  told.  It  is  the  duty  of  every  Christian 
to  strive  to  crush  it  out,  by  careful  training  of  the  young,  by  discouragement  of 
popular  passions,  by  enforcement  of  the  teaching  and  Spirit  of  Christ,  and  by  earnest 
prayer  that  the  Church  may  be  firm  in  protest  against  it. 

II.  We  have  also  AN  exhibition  of  pbide  in  human  strength.  This  giant 
thought  himself  mighty,  and  he  boasted  in  his  strength.  Boastfulness  in  any  form 
is  disgraceful.  Man  is  not  in  a  position  to  magnify  himself  on  any  possession,  for 
it  is  as  a  shadow,  and  may  quickly  vanish.  Pride  in  mere  physical  strength  is  the 
lowest  form  of  boasting,  save  that  in  actual  vice.  A  quick,  bright,  intelligent  mind 
is  of  more  account  than  height  of  stature  and  strength  of  hmb.  Yet  self-satisfaction 
in  intellectual  qualities  and  powers  is  evidence  of  a  moral  weakness  which  renders 
man  inferior  in  the  higher  realms  of  life.  We  have  need  to  learn  that  man  at  his 
best  estate  is  vanity ;  that  it  is  not  by  might  nor  by  power  that  the  highest  achieve- 
ments are  wrought  in  the  spiritual  sphere. 

III.  We  have  also  A  reveesion  of  the  natural  order  op  things.  The  natural 
order  is  that  which  follows  from  the  normal  constitution  and  relations  of  things. 
By  appointment  Israel  were  the  possessors  of  the  land.  The  promise  had  read  thus  : 
Be  true  and  obedient,  and  ye  shall  possess  the  land  in  peace,  and  be  exalted  above 
all  nations  (Deut.  xxviii.  1 — 13).  Had  the  conditions  been  faithfully  observed,  God 
long  ere  the  days  of  David  would  have  subdued  their  enemies  (Ps.  Ixxxi.  13 — 16). 
Or,  had  new  enemies  trespassed  on  their  borders,  Israel  would  have  assailed  in  con- 
fidence, and  not  be  assailed  in  great  fear.  Aggression  on  the  foes  of  God  and  man 
is  the  work  of  God's  people ;  there  is  a  reversion  of  the  natural  order  when  they  are 
barely  able  to  hold  their  own,  and  tremble  at  the  aggressive  onslaughts  of  the  foe. 
The  attitude  and  work  of  the  Church  in  relation  to  the  manifold  forms  of  evil  in  the 
world  is  not  inaptly  indicated  in  Israel's  original  relation  to  the  abominable  nations 
that  once  held  and  begirt  the  promised  land — ^namely,  aggression  till  the  earth  is 
subdited  to  Christ.  If  there  are  defiant  systems  assailing  the  Church  of  God  and 
making  inroads  upon  her,  it  is  because  she  has  been  unfaithful  in  her  aggressive 
work.  If  we  do  not  make  aggression  on  the  domain  of  sin,  the  forces  of  evil  will 
gain  power  and  make  positive  aggression  on  the  domain  of  religion.  Vices  of  all 
kinds,  and  infidelity  in  brazen  forms,  flourish  and  become  more  than  defensive  in 
action  when  Christians  lose  faith  in  their  mission  and  sink  to  the  level  of  other  men. 
Not  even  the  vilest  of  men  nor  the  hardiest  unbeliever  will  venture  to  assail  a  puie 
and  very  devoted  spiritual  life. 

General  leisons: — 1.  The  Christian  Church  should  consider  how  much  of  the  pre 
valence  of  the  war-spirit  is  due  to  her  imperfect  treatment  of  the  natural  tendency 
to  it.  2.  Those  who  despise  the  low  type  of  life  which  glories  in  mere  brute  force 
should  remember  that,  from  the  higher  spiritual  sphere,  glorying  in  any  mere  human 
possession  may  be  regarded  in  the  same  light.  3.  The  earnest  cultivation  of 
spiritual  life  will  be  proved  by  the  aggression  which,  as  individuals,  we  make  on 
t)ur  besetting  sins,  ana,  as  communities,  on  the  sins  of  the  world. 

Vers.  12 — 19. — Co-operation  in  spiritual  warfare.  The  facts  are — 1.  Three  Oi. 
Jesse's  sons  are  with  the  army  opposing  the  Philistines.  2.  David,  being  relieved 
from  attendance  on  Saul,  keeps  the  flock  at  Bethlehem.  3.  Jesse  sends  David  to  the 
camp  with  provisions,  and  instructs  him  to  look  after  the  welfare  of  his  brethren. 
It  is  possible  that  Jesse  may  have  surmised  that  some  considerable  developments 
would  soon  arise  out  of  Samuel's  recent  visit  to  Bethlehem  and  the  wonderful 
interest  taken  in  young  David.     At  all  events,  it  was  providential  that  he  sent  him 


i-^J  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL,  [ch.  xvu.  1—19. 

from  caring  for  sheep  to  care  for  his  brethren  on  the  battle-field.  Leaving  out  of 
view  the  moral  condition  of  Israel  and  its  consequences,  as  dwelt  on  in  the  last 
section,  we  may  regard  the  army  of  Saul  as  being  engaged  in  the  service  of  the 
living  God  (vers.  26,  36),  virtually  against  the  foes  of  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah. 
David's  visit  to  the  army  with  provisions  and  messages  relating  to  the  welfare  of  his 
soldier  brothers,  therefore,  brings  out  the  relation  that  should  subsist  between  tho»e 
engaged  in  open  conflict  in  the  service  of  Qod  and  such  as  are  not  called  to  serve  in 
that  form. 

L   The    EXIGENCIES  OF    THE  ChURCB   BEQUIBE  80HB  TO  BE  6FECIALLT    ENGAGED  IN 

OPEN  CONFLICT  WITH  BIN.  The  circumstances  of  Israel  necessitated  just  then  that 
some  of  God's  people  should  devote  themselves  to  the  campaign  as  soldiers.  Com- 
bination under  the  guidance  of  skill  would  effect  what  isolated  privatie  effort  could 
not  touch.  In  the  Christian  economy  every  true  follower  of  Christ  is  a  soldier,  fol- 
lowing the  lead  of  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.  Nevertheless,  the  circumstances  in 
which  Christians  find  themselves  demand  that  some  should  be  more  emphatically 
fighting  men,  to  undertake,  in  combination  with  others,  arduous  work  which  can  never 
be  done  by  Christians  in  a  private  and  isolated  capacity.  Hence  we  have  men, 
separated  from  various  occupations,  consecrating  all  their  time  and  energies  not 
merely  in  defence  of  the  gospel,  but  in  making  war  upon  the  manifold  evils  which 
obstruct  the  triumph  of  Christ.  These  sustain  a  relation  to  others,  whose  time  is 
otherwise  employed  on  purely  personal  pursuits,  similar  to  that  of  the  army  at  Elah 
to  the  Jesses  and  Davids  engaged  in  domestic  and  rural  occupations, 

U.  The  CONFLICT  THUS  OPENLY  MAINTAINED  INVOLVES  THE  INTEBESTS  AND  CLAIMS  THE 

SCPPGBT  OF  ALL.  Obviously  every  one  in  Israel  was  concerned  in  the  issue  of  the 
conflict  with  the  Philistines.  All  that  free  people  hold  precious  was  at  stake.  If  it 
was  in  the  power  of  fum-combatants  to  render  aid,  clearly  it  ought  to  be  forthcoming. 
In  a  higher  and  wider  sense  is  it  true  that  the  business  of  Christ's  soldiers  at  home 
and  abroad  is  the  business  of  the  entire  body  of  believers,  irrespective  of  age, 
position,  or  ability.  The  Church  is  one  body,  and  the  sufferings  or  pleasures  of  one 
member  are  of  moment  to  all  the  members.  The  feeling  which  suggests  that  certain 
efforts  to  save  men  are  no  concern  but  to  those  engaged  in  them  is  unintelligent  and 
unchristian.  The  call  to  hold  forth  the  word  of  truth  is  to  the  one  body  of  the 
faithful.  Our  sympathy  with  Christ's  mission  is  real  only  as  we  identify  our  hopes, 
and  aspirations,  and  endeavours  with  those  of  all  who  have  the  "same  mind."  Conse- 
quently, every  consideration  of  humanity,  of  brotherly  regard,  of  love  for  Christ,  and 
joy  in  his  advancing  conquests,  should  stimulate  aid  to  those  on  the  high  places  of 
the  field. 

III.  ThBBB  ABC  AVAILABLE  MEANS  BT  WHICH  EVEBT  ONE  MAT  BBNDEB  SUBSTAN- 
TIAL AID  IN  THIS  WABFABE.  Jesse's  forethought  and  David's  readiness  contributed 
to  the  strength  and  encouragement  of  the  absent  warriors.  Likewise  every  one  in 
Israel  could  aid  in  the  conflict  by  contributions  of  food  and  clothing,  and  by  cherished 
sympathy  and  prayer.  In  modem  nations  every  member  of  the  community  renders 
assistance  in  war,  by  payment  of  taxes,  combination  of  counsel,  deep  and  variuusly- 
expressed  sympathy,  and  that  quota  from  each  one  which  makes  up  the  sum  of 
support  to  be  found  in  public  opinion.  The  means  by  which  the  scattered  members 
of  Christ's  Church  can  fulfil  their  duty  to  their  brethren  devoted  entirely  to  the 
campaign  against  sin  are  varied  and  effective.  1.  By  loyally  bearing  the  common 
eaute  on  the  heart.  This  may  become  a  habit  if  we  will  but  make  an  intelligent 
study  of  what  is  due  from  us.  Its  value  to  the  distant  and  near  soldiers  of  the  cross 
is  clear  to  the  spiritual  eye.  Moral  natures  are  knit  together  by  subtle  bonds. 
2.  By  tjoedal  acts  and  seasons  of  prayer.  Emphasis  given  to  our  general  sympathy 
by  special  pleading  with  God  on  oehalf  of  his  faithful  servants  is  the  all-powerfnl 
means  of  taking  our  share  in  the  one  great  conflict  Even  the  greatest  of  apostles 
felt  that  he  would  do  his  work  better  if  friends  would  but  respond  to  his  appeal, 
"  Brethren,  pray  for  us."  This  is  an  aid  which  may  be  rendered  by  young  and  old, 
hale  and  weak,  the  rich  and  poor.  Only  eternity  will  reveal  how  much,  among  the 
many  concurring  causes  that  issue  at  last  in  the  full  triumph  of  Christ,  is  due  to  the 
prayers  even  of  the  helpless  invalids,  and  poor,  unheard-of  saints  that  dwell  ill 
cottage  homes.    3.  Moral  and  material  support.    We  may  seize  opportnnities  for 


oa.  ZTU.  1—19.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  881 


MBoring  oar  brethren,  whose  hearts  are  often  faint  and  weaiy,  that  we  do  cany  their 
cares  and  sorrows,  and  do  regard  their  work  as  ours.  We  rob  devoted  men  of 
strength  when  we  are  chary  of  letting  them  know  our  deep  interest  in  them.  The 
material  »uppoH  is  also  within  the  reach  of  most.  To  devote  a  portion  of  our 
means  to  Chnst's  cause  is  a  great  privilege.  Had  the  Church  devoted  half  on  Chris- 
tian enterprise  that  has  been  devoted  to  questionable  self-indulgences,  the  joys  of 
men  and  angels  would  ere  this  have  been  doubled. 

General  lessons: — 1.  We  should  encourage  by  example  and  personal  influence  in 
young  people  an  intelligent  interest  in  all  Christian  work  because  it  is  Christian. 
2.  Where  true  love  exists,  ingenuity  will  devise  means  of  cheering  those  engaged  in 
arduous  service.  3.  The  spiritual  unity  of  the  Church  may  thus  be  largely  realised, 
notwithstanding  diversity  of  organisations. 

HOMIL  LES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORa 

Vers.  1 — 11,  (The  valley  of  Ela^.)— Israel  smitten  with  fear.  "They  were 
dismayed,  and  greatly  afraid  "  (ver.  11).  1.  TJie  renewed  attempt  of  the  Philistines 
to  subjugate  Israel  shows,  in  comparison  with  their  former  invasion,  a  decrease  of 
power.  They  did  not  penetrate  into  the  heart  of  the  land  (ch.  xiii.  6),  but  advanced 
only  a  short  distance  from  their  own  border,  and  "pitched  between  Shochoh  and 
Azekah,  in  Ephes-dammim,"  a  dozen  miles  south-west  of  Bethlehem.  They  had 
been  driven  back  and  held  in  check.  2.  It  could  hardly  have  been  possible,  but  for 
the  rashness  of  Saul  in  "  the  war  of  Michmash,"  by  which  the  opportunity  of  inflict- 
ing a  fatal  blow  was  lost.  Hearing,  perhaps,  of  his  condition,  and  perceiving  signs 
of  the  laxity  of  his  rule,  they  sought  to  repair  their  defeat.  3.  It  found  the  people 
of  Israel,  notwithstanding  their  previous  success,  ill-prepared  to  repel  the  aggression. 
Although  they  went  to  meet  the  enemy,  and  encamped  opposite  to  them,  they  did 
nothing  more.  In  the  spirit  of  a  better  time  they  would  have  immediately  fallen 
upon  them  in  reliance  upon  "the  Lord  of  hosts"  (Deut  xxxii.  30);  but  now  they 
were  paralysed  vdthfear,  especially  at  the  appearance  of  the  gigantic  champion  who 
came  out  against  them.  The  Philistines  desired  to  make  the  issue  depend  on  a  single 
combat  between  this  man  and  any  Israelitish  warrior  who  might  be  appointed  to 
meet  him;  and  he  "drew  near  morning  and  evening,  and  presented  himself  forty 
days  "  (ver.  16).  A  similar  fear  has  sometimes  pervaded  the  Christian  community 
in  the  presence  of  the  enemy. 

L  It  is  inspired  by  formidablb  opponents.  1.  Their  number  is  great.  They 
consist  not  merely  of  one  or  two,  but  of  a  host  of  giants.  (1)  Within:  carnal  afEec- 
tions,  corrupt  tendencies,  proud  thoughts,  evil  imaginations,  and  wrathful  passions. 
(2)  Without :  ignorance,  error,  unbelief,  superstition,  intemperance,  licentiousness, 
worldliness,  and  "  all  ungodliness."  (3)  In  the  background,  of  all  "the  prince  of  the 
power  of  the  air,  the  spirit  that  now  worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience  "  (Ephes. 
ii.  2).  2.  Their  appearance  is  imposing.  They  seem  to  be  possessed  of  extra- 
ordinary might,  and  arrayed  in  terrible  armour,  and  are  of  great  renown.  "  Am  I 
not  that  Philistine  "  (ver.  8),  who  has  exhibited  such  prowess  and  slain  so  many 
foes  ?  "  He  arose,  and  came,  and  drew  nigh,  like  a  stalking  mountain,  overlaid  with 
brass  and  iron  "  (M.  Henry).  3.  Their  attitude  is  "proud,  boastful,  defiant,  con- 
temptuous, and  increasingly  confident  of  victory  as  day  after  day  tfoe  challenge  is 
renewed,  and  no  one  dares  to  answer  it.  "  The  first  challenge  to  a  duel  that  we  ever 
find  came  out  of  the  mouth  of  an  uncircumcised  Philistine  "  (Hall).  How  often  has 
the  contemplation  of  such  adversaries  filled  even  good  men  with  dismay!  While 
we  measure  our  natural  strength  against  the  forces  of  evil  our  case  is  hopeless. 
"  Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  '  " 

IL  It  beshlts  from  previous  unfaithfclnbss.  1.  Distrust  of  God  and  alienation 
from  him.  faith  prevents  fear.  It  looks  to  God,  judges  of  the  power  of  the  enemy 
in  the  light  of  his  omnipotence,  unites  to  him,  and  inspires  with  unbounded  courage 
(ch.  xiv.  6 ;  ver.  47)  ;  but  unbelief  is  blind  and  weak  and  fCarful  (Matt.  viii.  26). 
And  dismay  in  great  emergencies  reveals  the  absence  or  feebleness  of  faith  in  the 
preceding  and  ordinary  course  of  life.  2.  Outward  acts  of  disobedience  to  the 
Divine  will  —  diminishing  moral  power,  and  producing  inward  distraction  and 
1  SAV  T 


322  THB  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xvu.  1—10. 

dread.  8.  Sympathy  wUh  afatthlem  leader,  and  participation  in  the  "  spirit  of  fear  " 
(2  Tim.  i.  7)  Which  he  possesBes.  Saul  had  forsaken  the  Lord.  He  had  not  the 
presence  of  Samuel  with  him ;  nor,  apparently,  that  of  the  high  priest ;  nor  did  he 
seek  the  Divine  counsel  as  aforetime.  He  ruled  independently  of  Jehovah ;  and  the 
people  loved  too  much  "  to  have  it  bo,"  sharing  in  his  faithlessness  and  fear.  A 
faithless  and  fearful  leader  cannot  have  faithful  and  fearless  followers. 

IIL  It  incubb  desekvbd  bepboach  (vers.  8,  26) — uttered  by  the  enemy,  and 
echoed  in  the  conscience  of  the  people,  on  account  of — 1.  The  cowardice  o£  their 
conduct  2.  The  inconsistency  of  their  position,  as  professed  servants  of  the  living 
God :  unfaithful  to  their  calling,  trembling  before  the  votaries  of  "  gods  that  were  no 
gods  "  (ver.  44),  and  bringing  dishonour  upon  the  name  of  Jehovah.  "  The  name  of 
God  is  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles  through  you  "  (Bom.  ii.  24 ;  Prov.  xxv.  26). 
3.  The  likelihood  of  their  defeat,  of  which  it  is  a  virtual  acknowledgment,  and  to 
which  it  must  infallibly  conduct,  unless  a  better  spirit  be  infused  into  them.  "  How 
is  it  that  ye  have  not  faith  ?  "  (Mark  iv.  40). 

Learn  that — 1.  The  spirit  of  fear  can  be  expelled  only  by  the  spirit  of  faith. 
2.  Fearfulness  in  conflict,  difficulty,  and  danger  indicates  a  lack  of  faith,  and  should 
constrain  to  renewed  trust  in  God,  3.  In  their  greatest  extremity  God  doea  not 
abandon  his  people  to  despair,  but  provides  for  them  "  a  way  of  escape." — D. 

Vers.  17, 18.  (Bethlehem.) — Parmtal  solicitude.  Family  life  occupies  a  prominent 
place  in  the  Books  of  Samuel,  and  the  affectionate  concern  of  parents  for  their 
children  is  often  mentioned  (see  ch.  ii.  24 ;  x.  2).  Jesse,  who,  in  consequence  of  his 
advanced  age  (ver.  12),  was  himself  unable  to  go  against  the  Philistines,  had  his 
three  elder  sons  in  the  army  of  Israel ;  and  after  they  had  been  absent  for  some 
weeks,  sent  their  youngest  brother  with  provisions  for  their  need,  to  make  inquiriei 
about  their  welfare,  and  "  take  their  token,"  by  which  he  might  be  asBored  thereof. 
Such  solicitude  as  he  displayed  is — 

L  Natural.     1.  Arising  out  of  the  instinctive  affection  which  is  felt  by  parents. 

2.  Continuing  throughout  the  whole  of  life.  3.  Commended  by  the  heavenly 
Father,  who  puts  it  into  the  heart ;  and  often  illustrated,  directed,  and  regulated 
by  the  teachings  of  his  word  (Gen.  xviii.  19  ;  xxii.  2  ;  2  Sam.  xviii.  33 ;  Ephea. 
vi,  4 ;  1  Tim.  v.  8). 

II.  Considerate.  1.  Of  the  distance  of  children  from  home,  and  of  their  depriva- 
tion of  parental  oversight,  counsel,  and  restraint.  2.  Of  their  need :  temporal,  spiritual, 
and  eternal.  3.  Of  their  peril :  from  their  own  tendencies,  their  intimate  associations, 
and  their  open  enemies. 

HI.  Practical.  Expressed — 1.  In  sending  them  presents  of  that  which  is  beat 
adapted  to  their  wants.     2.  By  the  hand  of  a  brother  (Gen.  xxxvii.  14 ;  zliij.  11). 

3.  With  the  request  of  a  token  of  affectionate  regard  for  the  gratification  of  a  heart 
that  desires  and  seeks  their  happiness. 

IV.  Illustrative  of  "  the  kindness  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour  toward  man  *' 
(Titus  ii.  4).  The  relation  of  an  earthly  father  to  his  children  is  a  shadow  of  that  of 
the  heavenly  Father  to  men ;  it  was  doubtless  appointed  from  the  first  to  be  aucb, 
and  the  loving  care  which  arises  out  of  it  is,  in  comparison  witli  that  of  the  "  Father 
of  spirits,"  only  as  a  ray  of  light  compared  with  the  sun.  This  also  is — 1.  Natural  and 
spontaneous,  for  "  God  is  love."  2.  Considerate  (Ps.  ciii.  13,  14).  "  In  thee  the 
fatherless  findeth  mercy  "  (Hosea  xi v.  3).  3.  Practical.  "  I  have  loved  you,  saith  the 
Lord,"  &c.  (Mai.  i.  2 ;  Matt.  vii.  11 ;  John  iii.  16). 

Exhortation : — 1.  To  parents.  Let  your  kindness  to  your  children  be  such  as 
accords  with  that  of  your  heavenly  Father  to  you,  and  as  affords  a  true  image  of  it. 
2.  To  children.  Show  kindness  to  your  parents  in  return  for  their  kindness  to  yon 
(ch.  xxii.  3),  as  your  heavenly  Father  requires.  8.  To  aU.  "  If  I  be  a  father,  wheif 
is  min«  honour?  "  (Mai.  L  6).— D. 


at.  XVII.  20—66.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


323 


EXPOSITION. 


Vers.  20 — 22.— Ha  eame  to  the  trench. 
More  probably  the  barricade,  or  outer  circle 
of  defence  for  their  camp,  made  of  their 
wagons  (see  on  ch.  z.  22).  Strictly  the  word 
means  a.  wagon-track,  but  the  primary  mean- 
ing of  the  verb  is  to  be  round.  This  was  the 
shape  of  camps  in  old  time,  and  they  were 
protected  against  surprise  by  having  the 
wagons  and  baggage  placed  round  them.  The 
word  occurs  again  in  ch.  xxvi  6,  7.  The 
latter  part  of  the  verse  is  literally,  "And  he 
came  to  the  circle  of  the  wagons,  and  to  the 
host  that  was  going  forth  to  the  array  ;  and 
they  shouted  for  the  battle. "  If  the  article 
be  omitted  before  "going  forth,"  for  which 
there  is  some  authority,  the  rendering  of  the 
A.  v.  would  be  right.  David  left  his  car- 
riage. /.  e.  that  which  he  waa  carrying. 
Tlie  word  is  rendered  stuff  in  ch.  x.  22  ;  xxv. 
13 ;  XXX.  24.  Literally  the  word  means 
utensils,  and  so  whatever  he  had  with  him 
for  any  purpose  (comp.  Acts  xxi.  16).  Ean 
into  the  army.  Literally,  "  to  the  array," 
"  to  the  ranks,"  the  place  where  the  troops 
were  drawn  up  (see  ver.  10). 

Vers.  23,'  24. — The  champion,  the  Fhilis- 
'tine  of  Oath,  Ooliath  by  name.  The  Hebrew 
is,  "  The  champion  (see  on  ver.  4),  Goliath 
the  Philistine  his  name,  of  Gath,"  probably 
the  very  words  of  the  original  record.  Out 
of  the  armies,  or  ranks.  This  is  a  very 
probable  correction  of  the  Kri,  made  by  re- 
storing a  letter  which  has  apparently  dropped 
out.  The  word  in  the  written  text  miglit 
mean  "  the  open  space  between  the  two 
armies ; "  but  it  occurs  nowhere  else,  and 
this  space  was  chiefly  occupied  by  the  ra- 
vine. The  men  of  Isra«l ....  fled  from 
him.  I.  e.  they  drew  back  in  haste  from  the 
edge  of  the  ravine,  which  Goliath  could  no 
more  have  crossed,  encased  in  armour  weigh- 
ing two  and  a  half  hundred-weight,  than  a 
knight  could  have  done  in  the  middle  ages. 
In  ver.  40  we  read  that  it  was  out  of  this 
ravine  that  David  selected  his  pebbles,  and, 
being  encumbered  with  no  armour,  it  waa 
easy  for  him  to  climb  up  the  other  side  and 
attack  his  heavily-armed  opponent. 

Vers.  25— 27.— To  defy  Israel.  Eather,  "to 
oast  seom  on,"  "to  dishonour  Israel"  (see 
on  ver.  10).     The  king  will  enrich  him  with 

great  riches and  make  his  father's 

house  free  in  Israel.  Many  years  must  have 
elapsed  before  Saul  could  thus  have  developed 
the  powers  of  the  crown,  and  the  last  words 
show  that  contributions  were  levied  from 
all  the  households  in  Israel  for  the  support 
of  the  king  and  his  retinue.  There  had 
manifestly  been  a  great  advance  since  the  day 
when  Jesse  sent  the  king  a  few  loaves  of 
bread,  a  skin  of  wine,  and  a  kid  (ch.  xvi  20). 


Still  we  cannot  imagine  that  Sanl  had  Intro- 
duced taxes,  nor  was  the  political  organisa- 
tion of  the  State  ripe  enough  for  so  advanced 
a  state  of  things.  The  words  more  probably 
refer  to  freedom  from  personal  service  in  the 
army  and  elsewhere ;  though  it  is  quite  pos- 
sible that  on  special  occasions  conmbutione 
may  have  been  levied,  and  presents,  no  doubt, 
were  constantly  being  made  to  the  king, 
though  on  no  regular  system.  Taketh  away 
the  reproach.  The  noun  formed  from  the 
verb  rendered  defy  in  ver.  10,  where  see  note. 
Tlncircumcised.  See  on  ch.  xiv.  6.  David, 
like  Jonathan,  sees  a  ground  of  confidence  in 
the  uncovenanted  relation  of  the  Philistine 
towards  God.  The  living  God.  A  second 
^ound  of  confidence.  The  god  of  the  Philis- 
tines was  a  lifeless  idol ;  Jehovah  a  Being 
who  proved  his  existence  by  his  acts.  So 
shall  it  be  done.  As  the  people  all  answer 
David's  inquiries  in  the  same  way,  Saul  had 
evidently  made  a  proclamation  to  this  effect, 
which  we  may  suppose  he  fulfilled,  though 
not  in  the  frankest  manner  (eh.  xviii.  17,  27). 

Vers.  28,  29. — Eliab's  anger  was  kindled 
against  David.  As  David,  with  growing 
indignation  at  an  uncovenanted  heathen  thus 
dishonouring  the  subjects  of  the  living  God, 
puts  eager  questions  to  all  around,  his  elder 
brother  angrily  reproaches  him  with  words 
full  of  contempt.  Between  the  eldest  and 
youngest  of  eight  sons  was  a  vast  interval, 
and  Eliab  regards  David's  talk  as  mere  pride, 
or,  rather,  "  presumption,"  '-'  impertinence ;" 
and  also  as  naughtiness,  or  badness,  of  heart, 
probably  because  he  imagined  that  David's 
object  was  to  provoke  some  one  else  to  fight, 
that  he  might  see  the  battle.  David's 
answer  is  gentle  and  forbearing,  but  the  last 
words  are  difficult.  Is  there  not  a  cause  1 
Have  not  those  whom  we  are  ready  to  con- 
demn a  reason  and  justification  for  their  con- 
duct! Such  a  question  put  to  ourselves 
might  stop  much  slander  and  fault-finding. 
But  the  Hebrew  literally  has.  Is  it  not  a 
wordf  And  the  ancient  versions  and  the 
best  modern  commentators  understand  by 
this,  "  It  was  but  a  mere  word  ; "  "I  was 
only  talking  about  this  challenge,  and  was 
doing  no  wrong." 

Vers.  30, 31. — Manner.  Literally,  word,  the 
noun  translated  cause  in  ver.  29,  and  mean- 
ing in  both  verses  "conversation."  It  occurs 
here  thrice,  the  Hebrew  being,  "And  he  spake 
according,  to  this  word :  and  the  people  re- 
turned him  a  word  according  to  the  former 
word."  And  as  David  thus  persisted  in  his 
indignant  remonstrances  at  the  ranks  of  the 
living  God  being  thus  dishonoured  by  no 
man  accepting  the  challenge,  they  rehearsed 
them  hefo'e  Saul,  who  thereupon  sent  for 
v2 


824 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh,  XVII.  20— 6& 


him.  And  thns  David  a  second  time,  and 
nnder  very  different  circumstances,  fonnd 
himself  again  standing  in  the  king's  presence. 

David  undertakes  the  combat  with 
Goliath,  and  peepaebs  foe  the  bnooun- 
TBE  (vera.  82—40).  Vers.  82,  83.— On  being 
brought  before  the  king,  David  says.  Let  no 
man's  heart  fail  because  of  him,  i,  «.  "on 
account  of  this  Philistine."  Literally  it  is 
"upon  him,"  and  some  therefore  translate 
"within  him."  The  Septuagint  forman  reads 
"my  lord  " — "  Let  not  my  lord's  heart  fail 
within  him."  Probably  "  within  him  "  is 
the  best  rendering  of  the  phrase.  Thou  art 
but  a  youth.  /.  e.  "  a  lad  (see  on  ch.  i  24  ; 
ii  18).  It  is  the  word  applied  to  David's 
brethren  in  ch.  xvi.  11,  and  his  friend  must 
have  been  very  enthusiastic  when,  in  ch.  xvL 
18,  he  described  him  as  a  "hero  of  valour 
knd  a  man  of  war." 

Vers.  84 — 36. — David  does  not  appeal  to 
any  feat  of  arms.  He  may  have  served  with 
credit  in  repelling  some  Philistine  foray,  but 
these  combats  with  wild  beasts,  fought  with- 
out the  presence  of  spectators,  and  with  no 
urgent  necessity  (as  most  shepherds  would 
have  been  too  glad  to  compound  with  such 
enemies  by  letting  them  take  a  lamb  without 
molestation),  still  more  clearly  proved  David's 
fearless  nature.  Lions  and  bears  were  both 
snmmon  in  ancient  times  in  Palestine,  when 
the  coimtry  was  more  densely  covered  with 
wood  ;  and  bears  are  numerous  in  the  moun- 
tainous districts  now.  Lions  seem  to  have 
been  less  feared  than  bears  (Amos  v.  19) ;  but 
Canon  Tristram  thinks  there  were  two  species 
of  the  lion  in  Palestine — one  short-maned, 
which  was  not  very  formidable,  the  other 
long-maned,  which  was  more  fierce  and  dan- 
gerous ('Nat.  Hist,  of  Bible,"  p.  117).  The 
Hebrew  literally  is,  "There  came  the  lion 
and  even  the  bear,"  the  articles  implying 
that  they  were  the  well-known  foes  of  the 
shepherd.  The  written  text  has  zeh,  "this," 
for  seh,  "  a  lamb,"  probably  a  mere  variety 
of  spelling.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that 
David  refers  to  two  di£Ferent  occasions,  espe- 
cially as  bears  and  lions  never  hunt  in  com- 
pany. By  his  beard.  Neither  the  bear 
nor  the  lion  has  a  beard,  and  the  word  really 
means  "the  chin,"  "the  place  where  the 
beard  grows."  The  Chaldee  translates  the 
lower  jaw,  and  the  Septuagint  the  throat. 
It  is  plain  from  this  description  that  David 
slew  the  beast  with  his  staff.  He  arose 
against  me.  This  shows  that  the  combat 
thus  particularly  described  was  with  the  bear, 
which  does  thus  rise  on  its  hind  legs  to 
grapple  with  its  foe,  while  the  lion  crouches 
and  then  springs.  Pliny  also  says  that  the 
weakest  part  of  a  bear  is  its  head,  and  that 
it  can  be  killed  by  a  smart  blow  there.  _  The 
manner  in  which  David  killed  the  lion  ii  not 
described.    Defied.    See  on  ver.  10. 


Yer.  87.— Sanl  said  unto  David,  Go.  The 
king's  consent  was  necessary  before  David 
could  act  as  the  champion  of  the  Israelites.  It 
was  a  courageous  act  in  Saul  to  give  his  per- 
mission, considering  the  conditions  of  the 
combat  (see  ver.  9),  but  the  two  arguments 
here  given  persuaded  him ;  the  first,  David's 
strong  confidence  in  Jehovah,  insuring  his 
courage  ;  and,  secondly,  the  coolness  and 
bravery  he  had  shown  in  these  dangerous 
encoimters  with  savage  animals. 

Vers.  38 — 40.— Saul  armed  David  with 
his  armour.  Bather,  "  Saul  clad  David  in 
his  war-dress."  The  word  does  not  mean 
arms,  either  offensive  or  defensive ;  for  in 
ch.  iv.  12,  where  it  is  rendered  "clothes," 
we  read  of  its  being  rent.  It  occurs  again 
in  ch,  xviii  4,  and  is  there  rendered  "gar- 
ments." Strictly  it  was  the  soldier's  coat, 
worn  under  his  armour,  and  girt  close  to  the 
body  by  the  sword-belt.  It  does  not  follow 
that  David  was  as  tall  as  Saul  because  he 
thus  put  on  his  military  coat ;  for  it  would  be 
adjusted  to  the  body  by  the  belt,  and  its 
length  was  not  a  matter  of  much  consequence. 
When,  then,  it  is  said  that  David  girded  hii 
sword  upon  his  armour,  it  means  upon  this 
coat,  though  the  corselet  of  mail  would  also 
be  worn  over  it.  He  assayed  to  go,  I.  e.  he 
made  an  attempt  at  going,  took  a  short  walk 
thus  arrayed,  making  trial  all  the  while  of 
his  equipments ;  and  he  found  them  so  cum- 
brous that  he  felt  that  he  would  have  no 
chance  against  the  Philistine  except  as  a 
liglit-armed  soldier.  The  agility  of  his  move- 
ments would  then  make  him  a  match  for  one 
so  heavily  overweighted  as  Goliath,  Wearing, 
therefore,  only  his  shepherd's  dress,  armed 
only  with  a  sUng,  David  descended  into  the 
ravine  which  separated  the  two  armies,  chose 
there  five  pebbles,  and,  clambering  up  the 
other  side,  advanced  towards  the  Philistine. 
For  brook  the  Hebrew  has  "torrent  bed." 
Conder  speaks  of  a  torrent  flowing  through 
the  ravine  (see  on  ver.  2), 

Combat  of  David  and  Goliath  (vers, 
41—54),  Vers.  41— 44.— When  David  had 
crossed  the  ravine,  Goliath  and  his  armour- 
bearer  advanced  towards  him  ;  and  when  he 
saw  that  the  Israelite  champion  was  but  a 
lad  (see  ver.  33),  with  red  hair,  which  added 
to  his  youthful  appearance,  and  handsome, 
but  with  nothing  more  than  a  staff  in  his 
hand,  he  regarded  this  light  equipment  as  an 
insult,  and  asks.  Am  I  a  dog,— an  animal 
held  in  great  aversion  in  the  East, — that  thou 
comest  to  me  with  staves!  The  plural  is 
used  as  a  contemptuous  generalisation,  but 
the  Septuagint  is  offended  at  it,  and  with 
amusing  matter-of-fact  exactness  translates, 
"  With  a  staff  and  stones."  And  the  Philis- 
tine cursed  David  by  his  ^ods.  The  Hebrew 
is  singular, "  by  his  god, "  t. «.  the  deity  whom 
he  had  selected  to  be  his  eapeoial  patron. 


o±  xvn.  20— i58.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL 


m 


Vers.  46— 47.— And  with  a  lUeld.  Really, 
'•  a  javelin"  (see  on  ver.  6).  David  of  conrse 
mentions  only  his  arms  of  offence.  Ai  Qoliath 
had  reviled  David  by  his  god,  so  David  now 
expresses  his  tmst  in  the  God  of  Israel,  even 
Jehovah  of  hosts,  whom  the  Philistine  was 
dishonouring.  This  day.  /.  «.  immediately 
(see  ch.  ziv.  83).  Carcases  is  singular  in 
the  Hebrew,  but  is  rightly  translated  plu- 
ral, as  it  is  nsed  collectively.  That  all  the 
earth  may  know,  &c.  As  we  saw  on  ver.  87, 
it  was  David's  strong  faith  in  Jehovah,  and 
his  conviction  that  God  was  fighting  for  him 
in  proof  of  his  covenant  relation  to  Israel, 
that  not  only  nerved  him  to  the  battle,  but 
made  Saul  see  in  him  one  fit  to  be  Israel's 
representative  in  so  hazardous  a  duel, 

vers.  48,  49. — When  the  Fhilistine  arose. 
Apparently  he  was  seated,  as  was  the  rule 
with  armies  in  ancient  times  when  not  en- 
gaged in  conflict  (comp.  ver.  62).  'When, 
then,  he  saw  David  emerge  from  the  ravine, 
he  rose,  and,  carrying  his  vast  load  of  armour, 
moved  slowly  towards  his  enemy,  trying  to 
frighten  him  by  his  curses.  David,  mean- 
while, in  his  light  equipment,  ran  towards  the 
army,  Hebrew,  "  tne  rank,"  i.  e.  the  Philis- 
tine line,  in  front  of  which  Goliath  had  been 
sitting.  As  the  giant's  helmet  had  no  visor, 
that  protection  not  having  as  yet  been  in- 
vented, and  his  shield  was  stiU  carried  by 
his  armour-bearer,  his  face  was  exposed  to 
David's  missiles.  And  in  those  days,  before 
firearms  were  invented,  men  by  constant  prac- 
tice "  could  sling  stones  at  a  hair-breadth, 
and  not  miss  "  (Judges  xx  16).  And  even 
if  David  were  not  quite  as  skilful  as  those 
Benjamites,  yet,  as  the  giant  could  move  only 
very  slowly,  the  chances  were  that  he  would 
hit  him  with  one  or  more  of  his  five  pebbles'. 
As  it  was,  he  struck  him  at  his  first  attempt 
upon  the  forehead  with  such  force  that 
Goliath  was  stunned,  and  fell'  down  upon  his 
face  to  the  ground. 

■Vers.  60,  51. — So  David  prevailed  over  the 
Philistine  with  a  sling  and  with  a  stone. 
It  is  evident  that  the  narrator  regarded 
Divid's  victory  as  extraordinary ;  and  no 
doubt  it  required  not  only  great  courage,  but 
also  perfect  skill,  as  only  the  lower  portion 
of  the  forehead  would  be  exposed,  and  on  no 
other  part  of  the  giant's  body  would  a  blow 
have  been  of  any  avail.  The  narrator  also 
calls  attention  to  the  fact  that  David  relied 
upon  his  sling  alone,  for  there  was  no  sword 
In  the  hand  of  David.  Slings  probably  were 
regarded  as  useful  only  to  harass  an  enemy, 
while  swords,  which  they  had  only  lately 
been  able  to  procure  (ch.  xiii  22),  were  re- 
garded as  the  real  weapons  of  offence.  David, 
therefore,  completes  his  victory  by  killing 
Goliath  with  his  own  sword  as  he  lay  stunned 
upon  the  groiind.  As  Ahimelech  considered 
it  fit  for  David's  ovn  use  (ch.  zzL  9),  it  was  j 


probably  not  so  monstrona  is  lin  u  Ctollath'i 
other  weapons.  Champion  ia  not  the  word 
■o  rendered  in  vera.  4,  28,  but  that  ued  ia 
ch.  xvi  18  for  "  a  hero  of  valour." 

■Vers.  62, 63. — ^To  the  valley.  Hebrew,  foi 
As  we  have  seen,  there  was  a  gai  or  ravine 
between  the  two  annies,  bnt  in  the  Hebrew 
there  is  no  article,  and  the  Israelites  must 
also  cross  this  before  any  fighting  began.  The 
panic  which  struck  the  Philistines  when  they 
saw  their  champion  fall  enabled  the  Israelites 
to  do  10,  bnt  the  pnisuit  only  then  com- 
menced. The  Septuagint  reads  Gath,  a  very 
probable  emendation,  for,  as  we  saw  in  the 
passage  quoted  fropi  Condor  on  ver.  2,  Gath 
was  situated  at  the  mouth  of  the  terebinth 
valley.  The  Syriac  and  'Vulgate  retain  valley, 
but  the  former  understands  it  of  the  mouth 
of  the  valley  of  Elah.  Shaaraim  was  a  town 
assigned  to  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  86)  in  the  She- 
phelah  (see  on  ver.  1),  but  was  now  held  by 
the  Philistines.  They  spoiled  their  tents. 
More  correctly,  "their  camp." 

'Ver.  64. — David  . . .  brought  it  to  Jerusa- 
lem. This  is  an  anticipation  of  later  history. 
The  Jebusitos  at  this  time  held  Jerusalem  ; 
but  when  David  had  taken  it  from  them,  he 
removed  the  head  of  Goliath  thither,  and 
the  narrator,  following  the  usual  custom  ol 
Hebrew  historians,  mentions  the  ultimate 
fate  of  this  trophy  here  (see  on  ch.  xvi  21). 
He  put  his  armour  in  his  tent  /.  e.  ho 
carried  it  to  his  home  (see  on  ch.  ii  86 ;  ir. 
10 ;  xiii.  2,  &c. ),  where  it  became  his  private 
property.  The  mistranslation  of  camp  by 
tents  in  ver.  53  might  lead  an  English  reader 
to  suppose  that  it  meant  a  tent  in  the  camp 
of  Israel ;  bnt  most  probably  the  men  all  slept 
under  their  wagons.  Abravanel  supposes  that 
by  David's  tent  was  meant  the  tabernacle  of 
Jehovah,  but  this  would  surely  have  been 
stated  more  fully.  Either,  however,  now,  or 
at  some  later  period,  David  must  have  pre- 
sented the  sword  as  an  offering  to  the  teber- 
nacle,  as  it  was  laid  up  at  Nob,  whence  he 
took  it  with  him  in  his  flight  (see  ch.  xxL  9). 

Saul's  inquiry  oonoerninq  David's  pa- 
EENTAOB  (vers.  55 — 58).  Vers.  66 — 68. — 
Abuer,  whose  son  is  this  youth  t  Hebrew, 
"  lad,"  nc^ar.  'We  have  seen  that  the  narra- 
tive in  oh.  xvL  21 — 23  carries  the  history  of 
David's  relations  with  Saul  down  to  a  much 
later  period,  and  that  in  ver.  16  of  this  chapter 
David  is  represented  as  not  dwelling  continu- 
ously at  Saul's  court,  but  as  having  returned 
to  Bethlehem  and  resumed  his  pastoral  occu- 
pations there,  whence  he  would  oe  summoned 
back  in  case  of  the  recurrence  of  Saul's 
malady.  It  is  plain  from  what  is  stated 
here  that  David  had  not  thus  far  spent  time 
enough  at  Gibeah  to  be  peraonally  well  known 
either  to  Saul  or  his  officers  (see  note  on  vet 
15).  Stripling.  Not  na'ar,  but  'alem,  th« 
masculine  of  the  word  'almah,  used  in  Isa. 


32« 


THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xvii.  20—68. 


Tii.  14.  It  meani  a  yonng  man  fully  grown, 
and  arrived  at  the  age  to  marry,  and  so  is 
more  definite  than  na'ar,  which  Saul  uses  in 
ver.  68.  As  David  returned,  &c.  Ahner,  as 
captain  of  the  host,  would  naturally  watch 
the  combat,  and  as  soon  as  it  was  possible 
would  bring  the  young  warrior  into  the  king's 

Eresence.     But  what  is  recorded  here  could 
ave  taken  place  only  after  the  pursuit  of 
the  Philistines  wai  over,  and  really  these  five 


verses  should  be  united  with  ch.  xviL,  at 
their  object  is  to  introduce  the  account  of  the 
love  of  Jonathan  for  David.  Starting  then 
with  the  inquiry  made  by  the  king  of  Abner, 
asking  for  fuller  information  as  to  the  young 
man's  parentage,  the  historian  then  tells  how 
after  the  chase  he  was  brought  before  Sanl,  and 
then,  in  ch.  zviiL  1,  that  the  result  of  theii 
conversation  was  the  warm  love  that  hence- 
forward knit  together  these  two  kindred  soola. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vers.  80 — 80. — A  religioM  .man's  view  of  things.     The  facts  are — 1.  David 

arrives  at  the  camp  just  as  preparations  are  being  made  for  battle.  2.  While  with  his 
brethren  he  hears  the  defiance  of  Goliath,  and  observes  the  dismay  of  Israel.  3. 
Being  informed  of  the  inducement  offered  by  Saul  for  any  one  to  slay  Goliath,  ha 
makes  particular  inquiries  as  to  the  facts,  and  suggests  the  vanity  of  the  defiance. 
4.  His  inquiries  arouse  the  jealousy  of  Eliab,  who  imputes  to  him  unhallowed 
motives.  5.  Nevertheless,  David  persists  in  his  attention  to  the  matter.  The  pusil- 
lanimity of  the  entire  army  seems  to  have  been  accepted  by  Saul  as  quite  reasonable 
in  presence  of  such  a  foe.  David's  converse  with  the  men  revealed  a  remarkable 
unanimity  of  sentiment  among  them.  Estimated  by  the  ordinary  maxims  of  war 
during  times  when  brute  force  in  individual  conflict  decided  the  day,  there  was, 
indeed,  small  chance  for  a  dwarf  against  a  giant.  The  embarrassment  was  great, 
natural,  and  irremovable.  But  from  the  moment  of  David's  arrival  this  condition  of 
things  appeared  to  him  unreasonable.  Coming  fresh  from  the  fold,  unfiimiliar  with 
the  ordinary  rules  of  armed  warfare,  and  interpreting  facts  by  principles  acquired 
elsewhere  than  in  the  camp  and  among  pusillanimous  men,  lie  marvelled  at  the 
dismay  of  Israel,  and  dared  to  be  singular  in  his  opinion  that  the  giant  was  not  to 
be  dreaded.  Eventa  from  a  religiouB  point  of  view  assume  a  different  aspect. 
Notice— 

I.  An  eminently  religious  man's  impressions  of  formidablb  dipficttlties. 
David  was  at  this  time,  in  comparison  with  others,  eminently  religious.  The  facts  of 
life  impress  us  according  to  sentiments  and  views  already  entertained.  When, 
therefore,  this  devout,  God-fearing  youth  looked  on  the  conflict,  he  saw  it  with  eyes 
full  of  religious  light.  He  felt  that  the  entire  army  was  wrong  in  feeling  and 
opinion.  The  principle  Iwlds  good  in  other  applications.  The  eminently  religious 
get  an  impression  or  the  world  peculiar  to  their  refined  spiritual  condition.  The 
most  conspicuous  instance  of  this  is  in  the  case  of  the  holy  Saviour.  Coming  from 
the  pure,  loving  sphere  of  heaven,  more  sweet  and  restful  than  David's  rural  pasturea, 
how  different  would  the  earth,  with  its  conflicts,  cares,  and  woes,  appear  to  him  as 
compared  with  their  impression  on  men  I  Holy  men  see  the  world  with  new  eyea 
when  they  descend  from  some  mount  of  transfiguration.  No  wonder  if  some  highly- 
purified  and  trustful  souls,  looking  on  the  fear  and  inactivity  of  professed  followers 
of  Christ,  are  disgusted  and  ashamed  at  the  lack  of  hope  and  confidence.  If  we  have 
the  "  mind  of  Christ,"  fresh,  pure,  deep  in  conviction  of  God's  all-wise  and  mighty 
will,  toned  with  pity,  and  elevated  by  undying  hope,  we  shall  often  get  impressions 
of  our  surroundings  which  may  make  us  singular,  but  which,  nevertheless,  will  be 
just. 

II.  An  eminently  bbligioub  man  will  not  hesitate  to  indicate  and  justift 
his  impressions.  The  clear,  truthful  eyes  of  the  shepherd  youth  saw  the  world 
through  a  Divine  medium,  and,  with  all  the  sincerity  of  goodness  and  force  of  deep 
conviction,  he  was  not  afraid  to  let  it  be  known  that  he  differed  from  others. 
"  Who  is  this  Philistine?"  He  defy  the  "armies  of  the  living  Godt"  The  fire 
burned  ;  he  could  not  but  speak.  To  him  it  was  a  most  abhorrent  thought  that  any 
one  could  dare  to  assert  his  strength  agjiinst  God.  It  is  obvious  that  David  reduced 
the  whole  situation  to  a  question  of  first  principles.  He  remembered  who  the 
Philistine  was  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  what  the  meaning  of  Israel's  existence  in  th< 


OB.  xm.  20—68.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  STi 

great  purpose  of  redemption.  The  fear  of  Israel  he  referred  to  loss  of  faith  in  the 
people's  mission  to  the  world,  and  in  God  as  the  perfecter  of  that  mission.  IllvMra- 
ticm  of  the  fame  course  are  elsewhere  Yound.  True  religious  enlightenment  must 
express  itself  in  some  form.  The  holy  cannot  look  on  life  and  be  silent.  Our 
Saviour's  words  and  deeds  were  largely  the  expression  of  the  effect  of  man's  con- 
dition upon  his  nature.  It  is  especially  important  to  remember  this  reference  to  firs', 
principles  in  their  application  to — 1.  The  sorrows  and  woes  of  mankind  through  sin. 
We  cannot  solve  the  mystery  of  evil,  but  can  fall  back  on  the  primary  truth  that 
God  is  good  and  wise,  and  therefore  his  government  in  the  end  will  be  justified. 
2.  The  prevalent  habits  of  the  world.  We  must  not  fail  to  trace  them  to  radical 
alienation  from  God,  and  apply  the  only  radical  cure,  renewal  of  nature  by  the 
Spirit  of  God.  8.  The  obstacles  in  the  way  of  Christ's  triumph.  They  are  real  cs 
facts,  but  we  must  justify  our  faith  in  their  removal  by  indicating  their  essentiall} 
transitory  character  in  contrast  with  the  "  everlasting  strength  "  of  our  God. 

III.     A   KELIGIODS   MAN   IN  GIVING   EFFECT  TO  HIB    IMPEESSIONB    MAT   BE   MISBEPRE- 

bbNted.  David's  pure  mind  was  charged  with  vanity  and  idle  curiosity  (ver.  28). 
The  accusation  was  the  more  painful  in  coming  from  a  brother.     Jealousy  creates  a 

J'aundiced  medium  through  which  the  holiest  and  most  beautiful  things  appear 
lideous.  A  greater  than  David  was  also  reviled,  and  his  most  holy  and  blessed 
words  and  deeds  associated  with  the  most  wicked  of  origins  (Murk  iii.  22 ;  John  x. 
20).  Pliny  and  Tacitus,  judicious  men  of  the  world,  could  not  appreciate  the 
opmions  and  motives  of  the  early  Christians.  Even  now  strong  faith  in  God,  and 
belief  that  all  obstacles  to  the  progress  of  Christianity  will  give  way  because  essen- 
tially human,  is  regarded  as  fanaticism.  Even  among  some  professed  believers  in 
Christ  those  are  held  to  be  too  sanguine  who  feel  sure  that  the  most  formidable  of 
modern  giants  is  as  nothing  before  the  mighty  power  which  somehow  will  sweep  ii 
away.     Be  it  so ;  time  will  show. 

General  lessons: — 1.  Clearness  of  vision  on  religions  matters, and  indirectly^ on  all 
is  a  result  of  superior  devoutness  of  spirit.  2.  We  never  need  fear  being  singulai 
when  sustained  by  a  clear  conscience  and  the  approval  of  God.  3.  The  earnest 
convictions  and  simple  faith  of  one  man  may,  in  the  providence  of  God,  work  a 
revolution  in  popular  thought.  4.  We  give  value  to  our  religious  convictions  when 
they  are  indicated  with  candour  and  are  sustained  by  simplicity  and  purityof  life 
6.  A  love  of  detraction  and  petty  fault-finding,  while  it  does  not  really  injure  the 
devoted  who  are  its  object,  debases  those  who  indulge  in  them. 

Vers.  31— ST.— Eeasonable  confluence  m  God.  The  facts  are— 1.  David's  words 
being  reported  to  Saul,  he  sends  for  him.  2.  David  volunteers  to  go  forth  and  fight 
the  Philistine.  3.  In  justification  of  his  confidence,  he  refers  to  God's  deliverance  of 
him  from  the  lion  and  bear.  4.  Saul  bids  him  go,  and  desires  for  him  the  Lord's 
presence.  It  was  doubtless  a  relief  to  Saul  to  be  informed  that  at  least  there  was 
one  in  Israel  who  dared  to  accept  the  Philistine's  challenge.  His  surprise  was  equal 
to  his  relief,  and  may  have  lessened  his  hope,  when  he  saw  the  stripling.  The  quiet 
confidence  of  David  was  natural  and  reasonable  to  himself,  but  evidently  required 
gome  justification  before  Saul.  The  story  of  the  lion  and  bear  was  adduced,  with 
beautiful  simplicity  of  spirit,  to  indicate  to  Saul  that  the  confidence  cherished  was 
amply  warranted  by  past  experience.  To  David's  mind  the  logic  was  unanswerable. 
It  is  by  tracing  the  mental  process  by  which  David  rested  in  his  firm  conviction  that 
we  shall  see  the  true  ground  of  our  confidence  in  God,  when  called  by  his  providence 
to  enter  upon  undertakings  of  a  serious  nature. 

I.  A  PRIMABT  TRUTH.  The  power  of  God  is  adequate  to  any  human  need.  This 
general  truth  was  the  basis  of  David's  reasoning.  It  was  involved  in  his  very  con- 
ception of  Jehovah,  and  found  beautiful  utterance  in  his  language  of  later  years. 
The  power  of  the  Eternal  was  not  a  mere  philosophic  idea  requisite  to  complete  the 
notion  of  God,  but  a  living  energy  permeating  all  things.  The  ascription  of  natural 
changes  and  events  immediately  to  God  (Ps.  xviii.)  is  only  the  expression  of  a  faith 
which  sees  the  Divine  energy  in  and  through  all  things.  The  people  at  Elah,  on  see- 
ing Goliath,  thought  of  his  strength.  The  reverse  efEect  produced  in  the  mmd  of 
Pavid  by  Goliath's  boast  was  the  tho-ught  of  the  eternal  power.     The  vnfiuence  oj 


B28  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ott.  XTti.  20—68. 

general  truths  on  our  life  is  great — greater  than  some  suppose.  They  He  deep  down 
in  the  mind,  and  yet  are  ever  at  command  to  regulate  thought  and  feeling,  and  to 
suggest  lines  of  conduct.  Hence  those  in  whom  they  are  most  fresh  and  clear  are 
persons  of  wider  range  of  view,  sounder  judgment,  and  deeper  convictions.  It  is 
important  to  have  the  mind  wellfo  rtified  with  those  general  truths  that  relate  to  God  ; 
and,  in  view  of  the  difficulties  and  dangers  of  life,  it  is  well  to  keep  clear  the  truth 
that  in  Jehovah  is  "everlasting  strength." 

II.  An  exfebiencb.  David  referred  to  the  experience  he  had  had  of  the  power  of 
God  in  delivering  him  from  the  lion  and  hear  while  in  the  discharge  of  his  life's 
calling.  The  Almighty  hand  had  befiiended  him  at  a  time  when  he  put  forth  his 
own  energies  to  subdue  his  dangerous  enemies.  Without  having  recourse  to  miracle 
in  these  cases,  it  is  enough  to  notice  that  David  recognises  Divine  aid  in  the  putting 
forth  of  effort,  and  the  primary  truth  had  been  translated  into  the  experience  of  life, 
and  80  become  strikingly  verified.  A  fact  is  an  unanswerable  argument  The  logic 
strengthens.  Most  of  us  can  fall  back  on  deliverances  from  lions  and  adders  (Ps. 
xci.  13).  The  mental  record  of  the  past  furnishes  a  premiss  on  which  to  build  an 
argument  of  hope  for  the  future  (2  Tim.  iv.  17,  18). 

III.  A  BBVEALED  FACT.  David  could  not  cherish  the  confidence  he  did  without 
welding  with  his  primary  truth  and  personal  experience  the  fact  that  the  Almighty 
was  always  the  same,  and  that,  therefore,  continuity  in  aid  might  be  looked  for.  The 
unohangeableness  of  Ood  was  an  assured  fact,  not  from  philosophic  speculation  on 
the  necessary  nature  of  the  Supreme,  but  because  made  clear  to  the  mind  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  (2  Pet.  i.  21).  "From  everlasting  to  everlasting  then  art  God,"  keep- 
ing covenant  for  ever  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  34).  Therefore  the  argument  from  past  experience 
of  his  power  was,  so  far,  available  for  conflict  with  a  gigantic  foe.  The /orce  of  this 
revealed  fact  concerning  the  Divine  Being  is  great.  It  gives  our  mind  a  resting-place 
amidst  the  incessant  flux  of  things.  It  opens  up  to  view  a  rock  on  which  we  can 
stand  calm  and  secure  in  face  of  all  changes  of  earth.  The  frailty  of  our  life  seems 
a  blessing  in  association  with  so  precious  a  reality.  As  the  uniformity  in  the  laws  of 
nature  furnish  a  basis  of  wise  calculation  and  confidence  in  action,  so  the  unchanging 
power  of  God  in  relation  to  human  need  is  a  ground  of  hope  and  confidence  in 
pursuit  of  legitimate  objects. 

IV.  A  FBESENT  BMEBQENCT.  David  found  himself  in  presence  of  ad  emergency 
more  trying  than  when  lion  and  bear  were  confronted,  for  the  interests  were  vride. 
He  was  too  sensible  a  youth  to  imagine  that  the  eternal  power  would  be  manifested 
because  men  desired  it,  whatever  the  occasion.  But  if  aid  was  given  formerly  in  real 
need,  and  now  a  need  more  pressing  was  felt,  the  argument  of  faith  was  conclusive. 
Moreover,  the  earlier  occasions  were  private  and  personal ;  this  was  public,  afEecting 
the  interests  of  Israel ;  and  were  not  these  the  interests  of  him  for  whose  advent 
Israel  lived  ?  The  ruddy  youth  perhaps  saw  a  connection  between  the  overthrow  of 
Goliath  and  the  great  kingdom  of  which  he  sang  in  Ps.  Ixxii.  We  have  here  a  tq/e 
criterion  of  the  reasonableness  of  confidemx  in  GodJs  aid.  When  an  emergencj 
arises  which  deeply  affects  the  honour  and  safety  of  Christ's  Church,  and  the  dif- 
fusion of  the  blessings  of  his  reign,  we  are  warranted  to  cherish  fullest  confidence 
that  God  will  help  ns  in  our  endeavour,  by  such  means  as  we  possess,  to  meet  the 
peril.  Let  Churches  and  individuals  act  by  this  rule,  and  they  will  never  be  dis- 
appointed. It  is  involved  in  the  promise,  "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even  onto  the 
end  of  the  world." 

V.  A  PBOViDENCK.  The  previously-noticed  elements  in  the  ground  of  David's 
confidence  were  more  influential  from  the  fact  that  he  did  not  force  himself  into  the 
position,  but  was  there  by  providential  leading,  in  which  he  was  quite  passive.  A 
man  may  at  the  last  moment  shrink  from  a  dangerous  work  if  conscious  that  he,  by 
contrivance,  sought  it  out ;  but  when  we  are  literally  urged  by  circumstances  into 
difficulties  and  dangers,  and  have  a  good  cause  in  hand,  then  we  may  take  the  pro- 
vidence as  an  encouragement  to  go  through.  Providence  led  the  apostles  into  con- 
flict with  miera,  andj  hence,  they  dared  to  be  confident. 

VI.  A  PLEA.  David  could  fortify  his  expectation  of  help  by  the  plea  that  his  heart 
was  honest  in  intent  He  sought  not  to  fight  the  giant  for  lov«  of  fighting,  for 
wonting  renown,  for  any  piivate  end,  bat  for  love  to  his  people  Israel  and  tne  honour 


OH.  XVII.  20—68.]         THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  SSf 

of  Israel's  God.  Purity  of  motive  in  ordinary  life  is  no  substitute  for  faith  in  Christ 
for  acceptance  with  God ;  but  it  is  a  condition  on  which  God  grants  his  aid  to  us  in 
our  exertions.  If  we  face  gigantic  evils,  in  themselves  too  great  for  our  wisdom  and 
strength,  from  an  intense  desire  to  conquer  them  for  Christ,  cherishing  no  vain  per- 
sonal ambition,  then  the  highest  confidence  is  justified.  A  power  equal  to  our  need, 
unchanged  by  time,  realised  in  past  experience,  required  for  an  emergency  in  wliich 
the  honour  of  Christ  is  at  stake,  sought  by  one  providentially  led  to  face  the  difBoulty, 
and  desired  not  for  vain  reasons,  but  purely  for  the  glory  of  God — such  a  process  of 
thought  places  confidence  in  God's  help  on  a  most  reasonable  basis. 

General  lessons: — 1.  We  should  consider  whether  Providence  has  really  given  ua 
arduous  work  to  do  for  Christ.  2.  Our  wisdom  is  to  go  forth,  not  under  the  influence 
of  the  opinions  of  unspiritual  men,  but  under  the  full  force  of  our  owrt  religious 
convictions.  3.  We  must  not  expect  to  know  in  what  way  the  power  of  God  will 
work  with  us ;  the  fact  that  it  will  is  enough.  .4.  Success  or  failure  in  perilous 
enterprises  for  Christ  depends  much  on  the  purity  of  motive,  and  this  should  receive 
prayerful  attention. 

Vers.  38 — 40. — Naturalness.  The  facts  are — 1.  Saul  clothes  David  with  his  armour. 
2.  David,  distrusting  its  value,  puts  it  aside.  8.  He  goes  forth  to  the  conflict 
armed  only  with  a  sling  and  a  stone.  There  is  a  curious  blending  of  cowardice, 
prudence,  and  folly  in  Saul's  conduct.  Not  daring  to  fight  the  foe,  he  hesitates  not 
to  accept  a  youth ;  and  while  providing  ordinary  armour  for  his  defence,  he  fails  to 
see  that  an  armed  youth  would  really  be  at  a  disadvantage  with  an  armed  giant. 
Apart  from  higher  considerations,  David's  good  sense  shows  him  that  free  nimble- 
ness  would  be  of  more  value  than  limbs  stiffened  under  a  coat  of  mail.  The  gentle 
negation,  "  I  have  not  proved  them,"  covered  a  positive  faith  in  other  armour  often 
proved.  He  would  be  David  in  the  conflict,  and  no  one  else.  The  issue  was  staked 
on  his  perfect  naturalness.  He  knew  "  in  whom  he  believed,"  and  was  true  to  his 
own  individuality.     The  teaching  is  wide  and  important  in  relation  to — 

I.  Education.  To  be  natural  is  one  of  the  ends  of  education,  and  there  is  a 
naturalness  in  the  means  and  process  by  which  alone  that  and  all  the  ends  of  educa- 
tion will  be  secured.  While  psychologically  the  sum  of  faculties  is  the  same  in  all, 
the  relative  power  of  them  may  vary.  Constitutional  tendencies  and  tastes  also 
greatly  differ.  The  inherent  capacity  of  certain  faculties  seems  likewise  to  be 
affected  by  inheritance.  Discrimination  is  therefore  requisite  in  education,  otherwise 
we  may  place  a  Saul's  armour  on  a  David,  and  encumber  his  mental  movements. 
No  doubt  a  weak  faculty  is  benefited  by  being  stimulated  to  work,  and  a  deficient 
taste  may  be  improved  by  exercise  ;  but  the  apportionment  of  work  to  faculties  and 
tastes  should  be  regulated,  not  by  some  general  average  of  minds,  bat  by  what  will 
make  the  most  of  the  idiosyncrasies  of  the  individual.  That  educational  training  and 
equipment  is  natural  which  leaves  the  mind  most  free  and  effective.  What  is  gained 
on  one  side  by  painful  drudgery  may  be  lost  on  another  by  embitterment  and 
crippled  talents.  Especially  in  rdigiovx  education  is  this  important.  Let  us  not 
clothe  the  mental  nature  of  children  with  the  forms  suited  to  men.  Probably  much 
of  the  distaste  for  religious  instruction  springs  from  the  perfect  unsuitability  of  the 
form  to  the  receptivity  of  the  mind. 

II.  Occupation.  Success  in  any  calling  depends  largely  on  the  naturalness  of  it 
to  the  abilities,  tastes,  and  aspirations  of  the  employed.  The  Goliath  of  poverty  and 
disappointment  too  frequently  overpowers  really  good  and  able  men,  because  their 
occupation,  though  good  and  useful  in  itself,  is  unnatural  to  them.  In  the  pressure 
of  life  it  is  hard,  no  doubt,  to  find  the  proper  place  for  each  one ;  but  more  fore- 
thought on  the  part  of  parents  and  guardians  would  obviate  some  of  the  evils.  The 
over-crowding  and  eager  race  of  men,  trampling  one  another  down  in  poverty,  raises 
the  thought  whether  these  troubles  are  not  the  voice  of  Providence  calling  on  men  to 
spread  abroad  and  cultivate  the  rich  distant  lands  waiting  for  occupants.  Natural- 
ness of  occupation  and  of  ma/nner  is  also  desirable  in  voorks  of  eharUy  and  rdigion. 
Let  not  men  be  armed  with  powers  and  prerogatives  out  of  accord  with  their  mental 
and  moral  stature.  Let  not  the  yon+b  o*  *he  Church,  in  their  enthusiasm  for  Christ, 
be  fettered  by  impositions  that  will  nullify  their  seal     Nor  let  the  fanmatnre  assums 


830  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL,  [oH.  xvil.  20—68. 

functions  for  which  ripe  experience  alone  can  qualify.  The  wise  Church  is  that 
which  takeg  cognisance  of  all  its  memhers,  and  finds  out  and  encourages  some 
sphere  of  Christian  activity  natural  to  the  attainments  and  social  position  of  each 
individual.  Ministries  may  differ  in  style  and  be  mpst  natural — e.  g.  Paul  and  John. 
III.  Spirituai,  conflict.  In  one  respect  David's  was  a  spiritual  conflict.  He 
discerned  the  great  religious  issues  at  stake,  and  the  fitness  of  the  means  by  which 
the  battle  was  to  be  fought.  For  sweeping  off  from  the  earth  a  great  foe  of  God's 
purpose  in  Israel,  and,  therefore,  in  Christ,  he  had  not  proved  the  armour  of  Saul,  the 
unspiritual  king;  but  he  had  proved  other  means  of  warfare  suited  to  his  indi- 
viduality as  a  youth  full  of  faith  in  God  and  enthusiasm  for  the  golden  age  of  the 
world.  The  man  after  God's  own  heart  will  not  fight  in  the  attire  of  the  man  who 
had  lost  faith  in  God.  He  must  have  freedom  for  such  powers  as  are  natural  to  him- 
self, and  that  would  give  scope  for  his  trust  in  God.  1.  Is  there  not  here  a  fore- 
skadowing  of  a  greater  than  David  ?  Christ,  in  seeking  to  rid  the  earth  of  the 
giant  foe  of  God's  righteous  government,  sin,  knows  that  men  have  been  accustomed 
to  contend  with  the  evil  by  various  appliances — philosophy,  art,  social  and  political 
organisation,  repressive  ordinances,  commercial  intercourse,  and  other  agencies 
created  for  the  preservation  of  society.  There  were  men  who  hoped  that  he  would 
adopt  some  of  the  ordinary  appliances  (John  vi.  16).  But  Christ  worked  out  his 
mission  on  the  line  of  his  own  individuality.  Recognising  organisations,  and  social 
laws,  and  ordinary  knowledge  as  useful,  he  nevertheless  struck  at  the  root,  not  at  the 
ramifications,  of  sin.  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of 
God."  "Make  the  tree  good  and  his  fruit  good."  And  this  he  effects  by  the  power 
of  his  holy  life,  of  his  self-sacrifice,  and  pure  truth,  brought  to  bear  on  the  deepest 
springs  of  thought  and  volition  by  the  mighty  working  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Matt.  xi. 
29;  John  iii.  7;  x.  16—18;  xiii.  15;  xvii.  17;  2  Cor.  v.  21 ;  Phil.  ii.  5;  1  Pet.  ii. 
21—25;  iiL  18).  2.  We  may  also  see  here  a  parallel  to  our  personal  conflicts 
with  evil.  There  are  "  carnal "  weapons  sometimes  used  for  subjugation  of  evil,  but 
the  spiritual  man  knows  of  an  "  armour  of  God  "  (Ephes.  vii.  11 — 17),  often  proved 
and  never  known  to  fail.  Both  in  our  own  hearts  and  in  the  world  sin  will  be  most 
surely  overcome  if  we  distrust  mere  accommodations  to  its  nature  and  conformities 
to  its  methods,  and  use  with  all  our  free  energy  the  Bpiritual  power  which  comes  of 
God.  Christian  naturalness  lies  in  using  Christian  means — ^faith,  prayer,  truth,  love, 
hope,  and  patience. 

Vers.  41 — 61. — The  govemiTig  principle  of  We.  The  facts  are — I.  The  Philistine, 
on  observing  the  youth  and  simple  weapons  of  David,  disdains  and  curses  him,  and 
boasts  of  soon  giving  his  flesh  to  bird  and  beast.  2.  David,  in  reply,  declares  that 
he  comes  in  the  name  of  God,  and  expresses  his  assurance  that,  in  the  speedy  death 
of  his  foe,  all  men  would  learn  that  the  battle  is  the  Lord's.  3.  Goliath  falls  by 
means  of  the  sling  and  stone.  4.  Seizing  his  sword,  David  cuts  off  his  head,  whereon 
the  Philistines  flee.  We  may  regard  Goliath  and  David  as  representatives  of  two 
very  distinct  orders  of  character — the  one  serving  as  a  foil  to  the  other.  The  low 
human  purpose,  the  boastful  trust  in  human  strength,  and  the  vanity  of  gaining  per- 
sonal renown,  on  the  one  side,  set  off  in  bold  relief  the  execution  of  a  Divine  purpose, 
the  quiet  trust  in  Divine  strength,  and  the  supreme  desire  to  see  God  glorified,  on  the 
other  side.  "  I  come  to  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  the  armies 
of  Israel,  whom  thou  hast  defied  " — here  is  the  great  principle  that  governed  David's 
conduct  "  In  the  name  of  the  Lord "  did  the  stripling  raise  his  voice,  select  his 
stones,  and  use  his  sling.  Nor  was  this  a  mere  accident  in  his  life.  A  crisis  may 
bring  out  into  clear  and  bold  expression  the  principle  which  governs  a  good  man's 
life,  but  it  does  not  create  it.  "  In  the  name  of  the  Lord  "  was  his  motto  when  feed- 
ing the  sheep,  slaying  the  lion  and  bear,  and  composing  the  Psalms.    Consider — 

I.   The  NATUBB  AND  RANGE  OF  THE  GOVEBNINQ  PRINCIPLB  OF  A  GOOD  MAN's  LIFB. 

There  are  various  mental  acts  entering  into  and  lying  at  the  spring  of  conduct — som« 
more  original  than  others.  Life  cannot  be  fully  understood  without  an  analysis  of  them 
and  a  recognition  of  their  mutual  relation.  At  one  time  a  passion  may  be  regarded 
is  the  governing  principle — e.  g.  "  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us ; "  at  another, 
?uiDreme  regard  for  right — e.  g.  "  Do  justly^;  "  at  another,  obedience  to  •  raperior  wilJ 


OH.  xvn  20-«8.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  331 

— e.  ».  "  Not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done."  But  these  and  others  of  Icindred  nature  ar« 
in  [Scripture  summarised  in  the  beautiful  formula,  "In  the  name  of  the  Lord." 
David's  conduct  brings  this  principle  into  triple  form.  1.  The  purpose  of  life  is  the 
purpose  of  God.  That  which  God,  by  the  revelations  of  his  mercy  and  the  ordina- 
tions of  providence,  is  working  out — the  cutting  off  of  evil  and  the  establishment  of 
righteousness — is  the  adopted  and  cherished  purpose  of  life.  In  every  calling,  pur- 
suit, enterprise,  alliance,  pleasure,  secular  or  spiritual  conflict,  the  true  man  goes 
forth  "  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  "  to  destroy  the  foe  of  God  and  man.  He  is  conscious 
of  a  definite  unity  of  purpose,  and  wills  that  it  be  identical  with  the  one  purpose  of 
God.  2.  The  power  trusted  to  is  the  power  of  God.  The  Lord  in  whose  name 
David  went  forth  "saveth  not  with  sword  and  spear."  The  stripling  did  not  expect 
Goliath  to  fall  down  dead  while  he  lay  at  rest  in  his  tent,  but  he  went  forth  using 
those  means  natural  to  him  as  a  youth,  and  this  too  because  of  the  unseen  hand 
which  taught  "his  fingers  to  fight.  God's  strength  is  not  a  vast  reserve  locked  up 
for  use  on  some  far  distant  day,  when  some  new  system  of  worlds  has  to  be  created, 
any  more  than  that  it  has  been  all  poured  forth  into  laws  and  forces  now  acting. 
The  Eternal  Spirit  is  eternally  strong,  and  as  a  Spirit  is  in  such  contact  with  us  that, 
by  placing  ourselves  in  a  certain  attitude  of  loving  trust,  we  receive  from  him  accord- 
ing to  our  need.  3.  The  glory  sought  is  that  of  the  Lord.  The  motive  of  David 
was  not  to  become  notorious  among  men,  not  to  promote  some  private  advantage, 
but  that  "  all  the  earth  might  know  that  there  is  a  God  in  Israel."  Here  the  stripling 
warrior  was  governed  by  the  same  reference  to  God  as  was  recognised  by  the  Apostle 
Paul  when  he  said,  "  Do  all  to  the  glory  of  God  "  (1  Cor.  x.  31).  This  abnegation 
of  self,  this  joy  in  the  honour  of  the  holy  name,  this  ambition  to  see  men  bowing 
in  reverence  to  the  Lord  of  all,  enters  into  the  private  and  public,  the  secular  and 
spiritual,  works  of  the  renewed  man.  See  the  beautiful  and  impressive  language  of 
saints  of  different  ages  (2  Sam.  xxii.  33,  35  ;  2  Chron.  zxxii.  7,  8 ;  Ps.  xx.  5 ;  Iziii.  4 ; 
cxv.  1 ;  2  Cor.  x.  4 ;  Heb.  xi.  32—34). 

II.  The  TBUB  GOVEKNING  PRINCIPLE  OF  LIFE  IS  NOT  UNDEBSTOOD  BY  THOSE  WHO  ABB 

NOT  UNDKE  ITS  INFLUENCE.  Goliath,  judging  others  by  the  principles  that  governed 
his  own  conduct,  disdained  David :  his  abusive  language  shows  that  he  had  no  con- 
ception of  the  nature  of  the  inspiration  that  made  the  stripling  so  cool  and  brave. 
Some  men  live  in  a  world  not  penetrated  even  by  the  vision  of  others.  Spheres  of 
life  come  into  collision,  but  do  not  intersect.  The  scorn  and  contempt  of  the  un- 
godly is  a  common  fact  (Ps.  cxxiii.  4 ;  1  Cor.  i.  18 ;  iv.  13).  Christ  and  his  apostles 
were  treated  with  contempt,  and  their  design  of  subduing  the  world  was,  and  still  is, 
by  some  referred  to  madness.  Eidicule  of  prayer,  of  missions  to  savage  men,  of 
expectation  of  Christ's  gospel  being  accepted  by  all,  still  abounds.  Are  not  the 
people  "few,"  the  means  contemptible — out  of  harmony  with  the  age,  and  opposed 
to  the  principles  of  physical  science  ?  It  is  the  old  story  of  a  boastful  Goliath.  It 
is  the  same  revelation  of  profound  ignorance.  Verily,  if  there  were  no  more  in 
Christian  men  than  in  their  foes,  the  conflict  would  soon  be  settled  (2  Cor.  iv.  4). 

III.  The  TBI0MPH  OF  THE  OUTWORKING  OF  THE  TRUE  GOVERNING  PRINCIPLE  OF  LIFE 

IS  A8SCBED.  David  was  sure  that  on  that  very  day  his  foe  would  fall,  and  so  illus- 
trate the  supremacy  of  the  good  man's  principle.  Events  confirmed  the  truth.  The 
issue  of  the  great  conflict  between  Christ's  Church  and  opposing  forces  of  evil  is 
thus  foreshadowed.  We  may  go  forth  with  the  same  assurance  that  at  the  end  of 
the  world's  great  day  of  battle  we  shall  be  in  a  position  to  say,  "Now  thanks  be 
unto  God,  who  always  causeth  us  to  triumph  in  Christ "  (2  Cor.  ii.  14 ;  1  Cor.  xv. 
57,  68).  The  same.result  may  be  looked  for  in  respect  of  our  own  personal  conflicts 
with  sin ;  for  though  we  may  be  weak,  and  pained  by  the  scorning  of  the  proud,  yet, 
using  our  sling  and  stone  in  the  strength  of  God,  it  will  be  found  at  last  that  we  are 
"  more  than  conquerors."  And  this,  which  applies  to  life  as  a  whole,  is  of  equal  forcQ 
in  respect  to  any  form  of  vice  or  moral  evil  we  contend  with  day  by  day  (Ps.  xliv. 
6,  7 ;  Micah  vii.  8). 

Qmeral  lesson* : — 1.  The  continued  boasting  of  the  enemies  of  Christianity  is  an 
illustration  of  its  spiritual  nature  and  the  truth  of  its  predictions  (2  Pet.  iii.  3).  S. 
The  great  need  for  Christians  is  to  rise  to  the  height  of  their  powers  and  privilegM 


83t  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xvn.  »— 6« 

as  soldiers  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  xvi.  13).     3.  Every  triumph  achieved  for  Christ  ovei 
sins,  or  individuals,  or  obstacles  is  a  pledge  of  coming  victories. 

Vers.  62^b8.— Unknown  and  yet  well  hwum.  The  facts  are— 1.  Stimulated  by 
the  exploit  of  David,  the  people  complete  their  victory  over  the  Philistines.  2. 
David  leaves  his  weapons  in  his  tent  and  carries  Goliath's  head  to  Jerusalem.  3. 
During  the  conflict  Saul  inquires  who  David  was,  but  obtains  no  information,  till,  on 
presentation,  David  declares  himself  to  be  the  son  of  Jesse.  The  summary  of  events 
here  given  brings  out  incidentally  a  fair  illustration  of  general  truths. 

I.  Multitudes  are  inspired  to  vigorous  action  by  the  influence  of  individual 
HEROISM.  The  force  of  David's  character  passed  beyond  the  death  of  Goliath:  it 
infused  fear  into  the  Philistines  and  aroused  the  spirit  of  his  countrymen.  In  this 
stimulating  power  we  have  one  of  the  prime  qualities  of  true  leadership.  The  value 
of  our  actions  lies  much  in  this  moral  force.  One  of  the  difficulties  of  conflict  in  a 
good  cause  is  to  arouse  enthusiasm,  nourish  courage,  and  incline  men  to  exchange 
Ujeir  lethargy  for  action.  In  the  cause  of  Christ  we  have  need  to  pray  that  he  would 
raise  up  men  fitted,  by  their  heroic  spirit,  to  arouse  the  slumbering  energies  of  his 
people. 

II.  FoRUEB  FRIENDS  RBAFFEAB  UNDER  A  NEW  OUISB.  The  stripling  who  be- 
friended Saul  in  his  military  difficulties  was  the  same  as  comforted  him  in  his  private 
sorrows.  The  deft  fingers  that  once  drew  sweet  music  from  the  harp  now  used  the 
stone  that  brought  Saul's  enemy  to  the  earth.  This  was  the  second  of  the  many  acts 
of  kindness  rendered  by  the  future  to  the  present  king,  though  Saul  recognised  not 
his  quondam  comforter  under  the  new  guise  of  chivalry.  It  is  a  happy  circumstance 
when  a  man  can  enrich  others  by  the  exercise  of  diverse  and  unlooked-for  gifts,  even 
when  not  recognised.  By  such  merciful  providences  does  God  sometimes  mitigate 
the  misfortunes  even  of  the  undeserving. 

III.  There  is  sometimes  ignorance  in  high  places  of  fbbsons  and  qualities 
WORTH  KNOWING.  For  some  time  David  had,  next  to  Samuel,  been  the  most  beau- 
tiful character  in  Israel.  This  is  a  just  inference  from  his  choice  apd  anointing  by 
Samuel,  the  sweet  charm  of  his  music  and  song,  his  noble  endurance  of  Eliab's  base 
imputation  (vers.  28,  29),  the  simple  story  of  the  lion  and  bear,  the  tone  of  his 
address  to  Goliath,  and  the  entire  spirit  displayed  through  the  day.  If  moral  and  high 
spiritual  qualities  are  of  greatest  permanent  value  to  a  nation,  then  David  was,  next 
to  Samuel,  Isvael's  greatest  benefactor.  And  yet  Saul  and  his  officers  knew  him  not. 
Concerned  with  the  arm  of  flesh  and  the  framework  of  national  life,  great  authorities 
are  often  unaware  of  the  presence  of  persons  most  important  on  account  of  their 
elevation  of  character.  This  will  ever  be  true  until  the  time  comes  when  moral  and 
spiritual  considerations  have  their  proper  place  in  the  councils  of  kings  and  princes. 
But  though  "  unknown  "  in  earthly  courts,  the  holy  and  Christly  have  their  record  in 
the  court  of  heaven,  and  are  held  in  everlasting  remembrance  by  him  who  delighteth 
in  his  saints  and  guards  them  as  the  apple  of  his  eye. 

GenercU  lessons : — 1.  We  should  pray  God  that  the  spirit  of  his  chosen  servants 
may  become  more  prevalent  in  the  Church.  2.  If  our  goodness  is  real,  it  will  find 
out  new  forms  of  manifestation,  and  not  refrain  because  men  see  not  the  personality 
that  blesses.  3.  It  may  be  useful  to  foster  courage  and  hope  for  future  conflicts  in 
life  by  a  frequent  reminder  of  past  victories,  for  the  giant's  head  in  Jerusalem  was 
not  without  moral  intent.  4.  It  will  be  an  encouragement  to  constancy  in  goodness 
to  remember  that  while  "  unknown  "  we  ai«  "  well  known  "  (2  Cor.  v.  9). 

HOMILIES  BY  YABIOUS  AUTHOBa 

Ter».  19—31.  (Thr  tallbt  of  EhAS.)—Sel/-c<mquett  "What  har*  1  now 
done  ?  Is  there  not  a  cause  ?  "  (ver.  29.  Was  it  not  a  word  ?  or.  Was  it  anything 
more  than  a  word?).  In  the  conflict  of  life  the  first  victory  which  every  one 
■hould  seek  to  achieve  is  the  victory  over  himself.  Unless  he  gain  this,  he  is  not 
likely  to  gain  others,  or,  if  he  gain  them,  to  improve  them  aright ;  bat  if,  on  the 
other  hand,  he  gain  it,  he  is  thereby  prepared  to  gain  othen,  and  to  Mlow  them 


OH.  xvn.  20—68.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMDEL.  SM 

np  with  the  greatest  advantage.  Such  a  victory  was  David's.  1.  He  arrived  at 
the  wagon-rampart  when  the  host  was  about  to  make  an  advance ;  leaving  there  the 
things  he  carried,  he  ran  into  the  ranks  to  seek  his  brethren ;  and,  while  talking 
with  them,  there  stalked  forth,  as  on  previous  days,  the  Philistine  champion,  at 
the  sight  of  whom  "  all  the  men  of  Israel  fled,  and  were  sore  afraid ''  (ver.  24). 
The  shepherd  youth  alone  was  fearless.  There  was  in  him  more  faith  than  in  the 
whole  army.  And  in  conversing  with  the  men  around  him  he  intimated  the  possible 
overthrow  of  this  boastful  giant,  and  the  "  taking  away  of  the  reproach  from  Israel," 
and  expressed  his  amazement  at  the  audacity  of  the  man  in  "  defying  the  ranks  of 
the  living  God  "  (whose  presence  and  power  all  appear  to  have  forgotten).  2.  On 
hearing  his  words,  and  probably  surmising  that  he  entertained  the  thought  of  encounter- 
ing the  champion,  Eliab  was  filled  with  envy  and  anger,  and  reproached  him  as  being 
out  of  his  proper  place,  as  only  fit  to  have  the  charge  of  a  few  sheep,  and  even 
neglectful  of  them,  and  as  proud,  discontented  with  his  calling,  bad-hearted,  and 
delighting  in  the  sight  of  strife  and  bloodshed,  which,  he  said,  he  knew,  however 
others  might  be  deceived.  Ah,  how  little  did  he  really  know  of  his  brother's  heart  I 
But  angry  men  are  more  desirous  of  inflicting  pain  than  of  uttering  the  truth.  3. 
This  language  would  have  excited  the  fierce  wrath  of  most  persons.  But  David 
maintained  his  self-control,  and  gave  the  soft  answer  which  "tumeth  away  wrath." 
He  thus  obtained  a  victory  which  was  hardly  less  noble  than  that  which  he  shortly 
afterwards  obtained  over  Groliath.  Consider  his  self-conquest  (with  respect  to  the 
passion  of  anger)  as — 

I.  Achieved  under  severe  pbovocation.  1.  The  eotUemptuoru  rtproach  of  a 
hroiker.  From  him  at  least  better  things  might  have  been  expected.  But  natural 
affection  often  vanishes  before  envy  and  anger  (Gen,  iv.  8),  and  is  transformed  into 
intense  hatred.  "  There  is  no  enemy  so  ready  or  so  spiteful  as  the  domestical "  (Hall). 
2.  An  ungrateful  return  for  Mndness.  David  had  come  with  valuable  presents  and 
kindly  inquiries,  and  this  was  his  reward.  3.  An  unjust  impugning  of  motives. 
"  Eliab  sought  for  the  splinter  in  his  brother's  eye,  and  was  not  aware  of  the  beam  that 
was  in  bis  own ;  the  very  things  with  which  he  charged  his  brother  were  most 
apparent  in  his  own  scornful  reproach  "  (Keil).  4.  An  open  attach  upon  reputation.  . 
His  words  were  intended  to  damage  David  in  the  eyes  of  others,  as  unworthy  of  their 
confidence  and  regard.  All  these  things  were  calculated  to  exasperate.  "Thus 
David  was  envied  of  his  own  brethren,  herein  being  a  type  of  Christ,  who  was 
rejected  of  the  Jews,  being  as  it  were  the  eldest  brethren,  and  was  received  of  the 
Gentiles  "  (Willet).  The  followers  of  Christ  are  often  exposed  to  similar  provocation. 
"  And  the  strength  of  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ  appears  in  nothing  more  than  in 
steadfastly  maintaining  the  holy  calm,  meekness,  sweetness,  and  benevolence  of  his 
mind  amidst  all  the  storms,  injuries,  strange  behaviour,  and  surprising  acts  and  events 
of  this  evil  and  unreasonable  world  "  (J.  Edwards). 

II.  Exhibiting  AN  admirable  spirit.  1.  Extraordinary  meekness  and  forbear- 
ance in  enduring  reproach.  "  He  that  is  slow  to  wrath  is  of  great  understanding," 
&c.  (Prov.  xiv.  29 ;  xv.  18 ;  xxv.  28).  2.  Firm  and  instant  repression  of  angry 
passion.  For  it  could  hardly  be  but  that  a  flash  of  indignation  should  glance  into 
his  breast ;  but  "  anger  resteth  in  the  bosom  of  fools ''  (Eocles.  vii.  9).  3.  Wise  and 
gentle  reserve  in  the  language  employed.  It  is  as  useless  to  reason  with  the  wind  as 
with  an  angry  man.  "  Set  a  watch,  0  Lord,  before  my  mouth,"  &c.  (Ps.  cxli.  3).  4. 
Gomtinued  and  steadfast  adherence  to  a  noble  purpose.  David  went  on  talking  "  after 
the  same  manner  "  (ver.  30).  We  ought  not  to  suffer  ourselves  to  be  turned  from 
the  path  of  duty  by  the  reproach  which  we  may  meet  therein,  but  we  should  rather 
pursue  it  more  diligently  than  ever,  and  prove  by  our  conduct  the  sincerity  and 
rectitude  of  our  spirit,  "  He  that  is  slow  to  anger  is  better  than  the  mighty,  and  he 
that  ruleth  his  spirit  than  he  that  taketh  a  city  "  (Prov.  xvi.  32).  "  It  is  better  to 
conqner  the  deceitful  lusts  of  the  heart  than  to  conquer  Jerusalem  "  (St  Bernard). 

"  The  bravest  trophy  ever  man  obtained 
Is  that  which  o'er  himself,  himself  hath  gained." 

"  When  thou  art  offended  by  others,  do  not  let  thy  mind  dwell  upon  them,  or  on 
■noh  thought*  as  these: — that  they  ought  not  so  to  have  treated  thee;  who  they 


834  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xvn.  SO--M. 

are;  or  whom  they  think  themselves  to  he,  and  the  like;  for  all  this  is  fael,  and 
a  kindling  of  anger,  wrath,  and  hatred.  But  in  such  cases  turn  instantly  to  the 
strength  and  commands  of  God,  that  thou  mayest  know  what  thou  oughtest  to  do, 
and  that  thine  error  be  not  greater  than  theirs.  So  shalt  thou  return  into  the  way 
of  peace  "  (Scupoli),  And  of  this  spirit  Christ  is  the  supreme  pattern  (1  Pet  ii. 
21—23). 

III.  FoLiowBD  BY  A  BENEFICIAL  EFFECT.  1.  A  Sense  of  peace  and  Divine  approba- 
tion. "Angels  came  and  ministered  unto  him"  (Matt.  iv.  11).  It  is  always  thus 
with  those  who  conquer  temptation.  2.  The  purifying  and  strengthening  of  faith, 
by  means  of  the  trial  to  which  it  is  subjected  (1  Pet.  i.  7 ;  James  i.  2).  3.  The 
commendation  of  character  in  the  sight  of  others,  who  commonly  judge  of  the  truth 
of  an  accusation  by  the  manner  in  which  it  is  met,  and  naturally  confide  in  a  man  of 
calmness,  firmness,  and  lofty  purpose.  "  They  rehearsed  them"  (his  words)  "before 
Saul:  and  he  sent  for  him"  (ver.  31).  4.  The  preparation  of  the  spirit  for  sub- 
seqtient  conflict.  "  Could  the  second  victory  have  been  achieved  if  he  had  failed  in 
the  first  conflict?'  His  combat  with  Goliath  demanded  an  undimmed  eye,  a  steady 
arm,  and  a  calm  heart,  and  if  he  had  given  way  to  stormy  passion  for  only  a  brief 
season  there  would  have  been  a  lingering  feverishness  and  nervousness,  utterly  unfit- 
ting him  for  the  dread  struggle  on  which  the  fate  of  two  armies  and  two  nations  wai 
depending  "  (C.  Vince). — D. 

Vers.  32 — 37.  (The  valley  op  Elah.)— ^ai<A'»  argument  from  experience.  "  Ho 
will  deliver  me  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Philistine  "  (ver.  87).  Many  things  tend  to 
hinder  the  exercise  and  work  of  faith.  Some  of  them  arise  from  the  heart  itself. 
Others  arise  from  the  speech  and  conduct  of  other  people.  Such  was  the  scornful 
reproach  cast  upon  David  by  his  eldest  brother,  and  such  the  cold  distrust  with  which 
he  was  at  first  regarded  by  Saul.  But  as  he  had  doubtless  overcome  his  own 
tendency  to  unbelief  by  recalling  what  God  had  done,  so  now  by  the  same  means  he 
overcame  the  unbelief  of  the  king,  and  excited  his  confidence  and  hope.  "  Let  no 
man's  heart  fail,"  &c.  (ver.  32).  "  Thou  art  not  able,"  &o.  (ver.  38).  But  "  there 
was  that  in  the  language  of  this  youth  which  recalled  the  strength  of  Israel,  which 
seemed  like  the  dawn  of  another  morning,  like  the  voice  from  another  world" 
(Edersheim).  "  And  Saul  said  unto  David,  Go,  and  Jehovah  be  with  thee  "  (ver.  37) ; 
thus  displaying  one  of  the  best  features  of  character  he  possessed  after  his  rejection. 
We  have  here — 

I.  An  experience  of  great  deliverances.  1.  Consisting  of  accomplished  facte. 
"  Thy  servant  kept  his  father's  sheep,"  &o.  (vers.  34,  36).  They  were  not  imagmary, 
but  real  events.  2.  Occurring  in  personal  history,  and  therefore  the  more  certain 
and  deeply  impressed  on  the  mind.  How  full  is  every  individual  life  of  instructive 
providential  occurrences,  if  we  will  but  observe  them.  3.  Wrought  by  a  Divine 
hand.  "  The  Lord  that  delivered  me,"  &c.  (ver.  87).  Where  unbelief  perceives 
nothing  but  chance  and  good  fortune  a  devout  spirit  sees  "  him  who  is  invisible ; '' 
and  the  extraordinary  success  which  the  former  attributes  to  man  the  latter  ascribes 
to  God.  4.  Treasured  up  in  a  gratefvl  memory.  "Therefore  will  I  remember  thee," 
&c.  (Ps.  xlii.  6 ;  Ixxvii.  10,  11).  "Experience  is  the  collection  of  many  particulars 
registered  in  the  memory." 

II.  An  argument  for  strong  confidence.  The  argument — 1.  Rests  upon  the 
unchangeableness  of  God,  and  the  uniform  method  of  his  dealings.  "  The  Strength 
of  Israel  will  not  lie  nor  repent"  (ch.  xvi.  29).  Hence  every  instance  of  his  help 
is  an  instruction  and  a  promise,  inasmuch  as  it  shows  the  manner  in  which  he  affords 
his  aid,  and  gives  assurance  of  it  under  like  conditions.  "  Because  thou  hast  been 
my  help,  therefore  in  the  shadow  of  thy  wings  will  I  rejoice  "  (Ps.  Ixiii.  7  ;  xxvii, 
9).  "  This  was  a  favourite  argument  with  David.  He  was  fond  of  inferring  future 
interpositions  from  past.  And  the  argument  is  good,  if  used  cautiously  and  with  just 
discrimination.  It  is  always  good  if  justly  applied.  The  difSculty  is  in  aucb 
application.  The  unchangeable  God  will  always  do  the  same  things  in  the  sam* 
ciicumstances.  If  we  can  be  certain  that  cases  are  alike  we  may  expect  a  repetition 
of  his  conduct "  (A.  J.  Morris).  2.  Eecognises  similarity  between  the  circumstance* 
in  which  Divine  help  has  been  received  and  those  in  which  it  is  expected  ■  viz.,  (1) 


OH.  xvn.  20—68.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  88b 

In  the  path  of  duty ;  (2)  in  conflict  with  An  imposing,  powerfal,  and  cruel  adversary ; 
(3)  in  a  state  of  perilous  need ;  (4)  in  the  exercise  of  simple  trust ;  (5)  in  the  use 
of  appropriate  means ;  (6)  and  in  seeking  the  honour  of  God.  When  there  is  so 
close  a  resemblance  the  argument  is  readily  applied,  and  its  conclusion  irresistible. 
8.  Regards  the  help  formerly  received  as  a  pledge  of  personal  favour,  and  an 
encouragement  to  expect  not  only  continued,  out  still  greater,  benefits  from  him 
whose  power  and  love  are  measureless.  "  I  was  delivered  out  of  the  month  of  the 
lion ;  and  the  Lord  shall  deliver  me  from  every  evil  work,"  &o.  (2  Tim.  ir.  17, 18 ; 
8  Oor.  L  lOX 

"  Man  8  plea  to  nun  is  that  he  never  more 

Will  beg,  and  that  he  never  begged  befor* ; 

Han's  plea  to  God  is  that  he  did  obtain 

A  former  suit,  and  therefore  sues  again. 

How  good  a  God  we  serve,  that,  when  we  sue, 

Slakes  bis  old  gifts  the  examples  of  his  new  "  (QuarlM^ 

4.  Is  emfrmtd  in  practice  as  often  as  it  is  faithfully  tested,  and  increases  la  f  oro«, 
depth,  and  brendth  with  every  fresh  experience  of  Divine  help.  "  Oh,  were  we  but 
acquainted  with  this  kind  of  reasoning  with  God,  how  undaunted  we  should  be  in  all 
troubles  I  We  should  be  as  secure  in  time  to  come  as  for  the  time  past;  for  all  is 
one  with  God.  We  do  exceedingly  wrong  our  own  souls  and  weaken  our  faith  by 
not  minding  God's  favours.  How  strong  in  faith  might  old  men  be  that  have  had 
many  experiences  of  God's  love  if  they  would  take  this  course  1  Every  former 
mercy  should  strengthen  our  faith  for  a  new,  as  conquerors  whom  eveiy  former 
victory  encourageth  to  k  new  conquest "  (Sibbes, '  Works,'  L  320). — D. 

Vers.  38  —  64.  (Ephes-dammim.)  —  Davids  conflict  with  Goliath.  "8o  David 
prevailed  "  (ver.  60).  1.  David  was  specially  prepared  for  the  conflict  by  the  whole 
of  his  previous  life,  and  especially  by  his  successful  attack  upon  the  lion  and  the 
bear,  and  his  victory  over  himself.  2.  He  was  providentially  led  into  the  conflict. 
"  Jesse  little  thought  of  sending  his  son  to  the  army  just  in  the  critical  juncture ;  but 
the  wise  God  orders  the  time  and  all  the  circnmstances  of  actions  and  afEairs  so  as 
to  serve  his  designs  of  securing  the  interest  of  Israel  and  advance  the  man  after  his 
own  heart "  (M.  Henry).  3.  He  was  inwardly  impelled  to  the  conflictby  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  that  had  come  upon  him  (ch.  xvi.  13),  and  had  formerly  inspired  Saul 
with  fiery  zeal  against  the  Ammonites  (ch.  xi.  6).  If  he  had  gone  into  it  in  any 
other  manner  he  would  doubtless  have  failed.  4.  He  rendered  invaluable  service  to 
Israel  by  the  conflict,  not  only  thereby  repelling  the  invasion  of  the  Philistines,  but 
•Iso  teaching  them  the  spirit  they  should  cherish,  and  the  kind  of  king  they  needed. 
"  It  is  not  too  much  to  assert  that  this  event  was  a  turning-point  in  the  history  of  the 
theocracy,  and  marked  David  as  the  true  king  of  lerael,  ready  to  take  up  the  Philistine 
challenge  of  God  and  his  people,  and  kindling  in  Israel  a  new  spirit,  and  in  the  might 
of  the  living  God  bringing  the  contest  to  victory"  (Edersheim).  6.  He  became  an 
appropriate  type  of  Christ  by  the  conflict.  "  It  is  a  rehearsal  of  Christ's  temptation 
and  victory  a  thousand  years  afterwards"  (Wordsworth's  'Com.').  6.  He  was  also  an 
eminent  pattern  for  Christians  in  the  conflict ;  exhibiting  the  spirit  which  they 
should  possess  in  their  warfare  with  "  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil."  "  David's 
contest  with  Goliath  will  only  be  apprehended  in  its  true  light  if  the  latter  be 
regarded  as  a  representative  of  the  world,  and  David  the  representative  of  the 
Church"  (Hengstenberg).     Notice — 

I.  The  weapons  which  he  chose  (vers.  38 — 40).  1.  Re  neglected  not  the  use  of 
weapons  altogether.  To  have  done  so  would  have  been  rash  and  presumptuous  ;  for 
it  is  God's  method  to  grant  success  to  those  who  employ  the  legitimate  aids  which 
he  has  provided  for  the  purpose.  Although  David  did  not  trust  in  weapons  of  war, 
he  did  not  throw  them  away,  but  used  them  wisely.  We  must  do  the  same  in  the 
spiritual  conflict.  2.  He  rejected  the  armour,  defeiisive  and  offensive,  which  seemed 
to  others  indispensable.  "  I  cannot  go  in  these ;  for  I  have  not  proved  them.  And 
David  put  them  ofE  him  "  (ver.  39).  Some  weapons  may  appear  to  others,  and  even 
to  ourselves,  at  first,  to  be  the  best,  and  yet  not  be  really  such.     Some  weapons  may 


SS6  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xvn.  20-58 

bis  suitable  to  others,  but  not  to  us.  We  must  learn  by  experience.  We  must  be 
simple,  genuine,  and  true  to  ourselves.  And  above  all,  we  must  look  for  Divine 
guidance  in  the  matter.  "  The  weapons  of  our  warfare  are  not  carnal,"  &c.  (2  Cor. 
X.  4).  3.  He  selected  the  weapons  which  were  most  ^ective.  "  And  he  took  hfs  staff 
In  his  hand,  and  chose  him  five  smooth  stones,"  &c.  (ver.  40) — selected  them 
carefully,  knowing  well  which  were  the  best  for  his  purpose;  and  he  wasnot  satisfied 
with  one  or  two  merely,  but  provided  a  reserve.  His  weapons  were  insignificant 
only  in  the  view  of  the  inconsiderate.  They  were  the  most  suitable  that  can  be 
conceived,  and  gave  greatest  promise  of  success ;  and  his  genius  was  shown  in  their 
selection.  Intelligence  was  opposed  to  brute  force,  "  It  was  just  because  the  sling 
and  the  stone  were  not  the  weapons  of  Goliath  that  they  were  best  fitted  to  David's 
purpose.  They  could  be  used  at  a  distance  from  the  enemy ;  they  made  his  superior 
resources  of  no  avail ;  they  virtually  reduced  him  to  the  dimensions  and  condition 
of  an  ordinary  man ;  they  did  more,  they  rendered  his  extraordinary  size  a  disad- 
yantage;  the  larger  he  was,  the  better  for  the  mark.  David,  moreover,  had  been 
accustomed  in  his  shepherd  life  to  the  sling ;  it  had  been  the  amusement  of  his 
solitary  hours,  and  had  sei-ved  for  his  own  protection  and  that  of  his  flock  ;  so  that 
te  brought  to  his  encounter  with  Goliath  an  accuracy  of  aim  and  a  strength  and 
steadiness  of  arm  that  rendered  him  a  most  formidable  opponent "  (A.  J.  Morris). 
The  lesson  here  taught  is  not  that  anything  will  do  to  fight  with,  but  that  there  must 
be  in  spiritual,  as  well  as  in  secular,  conflicts  a  proper  adaptation  of  means  to  ends. 

II.  The  sriBiT  which  he  displayed  (vers.  41—48).  1.  Humility.  His  heart 
was  not  haughty  and  proud  (Ps.  cxxxi.  1),  as  Eliab  said  it  was,  but  humble  and 
lowly.  He  was  conscious  of  nnworthiness  before  God,  of  utter  weakness  and 
insufSciency  in  himself,  and  ready  to  do  and  bear  whatever  might  be  the  will 
of  the  Lord  concerning  him.  Humility  (from  humus,  the  ground)  lies  in  the  dust, 
and  is  the  root  out  of  which  true  excellence  grows.  It  is  the  first,  the  second,  and 
the  third  thing  in  religion  (Augustine).  "Before  honour  is  humility"  (Prov.  xv. 
32).  "He  giveth  grace  to  the  humble."  "Be  clothed  with  humility."  2.  Faith. 
"  I  come  to  thee  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts  "  (ver.  45  ;  see  ch.  i.  3).  He 
looked  beyond  man  to  God,  and  relied  upon  his  help.  "  He  did  not  compare  himself 
with  Goliath,  but  he  compared  Goliath  with  Jehovah,"  who  was  the  Leader  and 
"  God  of  the  ranks  of  Israel."  He  believed,  and  therefere  he  spoke,  and  fought,  and 
prevailed  (2  Cor.  iv.  13).  "  Although  imarmed  in  the  estimation  of  men,  he  was 
armed  with  the  Godhead  "  (St.  Ambrose).  3.  Zeal.  He  was  little  concerned  about 
his  own'honour  and  renown,  but  he  was  "very  jealous  for  the  Lord  God  of  hosts" 
(1  Kings  xix.  14).  He  heard  the  gods  of  the  heathen  extolled  (ver.  43),  and  the 
name  of  Jehovah  blasphemed,  and  he  was  desirous  above  all  things  that  he  should 
be  glorified.  "  All  the  earth  shall  know,"  &c.  (ver.  46).  "  All  this  assembly  shall 
know,"  &o.  (ver.  47).  When  we  fight  for  God  we  may  confidently  expect  that  he 
will  fight  for  us.  "  The  battle  is  the  Lord's."  4.  Courage,  which  stood  in  contrast 
to  the  fear  with  which  Israel  was  smitten,  and  was  the  fruit  of  his  humility,  faith, 
and  zeal.  It  was  shown  in  his  calm  and  dauntless  attitude  in  going  forth  against  his 
opponent,  in  the  presence  of  the  two  armies,  in  breathless  suspense  ;  in  his  bold  and 
confident  answer  to  the  contemptuous  challenge  of  the  foe ;  and  in  his  eagerness  and 
energy  in  the  actual  conflict  "  David  hasted,  and  ran,"  &o.  (vers.  48,  49,  61).  "  So 
David  prevailed." 

III.  The  victoby  which  he  achieved.  Not  only  was  the  boastful  Philistine 
overthrown,  speedily,  signally,  and  completely,  but  also — 1.  The  enemy  fled  in  terror 
(ver.  61),  and  their  power  was  broken  (ver.  52).  2.  Israel  was  imbued  with  a  new 
and  better  spirit  (vers.  52, 68).  3.  He  himself  was  honoured — by  God  in  giving  him 
the  victory  and  opening  before  him  a  wider  sphere  of  activity,  by  the  king  (vers 
56—68 ;  oh.  xviii.  2),  and  by  all  the  people.  Even  the  Philistines  long  afterwards 
held  his  name  in  dread  (ch.  xxi.  11).  «  This  first  heroic  deed  of  David  was  of  th« 
greatest  importance  to  him  and  all  Israel,  for  it  was  his  first  step  on  the  way  to  the 
throne  to  which  Jehovah  had  resolved  to  raise  him"  (Keil).  "  Raised  by  the  nation, 
he  raised  and  glorified  it  in  return ;  and,  standing  at  the  crowning  point  of  tlie  history 
of  the  nation,  he  concentrates  in  himself  all  its  brilliance,  and  becomes  the  one  mas 
of  greatest  renown  in  the  whole  course  of  its  existence"  (Ewald). — D, 


OK  xm.  20-fi8.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUKL.  187 

Ver.  47. — The  battle  is  the  Lardlt.  Many  of  the  battles  which  an  waged  on  earth 
are  not  the  Lord's.  They  are  unnecessary  and  unrighteous.  The  end  they  seek  and 
the  means  they  adopt  to.  attain  it  are  evil.  Other  conflicts  are  only  the  Lord's  in  an 
inferior  sense.  Although  not  unnecessary,  nor  in  themselves  unrighteons,  they  are 
waged  with  secular  aims  and  carnal  weapons.  But  there  is  one  which  is  the  Lord's 
In  the  highest  sense.  It  is  a  holy  war ;  a  conflict  of  the  kingdom  of  light  with  the 
kingdom  of  darkness.  Observe  that — 1.  The  obligation  is  imposed  hy  the  Lord. 
'  Fight  the  good  flght  of  faith."  2.  The  adversaries  are  the  adversaries  of  the  Lord. 
'  Principalities  and  powers,"  &c.  S.  The  soldiers  are  the  people  of  the  Lord.  Those 
in  whose  hearts  the  principles  of  the  kingdom  of  God  are  implanted — "  righteousness, 
peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  4.  The  Gommander  is  the  Anointed  of  the  Lord. 
"  The  Captain  of  our  salvation."  "  The  Leader  and  Commander  of  the  people."  6. 
The  weapons  are  provided  by  the  Lord.  "  Put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God  ' — "  the 
armour  of  light.'  6.  The  success  is  due  to  the  Lord.  He  gives  the  strength  which 
is  needed,  "  teaoheth  our  hands  to  war,  and  our  fingers  to  fight,"  and  "  he  will  give 
you  into  our  hands."  7.  The  end  is  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  When  it  ia  over  God 
will  be  "  all  in  all"    "  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  ?  "— D. 

Vers.  29,  37 — 39,  46 — 47, — Tlvree  victories  in  one  day.  Here  the  history  assumes 
the  charm  of  romance,  and  David  stands  forth  a  hero  above  all  Greek  and 
Roman  fame.  By  the  grace  of  God  he  won  three  victories  in  quick  succession. 
1.  Over  the  spirit  of  anger.  When  David,-  shocked  to  see  all  Israel  defied  and 
daunted  by  one  Philistine,  showed  his  feeling  to  the  men  that  stood  by  him,  his 
eldest  brother,  Eliab,  sneered  at  him  openly,  and  taunted  hira  with  being  fit  only  to 
keep  sheep,  or  to  look  at  battles  which  others  fought.  Probably  this  ungracious 
brother  had  not  forgiven  David  for  being  preferred  before  hira  in  the  day  when 
Samuel  visited  the  house  of  Jesse ;  probably  too  he  was  conscious  that  it  was  the 
duty  of  some  such  tall  soldier  as  himself  to  encounter  the  Philistine  champion,  and 
he  was  ashamed  and  irritated  because  he  was  afraid  to  fight.  So  he  vented  his  ill- 
humour  in  a  most  galling  and  insulting  reproach,  hurled  at  his  stripling  brother. 
His  words  might  have  provoked  a  sharp  retort.  But  David  was  in  a  mood  of  feel- 
ing too  exalted  to  descend  to  wrangling.  He  was  forming  a  purpose,  at  once 
patriotic  and  pious,  which  he  saw  that  Eliab  was  unfit  to  appreciate,  and  therefore 
made  a  calm  and  mild  reply :  "  What  have  I  now  done  ?  It  was  only  a  word ;  "  q.  d. 
"  I  may  surely  ask  a  question."  Thus  the  hero  ruled  his  own  spirit ;  was  master  of 
himself  before  he  mastered  others ;  had  that  disinclination  and  disdain  for  paltry 
quarrels  which  belongs  to  men  who  cherish  high  and  arduous  aims ;  and  David's 
first  triumph  was  the  triumph  of  meekness.  2.  Over  the  precautions  of  unbelief. 
When  the  youth  was  led  to  the  king,  and  in  his  presence  offered  to  fight  with  the 
Philistine,  he  was  told  that  he  was  not  old  or  strong  enough  for  the  encounter.  When 
a  tried  soldier  of  lofty  stature  like  Saul  himself  shrank  from  the  combat,  how  could 
this  stripling  attempt  it  ?  It  was  certain  death.  David  was  not  shaken  from  his 
purpose.  He  showed  the  king  that  his  trust  was  in  God,  and  that  the  remembrance 
of  past  encounters  with  wild  beasts  when  the  Lord  delivered  him  made  him  con- 
fident of  victory  over  the  giant.  Then  Saul  said,  "  Go,  and  the  Lord  be  with  thee." 
Perhaps  he  said  it  from  a  mere  habit  of  using  such  phrases,  perhaps  with  a  melan- 
choly feeling  that  from  himself  the  Lord  had  departed.  But  he  had  so  much  con- 
sideration for  the  brave  youth  before  him  as  to  put  his  own  armour  on  him,  and 
gird  him  with  his  own  sword.  It  may  seem  strange  that  he  did  not  assign  to  him 
a  suit  of  armour  more  suited  to  his  size ;  but  there  was  little  armour  of  any  kind 
among  the  Israelites,  and  none  so  good  as  that  of  the  king.  It  was  well  meant, 
but  it  was  a  sign  of  unbelief.  Saul  could  not  trust  in  God  to  defend  this  young 
champion,  but  would  cover  him  with  a  brazen  helmet  and  a  coat  of  mail.  David, 
however,  happily  for  himself,  put  ofE  the  armour.  It  only  encumbered  his  body, 
taking  away  his  native  nimbleness  of  movemenf,  and  it  tended  to  weaken  in  his 
mind  that  total  faith  in  God  and  sense  of  dependence  on  him  which  was  more  to  him 
in  such  a  field  than  even  the  armour  of  a  king.  Thrice  was  he  armed  who  had  hia 
qnarrel  jml,  mid  the  living  Qud  for  his  re£uga  and  strength.     3.  Over  the  proud 

1  BAll.  « 


!I38  THB  FIBST  BOUK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xtii.  20— 6& 

Uaipkemer.  Goliath  wag  a  terrible  opponent  in  a  time  when  g^powdei  as  yet  wai 
Dot,  and  prowess  in  the  field  depended  on  size,  strength,  and  armour.  No  one  dared 
to  accept  hia  challenge ;  and  as  he  stalked  along  the  valley  he  scoffed  at  the  men  of 
Israel  with  impunity.  It  was  a  prodigy  of  courage  on  the  part  of  a  youth  like 
David — ^however  strong  and  active,  not  above  the  customary  height  of  men — to 
assail  that  moving  tower  of  brass.  But  it  was  no  blind  fanaticism,  such  as  despises 
caution  and  skill,  and  disowns  the  use  of  fit  means,  as  though  implying  a  want  of 
faith.  David's  faith  made  him  use  his  utmost  care  and  dexterity,  trusting  in  God 
to  give  him  a  sure  aim  and  a  quick  victory.  It  is  quite  a  mistake  to  dwell  on  the 
simplicity  of  David  in  going  forth  to  the  combat  with  a  weapon  so  unlikely,  so 
inadequate,  as  a  sling.  On  the  contrary,  he  would  have  shown  not  simplicity  only, 
but  folly,  if  he  had  trusted  to  sword  and  spear.  If  he  were  to  strike  the  giant  at 
al),  it  must  be  from  a  distance,  and  not  with  weapons  held  in  the  hand ;  for  Goliath^s 
long  arm  and  long  spear  would  never  have  let  him  near  enough  to  inflict  a  blow. 
So  David  shrewdly  took  the  sling,  with  which  he  was  familiar,  and  picked  from  the 
bed  of  the  brook  a  few  pebbles  which  would  pass  through  the  air  like  bullets.  The 
sling  was  in  fact  the  rifle  of  the  period,  and  men  who  practised  the  art  could  make 
their  bull's-eyes  with  this  weapon  as  well  as  our  modern  rifle-shooters,  though  not  at 
go  great  distances.  The  giant,  seeing  the  shepherd's  stafE  in  David's  hand,  and 
probably  not  perceiving  the  thong  of  the  sling,  demanded  whether  he  was  regarded 
as  a  dog,  that  might  be  beaten  with  a  stick.  Then  he  loudly  defied  the  rash  boy 
who  ventured  to  meet  him  in  combat,  and  cursed  him  by  his  own  heathen  god.  Back 
across  the  valley  went  the  noble  answer  of  Jehovah's  servant.  "1  come  to  thee  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts,  the  God  of  the  armies  of  Israel,  whom  thou  hast 
defied."  Then  came  the  terrible  moment,  and  both  armies  "  held  their  breath  for  a 
time."  David  made  the  attack.  Nimbly  he  ran  forward  to  be  within  shot.  Goliath 
had  opened  the  visor  of  his  helmet  to  look  at  the  foe  whom  he  despised,  and  to  shout 
defiance.  Thus  was  his  forehead  exposed.  David's  quick  eye  saw  the  advantage; 
he  slipped  a  pebble  into  the  sling,  and  let  it  fly.  A  sharp  whistle  in  the  air,  and  ths 
stone  sunk  into  the  giant's  haughty  brow.  "  He  fell  on  his  face  to  the  earth." 
How  the  men  of  Israel  shouted  as  they  heard  the  clang  of  his  heavy  armour  on  the 
ground,  and  saw  their  young  champion  cut  ofE  the  boaster's  head  with  his  own 
sword  I  Then  it  was  the  turn  of  the  Philistines  to  fear  and  to  flee ;  and  the  Israel- 
ites pursued  them,  and  "  spoiled  their  tents."  So  one  man  gained  three  battles  in  a 
day,  and  thousands  reaped  the  advantage  of  his  victories.  Is  not  this  what  we  have 
under  the  gospel  ?  One  who  was  born  in  Bethlehem,  but  in  whom  his  own  brethren 
did  not  believe,  is  our  Deliverer  and  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.  Jesus  overcame 
provocation  by  his  meekness  and  lowliness  of  heart.  He  overcame  aU  temptation 
to  unbelief  and  self-will  by  his  perfect  trust  in  God  his  Father.  He  also  overcame 
that  strong  adversary  who  had  long  defied  and  daunted  the  people  of  God,  and  had 
lifted  up  the  name  of  false  gods  on  the  earth,  blaspheming  him  who  is  true.  This 
enemy  seemed  to  stride  to  and  fro  in  the  earth,  and  boast  himself  against  the  Lord 
with  impunity.  But  the  Son  of  David  has  bruised  the  enemy's  head,  laid  low  hia 
pride,  and  now  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  enter  into  his  victory  and  about 
his  praise.  To  David  belonged  the  honours  of  tlie  day.  Jonathan  loved  him.  All 
Israel  extolled  him.  So  let  us  love  and  praise  him  who  has  won  for  us  a  greater 
victory  and  a  richer  spoil.  We  thank  victorious  generals,  we  decorate  valiant 
soldiers,  we  raise  statues  and  trophies  to  national  champions.  But,  in  truth,  the 
country  which  they  have  saved  ia  their  real  monument,  the  nation  which  they  rescue 
from  oppression  or  danger  is  the  true  and  lasting  pillar  of  their  fame.  So  is  it  in 
regard  to  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.  Words  and  oSerings  for  his  cause  are  insuffi- 
cient for  bis  praise.  The  Church  of  the  redeemed  is  his  monument.  All  whom 
he  has  saved  out  of  the  enemy's  hand  are  to  the  praise  of  his  glory.  "  Hoaanna 
to  the  Son  of  David ;  hosanna  in  the  highest  1 " — F. 


«.raLi-«a] 


THX  mtST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


S3S 


BXPOSITION. 

FnsojiAi.  BbIiAtiors  or  Saul  and  Datid  (ohs.  xtiii.— xxvii,), 
Fbibkdship  of  Dav^d  and  Jonathan  (chs.  xviii. — xx.). 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

JORATHAK     LOVES     DaVID     (vetB.     1 — 6). 

Ver.  1. — ^When  he  had  made  an  end  of 
speaking.  Tliis  conversation  took  place  as 
soon  es  the  pursuit  of  the  Philistines  and 
the  collecting  of  the  spoil  were  over.  There 
would  then  be  a  muster  of  the  Israelites,  and 
Abner  would  naturally  present  the  youthful 
champion  to  the  king,  who  is  represented 
as  having  virtually  forgotten  him,  and  as 
anxious  to  learn  his  history ;  nor  had  his 
stay  been  long  enough  for  Abner  to  remember 
him.  As  this  conversation  is  narrated  as  an 
introdnction  to  the  account  of  Jonathan's 
friendship  for  David,  the  last  four  verses  of 
ch.  xvii.  ought  to  be  prefixed  to  ch.  iviii.  A 
new  beginning  commences  with  them,in  which 
we  are  told  of  the  commencement  of  this 
friendship,  of  the  growth  of  Saul's  hatred, 
and  of  the  trials  which  befell  David,  proceed- 
ing on  the  king's  part  from  bad  to  worse, 
till  at  last  he  was  driven  away  and  com- 
pelled to  lead  the  life  of  an  outlaw.  But  by 
his  envy,  cruelty,  and  bad  government  Saul 
was  alienating  the  minds  of  the  people  from 
him,  and  preparing  the  way  for  his  own 
downfall  and  David's  ultimate  triumph. 
The  episode  of  Jonathan's  love  is  as  beautiful 
as  Saul's  conduct  is  dark,  and  completes  our 
admiration  for  this  generous  and  noble  hero. 
The  soul  of  Jonathan  was  knit  with  the 
sonl  of  David.  These  kindred  spirits  had 
so  much  in  common  that,  as  David  with 
modest  manliness  answered  the  king's  ques- 
tions, an  intense  feeling  of  admiration  grew 
up  in  the  young  warrior's  heart,  and  a 
friendship  was  the  result  which  ranks  among 
the  purest  and  noblest  examples  of  true 
manly  affection.  The  word  rendered  knti 
literally  means  knotted,  tied  together  firmly 
by  indissoluble  bonds. 

Vers.  2— 4.— Saul  took  him  that  day. 
Bent  solely  on  war,  Saul  gladly  took  so 
promising  a  young  soldier  as  David  to  be 
one  of  his  body-guard  (ch.  xiv.  62),  and 
henceforward  he  was  constantly  with  him. 
Thus  in  two  ways,  first  as  a  musician,  and 
now  as  a  soldier,  David  was  forced  into  those 
intimate  relations  with  Saul,  which  ended 
so  tragicallj-  For  a  while,  however,  those 
happier  results  ensued  summed  up  in 
ch.  xvi.  21.  Jonathan  and  David  made  a 
ooTtnant.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  this 
happened  immediately.  David  continued  on 
friendly  terms  with  Saul  for  a  considerable 
period,  during  which  he  went  on  many  expe- 
oitiona,  and  grew  in  military  renown  (see 


rer,  S),  And  thus  the  love  which  began 
with  admiration  of  David's  prowess  grew 
deeper  and  more  confirmed  by  constant 
intercourse,  till  this  solemn  bond  of  mutual 
friendship  was  entered  into  by  the  two 
youthful  heroes,  by  which  they  bound  them- 
selves under  all  circumstances  to  be  true  and 
faithful  to  one  another.  How  nobly  Jona- 
than kept  the  bond  the  history  proceeds 
immediately  to  tell  us ;  nor  was  David  sub- 
sequently unmindful  of  it  (2  Sam.  ix.  1,  7). 
Jonathan  stripped  himself  of  the  robe,  &c. 
In  confirmation  of  the  bond  Jonathan  gave 
David  first  his  robe,  the  meil,  which,  as 
we  have  seen  on  ch.  ii  19,  was  the  ordinary 
dress  of  the  wealthier  classes  ;  and  next  his 
garments,  his  military  dress  (see  on  ch.  xvii. 
38,  39),  worn  over  the  mefl,  and  which  here 
seems  to  include  his  accoutrements, — the 
bow,  sword,  and  girdle, — though  elsewhere 
distinguished  from  them  (2  Sam.  xx.  8). 
In  thus  clothing  David  in  his  own  princely 
equipments  Jonathan  was  showing  his  friend 
the  greatest  personal  honour  (Esther  vi  8), 
and  such  a  gift  is  still  highly  esteemed  in 
the  East. 

Ver.  5. — David  .went  out  /.  ft  went  on 
military  expeditions  (comp.  ver.  80).  As 
the  verb  has  thus  a  technical  signification,  it 
makes  a  complete  sense,  and  the  verse  should 
be  translated,  "  And  David  went  forth  {i.  e. 
on  warlike  enterprises) ;  whithersoever  Saul 
sent  him  he  prospered,  and  Sanl  set  him 
over  the  men  of  war."  These  expeditions 
were  not  upon  a  very  large  scale ;  for  it  is  not 
until  ver.  13  that  we  read  of  David  being 
made  "  captain  over  a  thousand."  Still, 
even  while  only  a  centurion  in  rank,  yet,  as 
being  in  constant  attendance  upon  the  king, 
he  would  often  temporarily  have  the  com- 
mand of  larger  bodies  of  men,  or  would  go 
on  campaigns  as  one  of  the  king's  officers. 
As  it  is  mentioned  that  his  promotion  caused 
no  envy  because  of  his  great  merits,  it  follows 
that  it  was  rapid  enough  to  have  given  occa- 
sion to  ill-will  under  ordinary  circumstances. 
Sehaved  himself  wisely.  This  is  the  primary 
meaning  of  the  verb  ;  but  as  success  is  the 
result  of  wise  conduct,  it  constantly  signifies 
to  prosper.  This  verse  is  a  summary  of 
events  which  may  have  occupied  a  very  con- 
siderable space  of  time.  It  was  only  gradu- 
ally that  David's  fame  became  so  great  as  to 
rouse  all  the  worst  feelings  in  Saul  s  mind. 

Saul's  hatred  op  David  (vers.  6 — 16). 

Ver.  6. — When  David  was  returned  from 

the  slaughter  of  the  Philistine.     Or  more 

probably,  as  in  the  margin,  "of  the  FhUis- 

s2 


S40 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  zym.  1—80. 


tinea."    The  allnsion  ii  not  to  the  combat 
with  Goliath,  bnt  to  one  of  the  expeditions 
referred  to  in  ver.  6,  in  which  David  had 
gained  some  decisive  victory.     The  women 
would  not  have  described  the  slanghter  of 
■>ne  champion  as  the  slaying  of  ten  thousand, 
nor  would  there   have  been  any  contrast 
between  this  act  and  the  military  enterprises 
of  Saul.     Probably  he  too  would  have  looked 
with  indifference  upon  this  Oriental  exag- 
geration of  the  daring  bravery  of  a  boy  ;  but 
what  galled  him  was  David's  continual  suc- 
cess in  repeated  campaigns.     The  Philistine 
means  the  whole  people  of  that  name  ;  and  as 
the  war  between  them  and  Saul  lasted  all  the 
days  of  Saul's  life,  and  was  his  main  kingly 
work,  he  saw  with  envy  the  rapid  growth  of 
David's  reputation  ;  and  when,  after  some 
noble  achievement,  the  women  gave  David 
an  ovation,  and  declared  in  their  songs  that 
he  had  achieved  a  success  ten  times  as  great 
as  Saul,  an  outburst  of  ill-feeling  was  the 
result.     Saul  suddenly  became  aware  that 
the  young  captain  on  whose  shoulders  he 
had  devolved  the  chief  labours  of  the  war 
had  supplanted  him  in  the  popular  estima- 
tion, and  hatred  took  the  place  of  the  good 
feeling  which  he  had  previously  entertained 
towards  him.     The  women  came  out  of  all 
cities  of  Israel  ...  to  meet  king  Saul.     It 
is  evident  that  this  refers  to  some  grand 
occasion,  and  probably  to  the  conclusion  of 
a  peace  between  the  two  nations.     The  battle 
in  the  valley  of  Elah  was  probably  followed 
by  several  years  of  warfare,  during  which 
David  developed  those  great  military  qualities 
which  made  him  subsequently  the  founder 
of   the  wide  empire  over  which   Solomon 
reigned.     It  was  unendurable  for  Saul,  him- 
self a  great  soldier,  to  find,  when  the  war  at 
last  was  over,  that  the  people  recognised  in  his 
lieutenant  higher  military  qualities  than  they 
had  discovered  in  himself.     With  tabrets. 
See  on  ch.  x.  5.   With  joy.    As  this  is  placed 
between  the  names  of  two  instruments  of 
music,  it  must  mean  some  kind  of  joyous 
shouting  or  singing  to  the  sound  of  their 
tabrets.  With  instruments  of  mnsic.  Hebrew, 
with  triangles,  a  very  ancient  but  effective 
instrument  for  an  outdoor  procession  accom- 
panied with  dancing. 

Ver.  7.  —  The  women  answered.  /.  t. 
they  sang  alternately.  It  was  this  alternate 
singing  which  led  to  the  psalms  being  com- 
posed in  parallel  sentences,  and  not  in 
metie  ;  and  we  from  the  temple  service  have 
inherited  onr  method  of  chanting  anti- 
phonally.  As  they  played.  The  word  is 
ambiguous,  and  to  an  English  reader  would 
suggest  the  idea  of  the  women  playing  upon 
tile  musical  instruments.  It  usually  refers 
to  merriment,  and  so  in  Zoch.  viii.  6  it  is 
used  of  the  children  playitxg  in  the  streets, 
bat  especially  it  refers  to  dancing.     Thus  in 


2  Sam.  iL  14  it  is  used  of  a  war-dance  ending 
in  a  leal  conflict;  and  again  (2  Sam.  vi. 
6,  21 ;  1  Chron.  xiii.  8 ;  xv.  29)  of  David 
dancing  to  instruments  of  music  before  the 
ark.  Michal  probably  would  not  have 
despised  David  for  playing  an  instrument 
of  music  during  a  religious  ceremony ;  it 
was  the  posturing  of  the  dance  which  seemed 
to  her  beneath  the  dignity  of  a  king.  So 
these  women  danced  in  alternate  choruses 
to  the  beating  of  their  tambourines  and 
triangles.  In  Judges  xvi  25,  where,  how- 
ever, it  is  in  a  different  conjugation,  the 
verb  is  translated  "  to  make  sport."  Keally 
Samson  was  compelled  to  dance  Israel's 
national  war-dance  before  the  Philistines. 

Vers.  8,  9. — ^What  can  he  have  more  1  &c. 
Literally,  "  And  there  is  beside  for  him  only 
the  kingdom."  Though  many  years  had 
passed  since  Samuel  pronounced  Saul's 
deposition,  and  the  choice  of  another  in  his 
place  (ch.  zv.  28),  yet  it  was  not  a  thing 
that  a  king  could  ever  forget  No  doubt  he 
had  often  looked  out  for  signs  of  the  person 
destined  to  he  his  successor  ;  and  now,  when 
he  had  stood  powerless  before  the  enemy,  a 
shepherd  boy  nad  stepped  forth  and  given 
him  the  victory.  And  this  stripling,  taken 
to  be  his  companion  in  arms,  had  shown  so 
great  qualities  that  the  people  reckoned  him 
at  ten  times  Saul's  worth.  Had  Saul  been 
the  high-minded  man  he  was  when  appointed 
to  the  kingdom  (ch.  zL  13),  he  would  have 
thrust  such  thoughts  from  him.  But  his 
mind  had  become  cankered  with  discontent 
and  brooding  thoughts,  and  so  he  eyed  David 
from  that  day  and  forward.  In  many  na- 
tions the  eye  of  an  envious  man  is  supposed  to 
have  great  power  of  injury.  Here  it  means 
that  Saul  cast  furtive  glances  at  David  full 
of  malice  and  ill-will. 

Vers.  10,  11. — It  came  to  pass  on  the 
morrow.  "The  day  had  been  a  time  of  public 
triumph,  and  yet  one  of  the  chief  actors  goes 
home  to  a  sleepless  couch,  because  he  thinks 
that  another  has  received  higher  honour  than 
-  himself  His  melancholy  deepens  till  a  fit  of 
insanity  comes  on.  For  the  evil  spirit  from 
God  came  npon  Saul.  Literally, ' '  an  evil  spirit 
(breath)  of  God  descended  mightily  upon 
Saul "  (see  ch.  xvi  15).  Just  as  all  mighty 
enthusiasms  for  good  come  from  God,  so  do 
strong  influences  for  evil,  but  in  a  different 
way.  In  all  noble  acts  men  are  fcUow- 
workers  with  God ;  when  evil  carries  them 
away  it  is  of  God,  because  he  it  is  who  has 
made  and  still  maintains  the  laws  of  our 
moral  nature ;  but  it  is  by  the  working  of 
general  laws,  and  not  by  any  special  gift  or 
grace  bestowed  by  him.  Saul  had  brooded  over 
his  disappointment,  and  cherished  feelings 
of  discontent  at  his  own  lot  and  of  envy  at 
the  good  of  others  to  such  an  extent  that  his 
mind  gave  way  before  tiie  diseased  workings 


CH.  XVIII.  1—30.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


841 


of  his  imagination.  And  so  he  lost  all  control 
ovor  himself,  and  prophesied.  The  conju- 
gation employed  here  (Hithpahel)  is  never 
nsed  of  real,  true  prophecy  (which  is  always 
the  Niphal),  but  of  a  bastard  imitation  of  it. 
Really  Saul  was  in  a  state  of  frenzy,  unable 
to  master  himself,  speaking  words  of  which 
he  knew  not  the  meaning,  and  acting  like  a 
man  possessed.  In  all  this  there  was  some- 
thing akin  to  the  powerful  emotions  which 
«gitated  the  true  prophet,  only  it  was  not 
a  holy  influence,  but  one  springing  from 
yiolent  passions  and  a  disturbed  state  of  the 
mind.  In  order  to  soothe  him  David  played 
with  his  hand,  as  at  other  times,  but  with- 
out the  desired  effect.  On  the  contrary,  Saul 
brandished  the  javelin,  which  he  carried  as  a 
sort  of  sceptre  in  his  hand,  with  such  violence 
that  David  twice  had  to  escape  from  this 
threat  of  injuiy  by  flight  It  is  not  certain 
that  Saul  actually  threw  the  javelin.  Had  he 
done  so  it  would  be  difficult  to  account  for 
David  escaping  from  it  twice.  After  such  an 
act  of  violence  he  would  scarcely  have  trusted 
himself  a  second  time  in  Saul's  presence.  In- 
stead of  Saul  cast  the  javelin,  the  Septua^int 
in  the  Alexandrian  codex  and  the  Chaldee 
render  lifted,  L  e.  retaining  the  same  conso- 
nants, they  put  vowels  which  refer  the  verb 
to  another  root.  But  even  with  the  present 
vowels  it  may  mean  "made  as  though  he 
would  cast,"  or  aimed  "the  javelin.  On 
a   later  occasion  Saul   actually  threw  the 

i'avelin,  and  struck  the  wall  where  David 
lad  been  sitting  (ch.  xix.  10). 

Vers.  12 — 16. — Saul  was  a&aid  of  David. 
A  new  feeling.  To  his  jealousy  succeeded  a 
sense  of  powerlessness,  as  knowing  that  a 
higher  power  was  with  David,  while  he  had 
lost  the  Divine  protection.  This  miserable 
feeling  grew  upon  the  unhappy  king,  till 
before  the  battle  of  Gilboa  we  find  him  with 
•11  his  old  heroic  spirit  gone,  a  miserable 
wreck,  seeking  for  comfort  at  the  hands  of 
■  woman  of  the  most  worthless  kind  (ch, 
xxviii.  5,  7,  20).  In  this  despondent  state 
of  mind  he  dismisses  David  from  attendance 
upon  him,  but  in  an  honourable  manner, 
giving  him  the  command  of  a  thousand  men, 
at  the  head  of  whom  he  went  out  and  came 
in  before  the  people,  t.  e.  in  a  public  capa- 
city, as  an  officer  of  state.  As  Saul  seems 
entirely  to  have  neglected  the  internal  ad- 
ministration of  the  kingdom,  this  would 
refer  to  military  expeditions  (see  on  ver.  5) ; 
and  in  these  David  behaved  liimself  wisely. 
Rather,  "prospered"  (see  on  ver.  5).  His 
great  success:  only  increased  Saul's  fears  ;  but 
both  Israel  and  Judah  loved  David,  now 
that  in  this  higher  command  they  had  full 
opportunities  forjudging  of  his  hig:h  qualities, 
"nius  again  his  removal  from  his  place  in 
Saul's  body-guard  only  served  to  make  him 
better   known.     The  separate  mention  of 


Israel  and  Jndah  is  an  indication  of  the 
Books  of  Samuel  having  been  written  at  a 
post-Solomonic  date,  though  the  distinction 
was  a  very  old  one  (see  on  ch.  zi  8). 
Saul,  under  psbtenob  of  a  habbiaqb 

WITH  HIS  DAUOHTBB,  PLOTS  DAVID'S  DEATH 

(vers.  17—30).  Vers.  17,  18.— Behold  my 
elder  daug^hter  Uerab.  Saul  had  promised 
that  he  would  give  his  daughter  in  marria^ 
to  whosoever  should  slay  the  giant  (ch.  zviL 
25) ;  and  not  only  was  there  in  this  the 
honour  of  a  close  alliance  with  the  royal 
house,  but,  as  it  was  usual  to  give  large 

S resents  to  the  father  in  return  for  the 
aughter's  hand,  the  gift  had  also  a  sub- 
stantial value.  After  long  delay  SanI  now 
refers  to  this  promise,  not  so  much  with  the 
intention  of  fulfilling  it,  as  of  leading  David 
on  to  enterprises  which  might  cost  nim  hia 
life.  The  marriage  may  have  been  deferred 
at  first  on  account  of  David's  youth ;  the 
subject  is  now  revived,  but  with  evil  in- 
tentions. Uy  elder  daughter  ia  literally 
"  my  daughter,  the  great  one,"  while  MichfU 
is  "  the  little  one,"  a  way  of  speaking  used 
only  where  there  are  but  two  daughters.  Be 
thou  valiant,  &c.  This  exhortation  would 
be  natural  under  the  circumstances  ;  but  Saol 
hoped  that  David,  in  order  to  secure  so  great 
4  prize,  would  be  encouraged  to  undertake 
rash  adventures,  For  Saul  said.  /,  e.  in 
himself ;  his  purpose  was  to  urge  David  to 
perpetual  fighting,  that  so  in  some  rash 
undertaking  he  might  be  slain.  Thus  Saul's 
malice  grows,  and  though  not  prepared  as  yet 
to  put  David  to  death  himself,  he  would  have 
felt  relief  if  he  had  died  by  the  fortune  of  war. 
David  answers  modestly  and  discreetly  that 
he  is  not  worthy  of  so  great  an  honour.  We 
are  not  to  suppose  that  he  discerned  Saul's 
treachery,  which  only  came  to  light  after- 
wards.  What  is  my  life, — i.  e.  my  condition, 
— or  my  father's  family  1  The  or  is  not  in 
the  Hebrew,  and  the  meaning  is.  What  is 
my  condition,  even  my  father's  family  ?  &c. 
David's  condition  or  rank  in  life  was  settled 
by  the  rank  which  his  father  held. 

Ver.  19. — Merab  .  ,  ,  was  given  unto 
Adriel,  A  large  dower  was  doubtless  offered 
to  Saul  in  return  for  his  daughter,  and,  as 
he  had  never  wished  David  to  have  her,  he 
proved  untrue  to  his  word.  For  the  un- 
happy death  of  the  sons  of  Merab  and  Adriel 
see  2  Sam.  xxi.  8, 

Vers.  20,  21.— Uichal  .  .  .  loved  David. 
Probably  there  was  some  short  lapse  of  time 
between  Merab's  marriage  and  the  growth 
of  this  affection,  the  news  of  which  pleased 
Saul.  He  was  not  an  ungenerous  man,  and 
possibly  may  have  felt  ashamed  at  having 
acted  so  meanly  by  David  after  having  ex- 
posed him  to  danger.  And  yet  evil  thought* 
again  are  uppermost,  and  his  pun)0se8  are 
selfish;    for  either  way  Saul  will  U  the 


S42 


THE  F1B8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[OB.  XTIIL  1-  -30. 


gainar,  Dtvld  will  probably  be  slain,  he 
thinki,  la  trying  to  get  the  dowi^  asked  of 
him ;  ud  if  not,  at  all  events  he  Will  himself 
be  cleat«d  of  the  stain  of  public  dishonesty 
now  nsting  npon  him.  Therefore  SanI  said 
to  David.  Not  in  person,  which  accounts  for 
David  giving  no  answer,  but  through  his 
servants,  u  is  recoontad  mor*  folly  afte^ 
ward& 

Vers.  22,  28. — Commnn*,  ke.  This  la  a 
more  full  and  exact  account  of  what  was 
said  summarily  in  ver.  21.  We  cannot 
suppose  that  Saul  first  spoke  to  David  him- 
self, and  then  told  his  servants  to  coax  him, 
as  this  would  also  require  us  to  suppose  that 
when  offered  her  by  Saul,  David  refused 
Michal  in  marriage.  But  we  may  well 
believe  that  he  was  displeased  at  naving 
been  deceived,  and  that  the  renewed  proposal 
of  marriage  with  one  of  the  king's  daughters 
had  to  be  made  carefully,  as  he  might 
naturally  think  that  there  was  danger  of  his 
being  cajoled  a  second  time.  David  replies, 
in  fact,  very  discreetly,  saying  that  to  be 
the  king's  son-in-law  was  indeed  a  great 
honour,  but  that  he  was  too  poor  to  provide 
a  sufficient  dowry.  Strictly  the  promises 
given  in  ch.  xvii.  25  bound  Saul  to  give  her 
without  dowry  j  but  it  appears  quite  plainly 
from  David's  words  that  he  had  lost  Merab 
because  not  able  to  purchase  her  as  Adriel 
had  done.  For  the  custom  of  giving  large 
sums  to  the  bride's  father  see  Gen.  zzziv. 
12 ;  Exod.  xxii.  16,  17. 

Vers.  2i,  25. — David's  answer  exactly  fell 
in  with  Saul's  purposes,  and  he  forthwith 
asked  as  a  dowry  proof  of  David  having  slain 
a  hundred  Phflistines.  As  this  slaughter 
would  have  to  be  effected  not  in  regular 
warfare,  but  in  a  sort  of  private  raid,  there 
would  be  every  likelihood  of  David  being 
overpowered  by  a  rapid  gathering  of  the 
Philistines  and  slain  m  attempting  it  It 
marki  the  nnscrupoloni  character  of  ancient 


warfaR'  thjl  the  lives  of  enemies  should  thai 
be  taken,  without  any  public  provocation,  fof 
private  purposes  (comp.  Judges  xiv.  19). 

Vers.  26,  27.— It  pleased  David  well  to 
be  the  king's  son-in-lav.  Besides  the  great 
honour,  David,  not  suspecting  any  malicious 
purpose  on  Saul's  part,  may  have  hoped  that 
this  relationship  would  put  an  end  to  the 
miserable  state  of  things  which  existed  be- 
tween him  and  Saul.  He  harboured  no 
treasonable  purposes,  and  would  have  gladly 
served  Saul  faithfully  if  he  had  been  per- 
mitted. The  nature  also  of  the  dowry  fell 
in  with  his  adventurous  and  war-loving  dis- 
position. The  days  were  not  expired. 
Wherefore,  &&  A  difficulty  arises  here 
ttom  the  wrong  division  of  the  verses,  and 
from  our  translators  having  rendered  the 
clauses  as  if  they  were  independent  of  each 
other.  The  Hebrew  is,  "And  the  days  were 
not  full,  and  David  arose,"  Ice.  The  dowry 
was  to  be  given  within  a  fixed  time,  and 
before  it  hitd  expired  David,  who  had  been 
forming  his  plans,  set  out  with  his  men  and 
made  an  incursion  into  the  Philistine  terri- 
tory, whence  he  brought  back  to  the  king 
twice  as  many  foreskins  as  had  been  stipu- 
lated ;  and  thereupon  Michal  became  David'i 
wife. 

Vers.  28,  29.— The  failure  of  his  evil  pur- 
pose,  end  the  knowledge  that  Michal  loved 
her  husband,  and  would  protect  him  against 
his  intrigues,  and  that  the  marriage  had 
brought  rank  and  influence  to  David,  made 
Saul  hate  him  all  the  more  bitterly,  because 
he  could  not  now  openly  put  to  death  one 
so  closely  connected  with  him. 

Ver.  30.— The  princes  of  the  Philistines 
went  forth.  See  on  ver.  6.  This  new  war 
was  the  result  of  David's  raid,  but  it  only 
led  to  an  increase  of  his  fame  and  popularity. 
For  he  behaved  himself  more  wisely.  /.  «. 
was  more  successful  and  skilful  than  any  td 
Saul's  other  officera. 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  1—4. — Eeligiom  friendship.  The  facts  are— 1.  Jonathan,  on  becmning 
acquainted  with  David,  forms  a  strong  attachment  for  him.  2.  Saul,  to  show  his 
gratitude  for  David's  aid,  constrains  him  into  his  service.  3.  Jonathan  and  David 
enter  into  a  solemn  covenant  of  friendship.  It  is  obvious  that  David  desired  to 
retire  to  the  quietude  of  rural  life,  thus  displaying  simplicity  of  purpose  and  freedom 
from  the  ambition  charged  on  him  by  Bliab  (ver.  28),  as  also  superiority  to  the  tempt- 
ation of  success.  Saul's  will  that  he  should  "go  no  more  home  to  his  fatlier's 
house  "  was  fraught  with  a  long  train  of  consequences  which  told  on  the  develop- 
ment of  the  higher  qualities  of  tlie  coming  king.  The  first  of  these  was  the  forma- 
tion of  that  beautiful  friendship  with  Jonathan,  which  shines  as  a  welcome  light 
amidst  the  gloom  of  the  last  years  of  Saul's  reign.  There  are  in  this  aection  two 
matters  deserving  special  attention. 

I.  Ak  illustration  of  thb  harmonies  of  Providencb.  On  h  priori  grounds 
we  may_ conclude  that  always,  in  all  things,  however  apparently  clashing,  there  is 
a' I  interior  harmony  in  the  ordinations  and   unfoldings  of  Providenc*.     In  manv 


SH.  xvin.  1— «).]  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  848 

instances  we  seem  to  hear  discord  ;  faith  only  enables  us  to  refer  the  discord  to  our 
defective  organs  of  knowledge.  But  here,  as  in  some  other  instances,  we  can  trace 
the  exquisite  harmony  between  David's  detention  by  Saul,  involving  his  friendship 
with  Jonathan,  and  David's  subsequent  entrance  on  the  duties  and  dignities  fore- 
shadowed by  the  anointing  by  Samuel.  Unquestionably,  as  seen  in  the  history  and 
in  the  Psalms  composed  during  the  period,  David's  trials  and  the  public  position 
arising  out  of  this  forced  detention  by  Saul  were,  in  their  efEects  on  his  character 
and  abilities,  wonderfully  harmonious  with  his  pre-ordained  kingship.  Moreover, 
this  providential  opportunity  for  forming  personal  friendship  beautifully  harmonises 
with  both  the  cutting  ofE  of  Saul's  line  (ch.  xv.  27 — 29)  from  the  succession  and  the 
acquisition  by  David  of  the  title,  in  virtue  of  his  religious  and  general  qualities. 
Such  friendship,  formed  on  the  purest  religious  basis,  and  before  developments  with 
respect  to  the  succession  were  made,  would  save  both  David  and  Jonathan  from  the 
possibility  of  regarding  each  other  as  rivals,  and  would  also  be  a  blessed  counter- 
poise to  David's  unmerited  sorrows  during  Saul's  violent  persecutions.  Jonathan 
never  lived  to  see  the  throne  taken  by  another  ;  but  his  life  was  not  embittered  by 
the  griefs  of  jealousy,  because  of  the  deep  love  he  had  for  his  friend.  David,  while 
in  the  decree  of  God  destined  to  be  king,  loved  Jonathan  too  well  to  think  of  setting 
him  aside.  Beautiful  providence  that  could  insure  a  succession  out  of  the  line,  and 
yet  sweeten  and  ennoble  the  lives  of  those  whose  interests  were  involved  in  it  1  It 
would  be  easy  for  Jonathan  to  resign  to  David,  should  they  both  survive  Saul's 
decease ;  for  did  he  not  love  him  with  a  love  passing  that  of  women  ?  (2  Sam.  i.  26). 
And  it  would  be  far  from  David's  desire  to  set  him  aside,  seeing  the  loving  esteem  in 
which  he  was  held.  Yea,  was  there  not  an  instinctive  homage  paid  to  David's  cha- 
racter, as  though  the  pure  soul  saw  in  him  the  coming  king,  when  Jonathan  stript 
himself  of  his  princely  attire  and  placed  it  on  David  ?  Harmonies  of  Providence  are 
constant,  if  only  we  had  the  eye  to  discern  them.  Paul's  early  training  worked  into 
his  life's  mission,  though  at  first  tending  another  way.  The  flight  of  Mary  and 
Joseph  into  Egypt  no  doubt  checked  a  premature  notoriety  of  the  child  Jesus. 

II.  An  illustration  op  a  tbub  eeligious  friendship.  Friendship  in  some 
degree  is  a  necessity  of  man's  life.  A  perfectly  solitary  being,  whose  feelings  cling 
to  no  one,  and  around  whom  no  one  clings,  is  truly  lost.  Ordinary  friendships  are 
based  on  the  existence  of  natural  affinities  and  contrarieties.  That  similarity  of 
mind  is  the  basis  of  friendsliip  is  only  true  in  a  limited  sense,  for  one  is  drawn  to 
another  not  only  by  the  affinity  of  common  tastes  and  qualities,  but  because  of  a 
recognition  and  admiration  of  qualities  that  are  lacking  in  self.-  We  seek  to  supple- 
ment the  deficiencies  of  our  own  life  by  taking  into  ourselves,  as  far  as  possible,  the 
excellences  of  another  life,  and  friendship  is  the  means  to  this  end.  This  is  not 
indeed  a  full  rationale  of  friendship,  nor  must  it  be  inferred  that  cool  calculation  of 
personal  profit  enters  into  it.  The  love,  the  sympathy,  the  tender,  undefinable 
interest  and  absolute  trust  cannot  be  disentangled  from  the  perception  of  qualities 
supplementary  to  one's  own.  The  friendship  of  David  and  Jonathan  embraced  all  that 
enters  into  ordinary  friendship, — appreciation,  love,  confidence,  tenderness,  fidelity, 
unsuspicious  intercourse, — with  an  additional  religious  element.  This  religious  friend- 
ship may  be  considered  as  to— 1.  Its  nature.  In  David  and  Jonathan  we  recognise, 
besides  the  usual  essentials  of  friendship,  the  .  esponsive  action  of  a  common  faith  in 
God  and  delight  in  his  service.  Each  saw  in  the  other,  as  by  a  higher  spiritual 
insight,  a  spiritual  kinship.  The  circumstances  of  the  age  intensified  this  mutual 
attraction.  As  holy,  consecrated  young  men,  they  cherished  a  secret  sorrow  over  the 
unhappy  spiritual  condition  of  their  countrymen ;  and  their  joy  in  the  recent  victories 
was  ]oy  in  God  and  the  holy  cause  for  which  Israel  was  chosen  out  from  among  the 
nations.  Among  Christians  the  same  religious  feeling  operates  in  the  formation  and 
maintenance  of  friendships.  It  is  true  that  all  are  one  in  Christ,  and  each  sees  in 
every  other  a  member  of  the  household  of  faith:  religiously  there  ia  a  common 
interest  in  all  (1  Cor.  zii.  26,  27).  So  far,  therefore,  there  is  a  friendship  subsisting 
between  each  member  of  Christ's  body  and  eveir  other,  as  distinguished  from  his 
interest  in  men  of  the  world.  But  affection  needs  for  its  own  life  concentratioB ; 
and  while,  therefore,  we  are  ia  general  friendship  with  all  Christ's  people,  and  are 
•onaoioiu  ctt  a  blessed  and  indestructible  bond,  the  necessities  of  oar  life  iMd  to  the 


•44  THE  FIRST  BOOS  OF  SAMUEL.  [ob.  xviii.  1—30. 

formation  of  personal  friendships  in  whicfi  all  ordinary  feelings  are  intensified  and 
beautified  by  the  infusion  of  a  spiritual  element.  Some  modification,  of  the  view  just 
g^ven  is  requisite  in  considering  t\iQ  friendship  of  Christ  for  John  and  the  family  at 
Bethany.  But  although  the  perfect  Saviour  saw  not  in  others  qualities  deficient  in 
himself,  he  did  see  in  the  ardent  John  and  the  tender  sympathy  and  fine  apprecia- 
tion of  the  family  at  Bethany  that  which  he  was  so  eagerly  in  quest  of  in  this  rough, 
onspiritual  world.  His  weary  heart  delighted  to  rest  in  such  pure  love  and  sym- 
pathy, and  he  returned  the  affection  a  hundredfold,  2.  Its  maintenance.  The 
Boblest  form  of  friendship  needs  culture  if  it  is  to  be  permanent.  How  David  and 
Jonathan  nourished  theirs  is  a  matter  of  history,  and  should  be  noted.  Few  things 
are  more  sad  to  reflect  on  than  a  broken  friendeliip — it  means  the  embitterment  and 
aad  solitariness  of  two  human  beings.  No  detailed  rules  can  be  set  for  nourishing  that 
which  in  its  very  nature  overleaps  all  formalities  and  rigid  lines.  Ordinarily  we  may 
strengthen  our  friendships  by  cherishing  a  conviction  of  their  sacredness-^noi  to  be 
rudely  handled  and  lightly  thought  of ;  by  making  it  a  point  to  secure  sufiicient 
intercourse  or  interchange  of  feeling  (Prov.  xviii.  24)  ;  by  a  studied  respect  for  the 
minor  differences  which  advancing  age  and  changed  circumstances  may  develop  ;  by 
prayer  for  the  blessing  of  God  on  each  other ;  and,  if  possible,  by  sharing  in  some 
common  work  for  Christ.     Why  should  not  friendsliips  continue  through  life  ? 

General  lessons : — 1.  Knowing  the  force  of  impulse  and  the  growth  of  interest 
when  once  aroused,  we  should  be  careful  in  placing  youth  in  such  circumstances  as 
may  lead  to  the  formation  of  true  and  lasting  friendships.  2.  It  should  be  a  ques- 
tion for  each  how  it  is  that  Christian  feeling  does  not  enter  so  fully  as  it  ought  into 
the  friendships  of  some  professedly  religious  people.  3.  It  would  be  an  instructive 
study  for  young  and  old  to  trace  out  in  history  some  of  the  achievements  in  religioui 
work  and  fidelity  promoted  by  the  maintenance  of  strong  personal  friendships. 

Vers.  5 — 11. — Some  dangers  of  persistent  sin.    The  facts  are — 1.  David,  behaving 

wisely  in  his  public  position,  wins  favour  with  the  people,  and  in  the  welcome  to  him 
on  his  return  from  the  battle  the  women  ascribe  to  him,  in  their  song,  higher  praise 
than  to  Saul.  2.  The  fact  excites  Saul's  envy  henceforth.  3.  In  a  fit  of  envious 
rage  Saul  seeks  to  smite  David.  The  victory  over  Goliath  brought  Saul  and  David 
into  a  proximity  highly  favourable  to  the  development  of  their  respective  characters. 
Their  mutual  influence  acted  powerfully  on  the  main  springs  of  life ;  and  as  these 
were  so  utterly  different  in  moral  quality,  so  the  sequel  reveals  very  diverse  conduct, 
We  have  in  this  section  an  instance  of — 

I.  Misinterpreted  prosperity.  The  decisive  words  of  Samuel  (ch.  xv.  26)  and 
his  entire  separation  from  Saul  (ch.  xv.  34,  35),  as  also  the  threatening  attitude  of  the 
Philistines,  were  certainly  enough  to  depress  the  spirit  of  the  king ;  and  his  melan- 
choly was  but  the  outward  sign  to  men  of  his  painful  secret.  But  the  appearance  of 
David,  and  the  consequent  defeat  of  the  enemy,  was  an  unlooked-for  gleam  of  light, 
and  at  once  raised  hopes  which  of  late  had  been  lost.  He  even  set  David  over  his 
men  of  war.  The  old  prosperity  was  returning ;  the  kingdom  was  saved  ;  Saul  wa» 
not  dishonoured  in  battle.  After  all,  with  such  helpers  as  David,  might  not  the 
dreaded  doom  be  avoided  ?  Thus  do  we  see  a  man,  conscious  of  moral  degeneracy, 
and  sensible  of  being  rejected,  putting  an  interpretation  on  events  according  to  his 
wishes,  and  not  from  a  perception  of  their  real  bearing.  The  heart,  when  destitute 
of  the  spirit  of  true  repentance,  obstinately  clings  to  unwarranted  hope,  and,  by  its 
own  perverse  ingenuity,  obliterates  or  weakens  the  force  of  hard  facts  and  moral 
laws  (ch.  XV.  26 — 29).  In  the  eye  of  God  the  recent  victory  was  the  public  present- 
ation of  the  "  neighbour,"  as  a  preliminary  to  his  supplanting  Saul  ;  in  the  eye  of 
Saul  it  was  the  postponement,  if  not  the  rendering  void,  of  the  dreaded  doom.  The 
tendency  thus  to  misinterpret  facts  is  common  to  sinful  men.  An  impenitent  heart  is 
unwilling  to  believe  in  the  vindication  of  justice  Not  being  in  moral  sympathy  with 
the  pui-poses  of  God,  it  will  not,  if  possible,  see  those  purposes  in  process  of  realis- 
ation. The  very  riches  of  goodness  are  perverted  into  an  occasion  for  persistence  in 
sin  (Rom.  ii.  4),  and  the  temporal  prosperity  of  life,  despite  the  voice  of  conscienc* 
and  the  clear  word  of  God,  is  supposed  to  be  a  sign  that  the  issue  will  not  ba  •• 
fearful  as  was  anticipated  (Pb.  x.  d,  11 :  Eeb.  ii.  3). 


(M.  inn.  1—80.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  840 

II.  Thb  soundnbbb  and  the  defeotb  of  POPnLAB  INSTINCTS.  The  mass  of  th« 
people  were  quick  in  recognising  the  fact  that  David  was  the  hero  of  the  day,  and 
only  expressed  the  real  truth  in  ascribing  to  him  his  "ten  thousands,"  and  to  Saul 
his  "thousands."  Their  instincts  led  them  to  honour  above  the  king  the  man  who 
was  proved  to  he  better  than  the  king.  But  while  correct  in  their  appreciation  of 
fact,  they  had  no  adequate,  if  any,  perception  of  the  moral  bearings  of  it.  Samuel, 
yrobably  Jesse,  and  a  few  other  devout  men,  would  trace  in  David's  exaltation  of  the 
"  name  of  the  Lord "  (oh.  xvii.  46 — 47)  a  spiritual  power  and  a  spiritual  man 
destined  to  work  wonders  for  Israel.  It  is  a  good  philosophy  that  tnisU  the  popular 
mind  in  reference  to  the  recognition  of  the  broad  facta  of  life.     It  is  this  faith  which 

-  lies  at  the  foundation  of  constitutional  governments  and  the  judicial  administration 
of  our  own  country.  The  common  sense  of  mankind  is  a  safe  guide  in  ordinary 
matters  of  fact.  But  by  reason  of  the  low  condition  of  man's  spiritual  life,  and  his 
inveterate  proneness  to  look  at  the  "  things  that  are  seen,"  the  mass  of  men  do  not 
recognise  quickly  the  moral  and  spiritual  bearings  of  facts.  There  is  a  moral  and 
spiiitual  " intention,"  to  use  a  logical  term,  in  human  facts ;  they  carry  with  them 
qualities  that  determine  the  future ;  they  exhibit  to  the  spiritually  enlightened 
powers  that  will  germinate,  and  that,  too,  not  always  in  the  form  desired  by  the 
populace  (Matt.  xvi.  3). 

III.  The  liability  of  men,  when  warring  against  Providence,  to  fall  into 
NEW  SINS.  We  have  seen  (ch.  xv.  24 — 31)  that  Saul  cherished  impenitent  feelings 
when  told  of  his  sin.  As  a  consequence,  he  tried  not  to  believe  that  the  threatened 
disaster  would  come.  One  of  the  consequences  of  this  mental  condition  was,  that  as 
■oon  as  he  heard  the  honest,  popular  approval  of  David's  prowess,  he,  dreading  lest 
after  all  the  decree  might  be  fulfilled,  eyed  David  as  a  rival,  and  fell  into  the  griev- 
ous sin  of  ceaseless  and  cruel  envy.  The  grievous  character  of  this  sin  is  seen  if  we 
notice  its  manifestation,  and  the  main  features  are  true  of  all  envy.  1.  It  blinded 
him  to  actual  facts.  It  was  true  that  David  had  slain  "  his  ten  thousands,"  as  com- 
pared with  Saul's  "  thousands  ;  "  but  to  the  envious  eye  this  was  as  though  it  were 
not.  Its  reality  must  not  be  tolerated.  The  Pharisees  in  like  manner  were  wilfully 
blind  to  the  fact  that  Christ  had  opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind.  2.  It  led  to  the 
imputation  of  base  motives.  He  at  once  charged  David  with  readiness  for  treason- 
ous designs  on  the  kingdom.  The  pure  man  was  deemed  impure.  This  is  the  com- 
mon practice  of  narrow  and  base  men,  as  appeared  in  the  instance  of  Joseph  (Gen. 
xxxvii.  8,  11),  and  of  Christ  (John  vii.  20).  3.  It  made  himself  perfectly  vrretched. 
His  life  lost  all  joy  and  hope,  and  suspicion  and  fear  entered  in.  And  whoever  falls 
into  this  sin  finds  that  it  slayeth  him  (Job  v.  2),  and  is  as  rottenness  to  the  bones 
(Prov.  xiv.  30).  4.  It  impelled  to  deeds  of  blood.  The  thrust  of  the  javelin  was 
virtual  murder.  The  same  process  wrought  in  the  heart  of  Cain,  of  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees  (Matt,  xxvii.  18  ;  Mark  xv.  10),  and  is  active  in  many  who  are  guilty  of  no 
overt  act  (1  John  iii.  15).  The  dark  thoughts,  the  unspoken  intents  of  envious  minds  j 
who  shall  declare  them  ?  How  true  it  is  that  he  who  hardeneth  his  heart,  not  bow- 
ing in  true  penitence,  submissive  to  all  God's  judgments,  falleth  into  mischief  (Prov. 
xxviii.  14)  again  and  again,  till  at  last  he  is  destroyed  suddenly  and  without  remedy 
(Prov.  xxix.  1 ;  cf .  1  Sam.  xxxL  3,  4^. 

General  lessons : — 1.  All  human  judgments  on  the  course  of  Providence  are  to 
be  discounted  in  so  far  as  sin  is  cherished  in  the  life.  2.  The  key  to  the  future  of 
the  individual  and  national  life  is  to  be  sought  in  moral  conditions  3.  It  is  import- 
ant that  the  popular  mind  should  be  trained  to  estimate  things  in  their  moral  rela- 
tions. 4.  Christians  should  strive  to  be  entirely  free  from'  the  spirit  of  envy,  both  in 
relation  to  worldly  prosperity  and  to  position  in  the  Church  of  God  (Ps.  xxxvii.  1  j 
1  Cor.  xiii.  4  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  1).  5.  In  so  far  as  we  indulge  in  any  envy  we  lay  ourselves 
open  to  temptations  to  further  sins. 

Vers.  li—ie.—The  disturbing  power  of  goodness.  The  facts  are— 1.  Saul,  seeing 
the  signs  of  God's  presence  with  David,  fears  him,  and  removes  him  to  a  distance. 
2,  Increasing  wisdom  of  David  adds  to  Saul's  fear,  and  secures  the  favour  of  the 
people.  3.  The  departure  of  God  from  Saul  explains  his  self-abandonment  to  the 
mfluence  of  this  fear.     We  have  here  a  statement  of  the  diverse  relation  of  Qod  to 


«46  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xvm.  1— Sft 

David  and  Saul, — he  was  with  the  one  and  was  departed  from  the  other, — and  the 
consequences  ensuing  thereon  in  their  respective  lives.  Each  man  made  his  own 
position,  and  was  answerable  for  the  state  he  was  in  and  attained  to ;  nevertheless, 
the  presence  and  absence  of  God  accounted  for  much.  Thus,  also,  we  have  the 
diverse  effect  of  the  same  wise  and  holy  life  upon  different  persons — the  diversity 
arising  from  the  moral  condition  of  the  persons  acted  upon. 

I.  The  RELATION  OP  GoD  TO  MAN  IS-  NOT  IN  EVERY  INSTANCE  THE  SAME.      There  are 

certain  natural  relationships  which  God  sustains  to  all  men,  in  all  time,  irrespective 
of  their  character.  His  power  upholds  them  in  life  ;  his  equitable  rulership  is  never 
withdrawn.  All  this  was  true  in  reference  to  David  and  Saul,  while  it  was  equally 
true  that  God  wag  to  the  one  what  he  was  not  to  the  other.  There  was  the  relation 
of  moral  nearness  and  support  to  David,  and  of  moral  abandonment  and  disapproval 
to  Saul.  The  Lord  '•  knoweth  the  way  of  the  righteous  "  (Ps.  i.  6).  His  delight  it 
in  his  people  (Ps.  rxii.  8).  "The  proud  he  knoweth  afar  off"  (Ps.  cxxxviii.  6), 
and  is  "  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day  "  (Pb.  vii.  11).  The  effects  of  moral 
nearness  and  support  are  seen  in  the  instance  of  David : — piety  was  sustained  and 
rendered  beautiful  in  development;  abilities,  under  such  favouring  influences,  were 
more  fully  and  evenly  exercised  ;  the  vision  being  cleared,  practical  sagacity  found 
wider  scope ;  and  the  Divine  energy  acting  everywhere  in  harmony  with  moral  ends, 
opportunities  would  be  created  for  usefulness,  and  the  minds  of  men  disposed  to 
favour.  On  the  other  hand,  moral  nearness  and  support  being  wanting  to  Saul,  the 
evil*  long  cherished  found  more  unrestrained  exercise ;  conscience  became  more 
remorsefm ;  natural  abilities  were  impaired  in  their  development,  and  foolish  deeds 
became  habitual. 

II.  The  DIVBBSB  RELATION  OF  GOD  TO  MAN  ARISES   FROM  UAN'b  PREVIOUS  CONDUCT. 

The  recent  history  of  David  shows  that  from  a  youth  he  had  quietly  and  consistently 
followed  the  measure  of  light  vouchsafed  to  him  ;  while  Saul's  course  reveals  a 
deliberate  and  persistent  preference  of  his  own  will  to  the  revealed  will  of  God. 
Grace  was  added  to  valued  grace.  Light  disregarded  had  become  darkness.  In 
this  diverse  consequence  there  is  nothing  unusual.  It  is  the  New  Testament  law 
that  "  to  him  that  hath  shall  be  given,  and  from  him  that  hath  not  shall  be  taken 
away  even  that  he  hath  "  (Matt.  xiii.  12 ;  Hosea  xi.  8 ;  Luke  zix.  42 ;  John  xii.  Sfi — 
40 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  8). 

IIL   A  BECOONITION  OF  THE  DIVERSE   RELATION  OF  GOD  TO  MAN   IS  AN  OCCASION  0» 

TROUBLE  TO  THE  DELIBERATELY  WICKED.  While  David  won  the  affection  of  the  mass 
of  the  people,  his  name  and  presence  were  disturbing  to  Saul.  "  Saul  was  afraid  of 
David,  because  the  Lord  was  with  him,  and  was  departed  from  Saul."  The  reasons 
for  this  effect  on  Saul  are  obvious.  David's  holy  life  and  glorying  in  the  name  of 
the  Lord  (ch.  xvii.  45 — 47)  revealed  by  contrast  the  spiritual  condition  of  Saul  to 
himself;  and,  being  destitute  of  the  spirit  of  repentance,  he  trembled  under  the 
silent  rebnke.  There  was  also  a  reminder  of  joys  and  privileges  once  within  reach, 
but  now  gone  for  ever ;  and  he  could  not  hut  associate  the  rising  character  of  David 
with  the  predicted  doom  of  his  own  monarchy.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  good- 
ness does  exercise  a  disturbing  injluence  in  the  domain  of  sin-  Goodness  in  its  own 
nature  is  a  repellant  power.  It  creates  a  commotion  whenever  it  enters  the  realms  ol 
darkness.  The  powers  of  evil  know  it  as  their  natural  foe,  and  quail  in  consciousnesa 
of  its  predestined  triumph.  There  appears  to  have  been  fear  and  excitement  among 
the  evil  spirits  when  the  holy  Saviour  drew  near  to  their  sphere  of  influence  on  earth 
(Matt.  iv.  1—11 ;  ivi.  18 ;  Mark  v.  7  ;  Luke  xxii.  53 ;  Col.  ii.  16).  While  the  natural 
effect  of  embodied  goodness  on  minds  not  bent  on  sin  is  to  soothe,  to  cheer,  and  to 
gladden,  as  when  Christ  drew  near  to  the  poor  and  needy,  the  sick  and  penitent,  and 
as  we  all  feel  when  a  very  wise  and  holy  man  enters  a  home  or  a  sick  chamber,  y«t 
the  effect  is  the  reverse  when  sin  is  being  deliberately  practised.  It  is  in  this  way 
that  we  may  understand  Herod's  fear  on  mention  of  the  name  of  John,  Ahab's  fear 
of  Elijah,  and  the  evident  oneasinesa  of  scribes  and  Pharisees  at  the  presence  of 
Christ. 

General  lasont  ."—1.  We  see  the  valne  to  the  ordinary  affairs  of  life  of  a  conacion*' 
ness  of  the  favonr  of  Ood  (Pi.  xxx.).  2.  The  development  of  our  powers  is  inti> 
mately  oooneotad  with  our  faithfnln—  ia  spiritual  things.    8.  In  proportion  aa  w« 


CH.  xvin.  1—30.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL,  847 

attain  to  true  holiness  of  life  will  the  power  of  our  presence  and  actions  be  recog- 
nised. 4.  We  must  expect  the  actual  antagonism  of  those  who  have  rejected  God 
in  so  far  as  we  come  into  contact  with  them,  but  this  should  be  regarded  as  proof  of 
the  truth  of  onr  religion. 

Vers.  17 — 30. — The  plot  and  itt  lessons.  The  facts  are^l.  Saul,  in  hopes  of  com- 
passing the  death  of  David,  promises  him  his  eldest  daughter  to  wife,  on  condition 
that  he  is  valiant  against  the  Philistines.  2.  David  expresses  his  unworthiness  of  so 
great  an  honour.  3;  Saul,  having  broken  this  promise  by  giving  Merab  to  Adriel, 
ofEers  David  his  daughter  Michal.  4.  On  David  intimating  that,  being  poor,  he  was 
not  able  to  provide  a  becoming  dowry,  Saul  is  content  with  proof  of  the  death  of  a 
hundred  enemies  of  Israel.  6.  David  presents  double  the  number  required,  and 
takes  Michalto  wife.  6.  In  spite  of  his  devices,  Saul  sees  the  growing  prosperity  of 
David,  and  becomes  more  than  ever  afraid  of  him.  This  section  further  unfolds,  on 
the  one  side,  the  downward  progress  of  the  man  who  has  wilfully  sinned  under  cir- 
cumstances favourable  to  obedience,  and  has  consequently  been  left  to  the  tendencies 
of  his  impenitent  heart ;  and,  on  the  other  side,  the  steady  advance  in  wisdom  and 
aptitude  for  afEairs  of  the  man  who  gloried  only  in  the  "  name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts." 
The  narrative  relates  events  as  they  appeared  to  observers  at  the  time,  and  introduces 
statements  of  the  sacred  historian  designed  to  indicate  how  those  events  were 
regarded  by  God.  The  outward  acts  are  connected  with  the  hidden  motive,  and  so 
made  to  bear  their  proper  moral  character. 

I.  The  characteeistics  of  the  plot.  Did  we  not  know  Saul's  entire  history 
there  is  much  in  the  narrative  of  this  section  which  might  suggest  to  a  casual  reader 
no  thought  of  a  plot.  The  addition  of  statements  unveiling  the  hidden  purpose  of 
his  words  ar>d  deeds  changes  the  moral  bearing  of  the  whole,  and  sets  forth  the 
triple  characteristics  of  the  plot.  1.  Cleverness.  It  is  said  that  insane  persons 
often  display  unusual  cunning  and  skill  in  compassing  their  ends ;  and  also  the 
"  devices  "  of  the  wicked,  both  in  relation  to  God  and  to  man,  are  in  Scripture  pro- 
verbial (Job  V.  12 ;.  Ps.  X.  2 ;  xxxiii.  10).  The  incipient  madness  and  settled  wicked- 
ness of  Saul  at  this  period  of  his  life  indicate  the  truth  of  these  remarks ;  for  consider 
the  plausibility  of  his  conduct.  (1 )  There  was  a  /air  appearance  of  truthfulness. 
He  had  virtually  promised  his  daughter  to  the  man  who  should  slay  Goliath  (ch. 
xvii.  25).  To  keep  one's  word  was  becoming  a  king  and  due  to  a  youthful  hero.  (2) 
There  was  an  obvtous  display  of  magnanimity.  For  the  recent  violent  attempt  on 
the  life  of  David  (ver.  11)  must  have  produced  an  impression  of  injustice  on  both 
David  and  the  people.  What  then  more  proper  than  that  a  fit  of  unreasonable  anger 
should  be  followed  by  some  expression  of  the  wrong  done,  and  some  efEort  to  render 
compensation.  (3)  Eeligiows  feeling  was  conspiaious.  Had  not  David  appeared  on 
the  arena  to  fight  the  battle  of  the  Lord  ?  (ch.  xvii.  47).  Was  it  not  proper,  after 
the  signal  victory  in  the  Lord's  name,  that  the  king  should  recognise  the  conflict 
with  the  heathen  oppressor  in  its  theocratic  aspect,  and  encourage  the  valiant  youth 
still  to  go  forth  in  the  same  holy  name  ?  (4)  Personal  interest  was  natural. 
Saul's  instructions  to  the  courtiers  to  endeavour  to  induce  David  to  accept  of  Michal 
had  an  appearance  of  naturalness,  as  it  was  important  to  honour  so  able  a  man  and  to 
ally  him  with  the  interests  of  the  monarchy,  as  also  to  remove  any  chagrin  on  account 
of  Merab  having  been  given,  probably  for  state  reasons,  to  Adriel.  (5)  There  was  a 
kindly  consideration  for  David's  position.  A  sense  of  poverty  is  hard  to  bear  when 
it  stands  in  the  way  to  honour  and  influence.  David  felt  that,  despite  his  services, 
be  was  too  poor  to  comply  with  custom  in  offering  as  dowry  what  became  a  suitor  to 
a  king's  daughter.  It  was,  therefore,  very  thoughtful  on  the  part  of  Saul  to  ask  as 
dowry  what  certainly  few  men  could  provide,  but  what  the  conqueror  of  Goliath 
would,  no  doubt,  readily  and  with  increasing  honours  secure.  A  kindly,  considerate 
bearing  disarms  suspicion.  The  plot  was  clever,  like  all  the  plots  whereby  our  great 
•dyersary,  the  devil,  seeki  to  ensnare  the  innocent.  A  parallel  might  be  d«y«loped 
withoBt  mnch  difficulty.  8.  Vileneti.  The  cleverness  is  discovered  by  tracing  the 
eonrte  apparent  to  men  j  the  vileness  by  the  light  thrown  upon  that  course  by  the 
Searcher  of  hearts.  We  are  enabled  to  look  beneath  the  sorface,  and  to  eatimate  words 
*iri  deeds  by  their  relation  to  motive.    The  vileness  is  seen  in — (1)  The  deliberate 


MS  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xviu.  1- -30. 

intent  to  commit  murder.  The  whole  procedure  originated  in  a  deterniinatidn  to 
insure  David's  death.  Blood  was  shed  in  intent.  The  true  universe  is  the  unseen, 
for  it  is  enduring.  In  that  sphere  Saul  slev/,  before  the  clear,  searcliing  eye  of  God, 
the  best  friend  he  ever  had  next  to  Samuel.  (2)  The  covering  of  murderous  intent, 
with  professions  of  kindness  and  esteem.  O^en  hostility  is  bad  enough  in  an  ev  il 
cause,  but  to  play  the  hypocrite  for  compassing  a  cruel  purpose  is  the  blackest  of 
crimes  (Ps.  x.  7).  To  be  clothed  as  an  angel  of  light  is  not  confined  to  Satan.  (3) 
The  attempt  to  make  Providence  subservient  to  a  secret  intent.  Sauldare  not  lay 
hands  on  David,  but  he  dare  lay  a  train  of  circumstances  by  which  Providence  should 
be  charged  with  doing  what  all  men  would  deplore  except  himself.  Man  would 
make  God  the  servant  of  his  vile  designs.  Cowards  wish  Providence  to  do  what  they 
have  not  the  courage  to  avow,  3.  Foolishness.  It  is  no  uncommon  thing  for  the 
cunning  and  skill  of  the  wicked  to  turn  out  the  veriest  foolishness.  Such  is  the  force 
of  right  and  justice,  that  wicked  wisdom  is  always  found  in  the  issue  to  be  mad  folly. 
That  it  was  so  in  this  case  is  seen  by  observing— (1)  God  knew  all  from  the  first.  It 
is  a  proof  of  the  utter  stupidity  of  the  sinful  heart  that  it  acts  as  though  God  were 
not.  This  unreasonableness  enters  into  all  sin.  The  wicked  heart  retires  into  its  own 
darkness,  and  sayg,  "  He  will  never  see  it "  (Ps.  x.  11).  (2)  The  plot  secured  to  David 
the  special  protection  promised  to  the  innocent.  God  pledges  his  care  to  the  poor  and 
needy  when  they  walk  in  innocency.  He  "  saveth  the  upright  in  heart "  (Ps.  vii.  10). 
The  "needy  shall  not  alway  be  forgotten ''  (P^  ix.  18  ;  xxxvii.  32,  33).  Saul  ought 
to  have  known  that  a  holy  man,  one  who  had  been  blessed  in  conflict,  would  not  be 
left  to  himself  in  the  day  of  danger.  (3)  It  issued  in  Davids  advantage.  Saul 
really  fell  into  a  pit  prepared  for  another.  The  man  who  was  to  be  put  down  rose 
higher,  while  Saul  himself  sank  in  the  esteem  of  all.  The  scheme  brought  out  in 
clear  and  beautiful  form  David's  personal  integrity  (vers.  18,  23).  Its  issue  gave  him 
greater  influence  with  Israel  (ver.  30).  He  became  a  greater  terror  to  his  enemies 
(ver.  27),  and  his  marriage  with  Michal  subsequently  proved  a  great  help  in  escaping 
the  snares  of  Saul  (ver.  21 ;  of.  xix.  12). 

II.  The  general  truths  it  teaches.  Among  the  many  truths  set  forth  in  the  plot 
of  Saul  and  escape  of  David,  the  following  may  be  specially  noticed: — 1.  The  moral 
value  of  conduct  is  seen  when  the  light  of  God  shines  on  it.  Saul's  conduct,  as  watched 
by  casual  observers  ignorant  of  the  secret  between  him  and  Samuel  (ch.  xv.  26 — 28, 
30),  would  have  attached  to  it  a  moral  value  quite  inconsistent  with  real  truth.  It  is 
the  light  which  God  enabled  the  historian  to  pour  on  the  inner  motive  that  reveals 
the  whole  as  vile.  Our  estimate  of  conduct  is  necessarily  approximate.  A  measure 
of  doubt  or  suspense  attends  our  judgments  of  character.  There  is  no  principle  more 
clearly  held  than  that  the  secret  intent,  the  private,  unexpressed,  and  often  inexpress- 
ible motive,  is  the  real  determinant  of  moral  character  in  actions.  Yet  suoh  are  the 
depths  and  intricacies  of  human  thought  and  feeling,  that  every  man  is  largely  an 
unknown  being  to  his  fellows.  This  uncertainty  creates  a  belief  in  a  future  manifest- 
ation of  character,  when  every  man  shall  receive  from  all  exactly  his  due.  Other- 
wise justice  is  defeated,  and  moral  worth  is  cheated  of  its  honour.  Scripture  assures 
us  of  the  truth  that  the  day  will  come  when  the  true  spring  of  conduct  shall  be 
manifested  ;  the  inner  real  man  will  be  known.  The  day  is  coming  on  when  men 
shall  see  themselves  and  others  in  that  all-revealing  light  (Eocles.  xii.  14;  Matt.  x.  26; 
XXV.  31,  32).  Hence  the  good  cheer  of  the  upright  in  heart  whose  actions  are  misin- 
terpreted, whose  position  is  obscure,  who  sufEer  from  the  scorning  of  the  proud,  and 
whose  outward  success  in  life  is  not  commensurate  with  the  largeness  and  purity 
of  their  desires.  Hence,  also,  the  warning  for  those  who  cover  up  a  defiled  heart 
beneath  an  attractive  exterior.  2.  Integrity  is  the  best  human  defence  against  wicked 
draft.  The  manifest  integrity  of  David  in  all  his  relations  to  Saul  and  the  people 
was  better  to  him  than  all  possible  contrivances  to  cunningly  checkmate  the  move- 
ments of  his  enemy.  There  was  a  moral  power  in  his  blameless,  unafEected  conduct 
which  caused  his  secret  foe  to  dwell  in  fear.  Looking  back  on  this  period,- be  could 
gay,  "I  have  walked  in  mine  integrity  "  (Ps.  xxvi.  1)  ,  «nd  doubtless,  knowing  the 
value  of  such  defence  in  the  past,  he  could  say,  in  view  of  future  dangers,  "  Let 
integrity  and  uprightness  preserve  me  "  (Ps.  xxv.  21).  It  is  ever  so.  As  simple 
truth  is  mightier  than  all  ramifications  of  falsehood,  so  an  upright  heart,  an  iniio 


ini.  xvm.  1—80.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  149 

cent  life,  ia,  in  the  issue,  more  than  a  match  for  all  onnning  combinations  of  eril. 
Were  men  more  simple  in  purpose,  less  given  to  mere  policy,  keeping  their  hearta 
free  from  petty  jealousies  and  ambitions,  their  foot  would  be  less  often  caught  in  a 
snare,  and  their  reputation  would  take  care  of  itself.  3.  God  takes  care  of  hts  faith- 
ful servants  who  have  a  work  to  do  in  the  world.  David's  innocence  was  an  object 
of  interest  to  God,  and  received  his  protection  ;  but  David  was  a  chosen  servant  in 
course  of  unconscious  preparation  for  high  and  important  duties.  He,  therefore,  was 
cared  for  by  God  in  the  midst  of  unknown  dangers.  Nor  was  there  anything  excep- 
tional in.  this,  for  such  is  the  heritage  of  all  who  fear  the  Lord.  Bodily  suffering, 
and  even  death,  may  come  on  the  innocent  and  true,  but  these  are  not  the  worst  of 
evils.  There  is  a  more  fearful  fall ;  and  in  this  respect,  such  is  the  care  of  God,  that 
though  a  thousand  fall  at  the  side  of  the  faithful,  the  great  spiritual  evil  does  not 
touch  him  (Ps.  xci.  7,  14).  Every  one  has  a  charmed  life  in  Christ's  service  as  long 
as  his  work  is  not  finished.  No  weapon  formed  against  David  could  prosper  before 
he  became  king.  No  power  was  allowed  to  take  away  our  Saviour's  life  till  he  had 
finished  the  work  the  Father  gave  him  to  do.  No  stones  and  lying  in  wait  of  wicked 
men  were  of  any  avail  against  Paul  before  he  had  preached  the  gospel  to  the  Gentiles 
(Acts  ix.  15,  23,  24 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  24 — 27),  4.  The  ulterior  object  of  a  sinfid  course  it 
never  attaitied.  One  object  of  Saul's  cunning  was  to  get  rid  of  David;  History  tells 
us  how  this  object  was  frustrated.  The  Lord  was  with  David.  Disappointment, 
vexation,  intenser  misery  were  the  result  to  Saul.  It  is  not  too  wide  an  assertion  to 
a£5rm  that  the  ulterior  object  is  never  attained  in  a  sinful  course.  A  careful  analysis 
of  the  workings  of  sin  in  every  instance  will  show  that  the  end  in  view  is  to  secure  a 
pleasure  deemed  greater  and  more  welcome  than  any  supposed  to  result  from  obedi- 
ence to  God's  will.  If  sin  in  its  origin  be  self-assertion,  as  against  conformity  to  a 
supreme  will,  the  object  in  view  is  evidently  to  attain  to  a  state  of  being  superior  to 
that  involved  in  conformity.  It  seeks  a  rise,  and,  behold,  it  is  itself  a  fall.  It  is 
always  self-defeated.  This  can  be  shown  to  be  true  of  all  who  wilfully  refuse  to 
have  rest  in  God — they  miss  the  bliss  they  sought  in  rebellion  ;  of  all  who  prefer  to 
be  saved  by  other  means  than  by  the  one  Mediator — they  never  attain  to  the  pardon 
and  purity  which  alone  constitute  salvation ;  of  all  who  sacrifice  Christian  principle 
to  acquire  wealth  or  power — ^they  get  the  wealth  and  power,  but  not  the  satisfaction 
of  soul  which  their  possession  was  believed  to  insure.  It  cannot  be  insisted  on  too 
strongly,  that  not  only  is  sin  essentially  evil  and  degrading,  however  fascinating  its 
form,  but  is  also  in  its  issue  a  bitter  disappointment.  "  He  that  sinneth  against  me 
wrongeth  his  own  soul "  (Prov.  viii.  36).  The  desire,  the  expectation,  the  way  of  the 
wicked  "  shaU  perish "  (Ps.  i.  6  ;  ciii.  10 ;  Prov.  x.  28).  5.  Eccalted  piety  and 
nttiplidty  of  life  are  consistent  with  pre-eminence  in  secular  affairs.  It  is  often 
supposed  that  a  very  pious  man,  and  one  of  simple  purpose  in  life,  cannot  compete 
with  men  less  spiritual  in  character.  The  language  cf  Christians  has  sometimes  given 
sanction  to  this  belief.  But  facts  and  reason  are  against  it.  David,  the  most  pious 
of  men,  attained  to  a  capacity  for  affairs  far  in  advance  of  others  (ver.  30).  Newton 
was  not  a  worse  mathematician  and  astronomer  for  his  deep  and  simple  piety.  It  is 
reasonable  that  a  mind  pure,  devout,  calm  in  sense  of  God's  favour,  free  from  the 
distraction  induced  by  waywardness  of  will,  and  enjoying  the  promised  blessing  of 
God,  should,  when  called  by  Providence  to  any  sphere  of  activity,  excel  those  of 
equal  natural  powers,  but  destitute  of  the  spiritual  tone.  If  such  men  do  not  attain 
to  highest  public  stations,  it  may  be  because  Providence  has  other  work  for  them  to 
do ;  or  if  only  a  few  rise  to  pre-emuience,  it  may  be  because  the  combination  of  great 
piety  and  great  natural  aptitude  for  special  pursuits  is  rare. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 30.  (Gibbah.) — Bavidls  life  at  court.  On  his  victory  over  Goliath, 
David  was  conducted  by  Abner  (ch.  xiv.  60)  into  the  presence  of  Saul,  "  with  the 
head  of  the  Philistine  in  his  hand."  He  appears  to  have  been  unrecognised  by  the 
king,  perhaps  because  of  the  alteration  that  had  taken  place  in  his  personal  appear- 
ance. Henceforth  he  resided  at  Giheah  (ver.  2),  where  he  remained  for  two 
ar  three  years.     The  court  of  Saul,  while  unlike  Uiat  of  Solomon,  half  a  uentui^ 


860  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oH.  xvm.  1— W 

later,  waa  not  destitute  of  worldly  show,  and  was  marked  by  the  obsequioiunefM, 
self-seeking,  emulation,  and  intrigue  which  too  often  prevail  in  such  places,  especially 
when  the  monarch  ie  capricious,  proud,  and  without  the  fear  of  God  (ch.  mi.  6,  7). 
David's  connection  with  it  was  of  great  importance  in  relation  to  the  position  which 
he  was  destined  by  Divine  providence  to  occupy;  continued  his  education  for  itj 
and  afEorded  (as  every  promotion  to  high  place  does  in  ita  measure)  a  wider  8Cop« 
for — 

I.  The  exercise  of  ability,  1,  Outward  circumstances,  though  they  may  not 
create  eminent  ability,  serve  to  call  ii  forth.  Much  excellence  doubtless  exists,  but 
is  never  displayed  on  account  of  the  absence  of  favourable  conditions.  2.  Great 
genius  is  shown  in  one  who  has  the  faeulty  of  adapting  himself  to  varied  positions 
in  life  and  their  varied  requirements.  3.  The  proper  use  of  power  ttrengthens  it 
and  develops  it  to  perfection.  4.  The  humble,  faithful,  and  eflScient  discharge  of 
duty  in  one  position  prepares  the  way  for  another  and  a  higher.  It  was  thus  with 
David,  who  passed  from  the  narrow  circle  of  private  life  to  the  wider  one  of  public 
life,  from  the  sheepfold  to  the  palace,  from  contending  against  a  lion  and  a  bear  to 
military  expeditions  (vers.  5,  13,  30)  against  the  enemies  of  Israel,  and  ultimately 
from  loyal  obedience  to  royal  rule. 

II.  Acquaintance  with  men,  and  the  knowledge  of  human  nature.  David  was 
familiar  with  "fields,  and  flocks,  and  silent  stars,"  but  needed  training  in  another 
school.  1.  There  are  few  things  more  valuable  than  an  accurate  and  eitensivs 
knowledge  of  men :  their  divers  temperaments,  tendencies,  and  capacities ;  their 
peculiar  excellences  and  defects ;  their  varied  wishes  and  aims ;  and  underneath  all 
the  great  principles  of  humanity  that  are  the  same  in  all.  2.  Some  circumstances 
afford  special  opportunity  for  the  attainment  of  such  knowledge.  What  a  field  of 
observation  were  the  court  and  camp  of  Saul  to  one  of  such  mental  activity  and 
profound  insight  as  David  !  3.  The  knowledge  of  men  produces  in  the  heart  that  is 
sincere,  devout,  and  acquainted  with  itself  a  large  sympathy  with  them  in  their 
sorrows,  joys,  imperfections,  and  strivings  after  higher  things.  Of  this  sympathy 
the  psalms  of  David  are  a  wonderful  expression.  4.  It  is  necessary  to  the  know- 
ledge of  the  most  effectual  methods  of  dealing  with  them — one  of  the  most  needful 
and  desirable  qualifications  in  a  ruler. 

III.  The  trial  op  peinciplb.  David,  no  less  than  Saul,  must  be  put  to  the  test, 
and  his  fidelity  to  Jehovah  tried  as  silver  "  in  a  furnace  of  earth.."  1.  Trial  is 
needful  to  prove  the  reality  of  principle,  and  manifest  its  strength  and  brightness. 

2.  One  trial  is  often  followed  by  another  and  a  greater.  The  royal  favour  into 
which  David  was  suddenly  raised  was  as  suddenly  succeeded  by  royal  jealousy, 
hatred,  and  craft.     Surely  no  man  was  ever  more  fiercely  assailed  by  temptation. 

3.  When  endured  aright,  in  faith  and  obedience,  trial,  however  painful,  is  morallp 
beneficial.  4.  The  victory  which  is  gained  over  one  temptation  is  an  earnest  of  a 
victory  over  the  next.  The  triumph  of  humility  in  David  was  followed  by  that 
of  simplicity,  patience,  and  forbearance. 

IV.  Advancement  in  popular  favour  (vers.  7, 16,  30),  which,  in  the  case  of  Da  vid, 
paved  his  way  to  the  throne ;  though  he  neither  coveted  nor,  during  the  life  of 
Saul,  put  forth  any  effort  to  gain  that  object.  1.  A  course  of  wise  and  prosperous 
action,  as  it  well  deserves,  so  it  gemerally  obtains  the  approbation  of  the  people. 
2.  Such  a  course  of  action  ought  to  be  aimed  at,  rather  than  the  popular  favour 
with  which  it  is  attended.  3.  The  favour  of  the  people  is  to  be  valued  only  in 
subordination  to  the  favour  of  God,  and  in  so  far  as  it  accords  with  it.  4.  Popular 
favour  should  be  regarded  not  as  an  end  in  itself,  but  as  a  means  of  promoting  the 
Divine  glory  and  human  welfare. — D. 

Vers.  1 — 4.  (Gibeah.) — True  friendship.  {References: — ch.  xii.  1 — 6;  xx,  1 — 28; 
xxiii.  16 — 18.)  1.  Friendship  is  a  mutual  afEection  between  persons  of  congenial 
minds,  arising  out  of  their  esteem  for  each  other's  excellence,  and  expressing  itself 
in  kindly  offices.  Attachment  to  kindred  is  in  some  respects  sui  passed  hy  that 
which  is  felt  towards  the  friend  "who  is  even  as  thine  own  soul"  (Deut.  ziii.  6). 
In  allusion  to  it  "  Abraham  was  called  the  friend  oT  God  "  (2  Chron.  xx.  7  ;  Isa.  xu. 
8 ;  James  ii.  88) — possibly  in  the  first  instance  by  Gud  himself ;  and  "  God  spake  to 


OH.  XTm.  1—80.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  Ml 

Moses  as  a  man  to  bin  friend"  (Ezod.  zzziii.  11).  The  Book  of  Proverbs  abonndi 
in  statements  concerning  the  worth  and  claims  of  friendship  (Pro  v.  rvu.  17  j  xviiL 
24 ;  xxvii,  6, 9, 10, 17).  And  Jesus  said  to  his  disciples,  "  I  have  called  you  friends" 
(John  XV.  15).  2,  Much  that  is  usually  called  friendship  is  not  worthy  of  tb« 
name.  "  There  are  three  things  that  engender  friendship — profit,  pleasure,  virtue. 
The  first  two  do  not  beget  true  friendship,  for  as  soon  as  the  profit  or  pleasure  ceasethj 
fiiendship  is  gone ;  but  virtue  only  maketh  love  and  friendship  to  continue ' 
(Willet).  3.  The  true  friendship  which  subsisted  between  Jonathan  and  David 
"shines  for  all  ages  an  eternal  type."  It  is  "the  first  Biblical  instance  of  such  a 
dear  companionship  as  was  common  in  Greece,  and  has  been  since  in  Christendom 
imitated,  but  never  surpassed,  in  modem  works  of  fiction  "  (Stanley).  The  most 
celebrated  of  the  instances  referred  to  were  those  of  Orestes  and  Pylades,  Damon 
and  Pythias,  Nisus  and  Euryalus.  4.  The  friendship  of  Jonathan  toward  David 
(the  formatum  of  which  is  here  described)  was  Divinely  provided  as  a  means  of 
guarding  the  life  of  the  latter  from  the  attacks  of  Saul,  and  of  preserving  his  loyalty 
to  the  king  and  his  faith  in  God.  "  Thy  love  to  me  was  wonderful "  (2  Sam.  L  26). 
On  the  other  hand,  that  of  David  toward  Jonathan  exerted  an  elevating  and  sanctify- 
ing influence  upon  him.     Of  true  friendship  observe  that — 

I.  It  bxists  only  in  noble  souls.  Both  Jonathan  and  David  were  virtuons, 
generous,  and  devout.  They  were  one  in  "  the  love  of  virtue  and  the  fear  of  God. 
Persons  destitute  of  these  principles  can  neither  esteem  the  excellence  of  others  nor 
be  esteemed  for  their  own.  "  We  are  so  formed  by  nature  that  there  should  be  a 
certain  social  tie  among  all;  stronger,  however,  as  each  approaches  each.  Now 
friendship  is  nothing  else  than  a  complete  union  of  feeling  on  all  subjects,  Divine  and 
human,  accompanied  by  a  kindly  feeling  and  attachment.  The  entire  strength  of 
friendship  consists  in  an  entire  agreement  of  inclinationB,  porauits,  and  sentiment*  " 
(Cicero,  '  On  Friendship '). 

"  A  generous  friendship  no  cold  medium  kno\ra, 
Bums  with  one  love,  with  one  resentment  glows  "  (Homer). 

"  A  good  man  is  the  best  friend,  and  therefore  soonest  to  be  chosen,  longaat  to  h» 
retained,  and,  indeed,  never  to  be  parted  with,  unless  he  ceases  to  be  that  for  which 
he  was  chosen  "  ( Jer.  Taylor). 

II.  It  is  podndbd  upon  mutual  esteem.  When  David  "had  made  an  end  of 
speaking  unto  Saul,"  in  which  he  doubtless  said  much  more  than  is  recorded,  the 
soul  of  Jonathan  "  was  knit  (linked  or  chained)  with  the  soul  of  David,"  &c.  (ver.  1). 
Nothing  is  said  of  Jonathan  at  the  time  of  David's  conflict  with  Goliath.  He  may 
have  been  absent ;  or,  if  present,  not  permitted  to  risk  his  life  in  the  encounter. 
Perhaps  his  faith  and  courage  were  not  strong  enough.  But  "  he  loved  that  which 
went  beyond  his  own  spirit,  yet  was  of  the  same  heroic  order.  He  saw  in  David 
a  higher  and  greater  Jonathan,  the  ideal  of  his  own  actual  life,  himself  transfigured 
and  perfected.  What  he  had  dreamt  he  might  be  he  beheld  in  David  "  (B.  Kent). 
He  admired  the  faith,  courage,  modesty,  and  moral  excellence  which  lay  beneath 
the  "outward  appearance."  "Now  they  are  worthy  of  friendship  in  whom  there 
exists  a  reason  why  they  should  be  loved  ;  a  rare  class,  for  in  truth  all  that  is 
excellent  is  rare  "  (Cicero). 

III.  It  consists  of  disintkbbstbd  affection.  "  Jonathan  loved  him  as  his  own 
soul "  (vers.  1, 3  ;  ch.  xx.  17) ;  with  the  same  kind  and  the  same  measure  of  affection. 
Hence  the  sympathy,  generosity,  fidelity,  and  constancy  which  he  displayed.  A 
friend  is  "another  self."  "Though  judgment  must  collect  the  materials  of  the 
goodly  structure  of  friendship,  it  is  affection  that  gives  the  cement"  (Melmuth). 
"  It  really  seems  to  consist  in  loving  rather  than  being  loved.  It  is  the  wishing  a 
person  what  we  think  good  for  his  sake,  and  not  for  our  own,  and,  as  far  as  is  in  our 
power,  the  exerting  ourselves  to  procure  it.  And  a  friend  is  he  who  entertains  and 
meets  a  return  of  this  feeling"  (Aristotle,  'Ethics,'  viii.  ;  'Rhetoric,'  ii.).  "  I  hope 
I  do  not  break  the  fifth  commandment  if  I  conceive  I  may  love_  my  friends  be- 
fore the  nearest  of  my  blood,  even  those  to  whom  I  owe  the  principles  of  life.  I 
have  loved  my  friend  as  I  do  virtue,  my  soul,  my  God  "  (Su:  T.  Browne,  '  Religio 
Medici '). 


M$  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xviii.  1— Sa 

IV.  It  tnriTis  in  a  btbadfast  bond.  Knh — sincerely,  closely,  firmly  joined, 
grappled  together  "  as  with  hooks  of  steeL"  "  A  friend  loveth  at  all  timeo,"  in 
adversity  as  well  as  in  prosperity ;  and  his  friendship  endures  the  strain  caused  by 
conflicting  interests,  misrepresentation,  and  many  imperfections ;  it  may  even  be  said 
to  be  "  one  soul  dwelling  in  two  bodies."  "  Now  the  foundation  of  that  steadfast- 
ness and  constancy  which  we  seek  in  friendship  is  sincerity  ;  for  noth  iug  is  steadfast 
which  is  insincere  "  (Cicero).  "  Friendship  founded  on  worldly  principles  is  natural, 
and,  though  composed  of  the  best  elements  of  nature,  is  not  exempt  from  its  muta- 
bility and  frailty ;  but  friendship  founded  on  religion  is  spiritual,  and  thetefor* 
unchanging  and  imperishable"  (R.  Hall,  'Works,'  v.). 

V.  It  is  cokfirmed  by  a  solemn  compact.  "And  Jonathan  and  David  made  a 
covenant,"  &c.  (ver.  3  ;  ch.  xx.  16,  17).  In  it  they  gave  and  received  assurance  of 
affection,  agreed  to  be  faithful  to  each  other  under  all  circumstances,  and  called  tlie 
Lord  in  whom  they  trusted  to  be  witness  between  them ;  to  it  they  were  impelled 
by  the  strength  of  their  love  and  "  a  loftier  necessity  of  finding  and  loving  in  one 
another,  if  possible  in  a  yet  higher  degree,  the  purely  Divine  power  already  felt 
within,  and  thus  mutually  living  under  its  influence "  (Bwald) ;  and  by  it  their 
friendship  was  rendered  sacred  and  strong  and  permanently  established.  In  times 
when  "  the  love  of  many  waxes  cold  and  iniquity  abounds,"  men  of  a  common  faith 
and  love  toward  Ood  do  well  to  draw  closely  together  and  strengthen  each  other's 
hearts  and  hands  by  sacred  vows. 

VI.  It  is  manifested  in  obneroits  gifts.  "And  Jonathan  stripped  himself  of  the 
robe  that  was  upon  him,"  Ac.  (ver.  4).  He  gave  him  what  best  expressed  the  gift 
of  himself,  and  what  would  continually  remind  David  of  his  friend  and  increase  his 
confidence  and  love.  It  was  little  that  David  could  give  him  in  return  of  an  out- 
ward kind,  but  he  gave  him  confidence  for  confidence,  love  for  love,  life  for  life. 
Friendship  is  practical,  self-sacrificing,  and  helpful,  and  gives  of  its  best.  "  David 
is  seen  in  Jonathan's  clothes  that  we  may  take  notice  he  is  Jonathan's  second  self. 
Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  thus  showed  his  love  to  us,  that  he  stripped  himself  to 
clothe  us,  humbled  himself  to  enrich  us.  Nay,  he  did  more  than  Jonathan — he 
clothed  himself  with  our  rags,  whereas  Jonathan  did  not  put  on  David's  '  (M. 
Henry). 

Hxhortation : — I.  Seek  friendship  only  among  the  wise  and  good.  If  you  would 
have  a  true  friend,  make  a  friend  of  him  who  is  a  friend  of  God.  2.  Strive  to  be 
as  worthy  of  the  friendship  of  the  good  as  David  was  of  the  friendship  of  Jonathan. 
3.  Be  as  sincere  and  f aitlif  ul  to  your  friend  as  Jonathan  was  to  David.  4.  Valne 
the  friendship  of  Christ  beyond  all  other. — D. 

Ver.  4. — Divine  friendship.  "  He  loved  him  as  his  own  soul"  (ver.  3).  Human 
friendship  is  a  shadow  of  Divine.  The  greatest  and  best  Friend  is  God  in  Christ 
Jesus.  Happy  is  every  one  who  can  say  from  the  heart,  "  This  is  my  beloved,  and 
this  is  my  fnend  "  (Song  of  Sol.  v.  16).     Consider — 

I.  Its  conditions,  on  the  part  of  man.  1.  Rationality:  capacit}'  of  thought, 
voluntary  choice,  moral  esteem.  "Amidst  the  ashes  of  our  collapsed  nature  there 
slumber  certain  sparks  of  celestial  fire"  (Owen).  2.  Reconciliation;  inasmuch  aa 
man  is  alienated  from  God,  and  under  condemnation.  3.  Renewal  in  righteousness 
and  true  holiness,  so  that  we  may  be  "partakers  of  the  Divine  nature"  (2  Pet.  i.  4). 
"  Friendship  is  a  union  of  souls,  and  souls  can  be  united  only  where  there  is  more 
or  less  accord  "  (Amos  iii.  3). 

II.  Its  chabaotkristics,  on  the  part  of  the  Lord.  All  his  perfections  render  it 
in  every  respect  transoendently  excellent.  But  notice  more  particularly  —  1.  lu 
disinterestednett.  "He  first  loved  us,"  with  a  pure,  free,  condescending,  self- 
sacrificing  love.  "  Greater  love  hath  no  man,"  &c.  (John  xv.  13).  2.  Its  faithful- 
ness. 3.  Its  constancy.  "The  love  of  friends  of  this  world  is  defective  in  three 
respects — they  begin  to  love  late,  cease  early,  love  little.  But  the  love  of  God  is  an 
nnequalled  love.  He  loves  us  without  beginning,  without  intermission,  and  without 
end ''  (Nonet). 

III.  Its  benefits,  or  the  blessings  enjoyed  by  those  who  have  fellowship  with 
him.     1.  CouH»el,  warning,  rebuke.    Benroofs  are  "  the  graver  looks  of  love."    8 


a.  irm.  l-4».]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  BAMUKL.  U» 

Defence,  support,  and  effectual  help.  3.  Sympaihy,  encouragement,  and  everlasting 
consolation,  "  And  now,"  said  Jonathan  Edwards,  on  liis  death-bed,  turning  from 
his  earthly  friends  toward  the  approaching  darkness,  "  where  is  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
m J  true  and  never-failing  Triena  ?  " 

IV.  Its  claims,  or  the  duties  of  those  who  enjoy  such  benefits  and  desire  theii 
continuance.  1.  To  cherish  proper  feelings  toward  him — confidence,  affection,  and 
delight  in  intercourse  with  him.  2.  To  do  those  things  that  please  him.  "  Te  are 
my  friends  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you."  3.  Not  to  be  ashamed  of  him, 
but  to  confess  his  name  before  men ;  to  love  and  serve  his  friends  for  his  sake,  and 
to  seek  in  all  things  his  honour  and  glory. — D. 

Vers.  6 — 16.  (Q[iB^kn.)—Envy.  "And  Saul  eyed  David  from  that  day  forward '' 
(ver.  9).  How  extraordinary  are  the  moral  contrasts  which  are  often  presented  In 
human  life  I  The  friendship  of  Jonathan  here  stands  in  opposition  to  the  envy  of 
Saul.  Hardly  had  David  experienced  the  one  before  he  was  exposed  to  the  other. 
"  His  victory  had  a  double  issue,  Jonathan's  love  and  Saul's  envy,  which  God  bo 
mixed  that  the  one  was  a  remedy  of  the  other"  (Hall).  On  the  day  of  public 
rejoicing  the  seeds  of  jealousy,  envy,  and  hatred  were  sown  in  his  heart.  He  eyed 
David  not  with  favour,  as  before,  but  with  dislike  on  account  of  the  honour  given 
to  him  beyond  himself.  The  general  suspicion  which  he  entertained  in  consequence 
of  the  intimations  of  Samuel  concerning  his  successor  also  seems  to  have  fastened 
on  him  as  the  man;  and  henceforth' he  looked  upon  him  a^  a  dangerous  rival. 
"  Mingling  with  his  constitutional  malady,  it  poisoned  his  whole  future  relations  with 
David."    Of  envy  notice  that — 

I.  It  takbs  boot  in  am  evil  hbabt.  In  the  case  of  Saul  the  soil  was  congenial 
and  ready  prepared  by — 1.  Alienation  from  God  and  conviction  of  his  disfavour. 
2.  Selfishness  and  morbid  concentration  of  thought  upon  himself.  3.  Self-will, 
pride,  and  worldly  ambition,  still  continuing  and  increasmg.  4.  Wrathful  passion. 
He  "  was  very  wroth,  and  the  saying  displeased  him "  (ver.  8).  "  He  who  is  apt 
to  feel  indignation,  feels  pain  at  those  who  are  undeservedly  successful ;  but  the 
envious  man,  going  beyond  him,  feels  pain  at  every  one's  success "  (Aristotle, 
'Ethics'). 

II.  It  grows  ih  the  shade  of  anothbb'b  pbb-eminenob  in — 1.  Popular  estima- 
tion. "  They  have  ascribed  unto  David  ten  thousands,"  Ac.  (ver.  8).  "  What  pro- 
peif.y  occasions  envy  is  tha  fruit  of  the  accomplishments  of  others ;  the  pre-eminence 
which  the  opinion  of  the  world  bestows,  or  which  we  dread  it  will  bestow,  on  their 
talents  above  ours  "  (Blair).  2.  Successful  achievements,  from  which  such  preference 
proceeds,  "  The  bright  day  brings  out  the  adder."  Prosperity  is  generally  attended 
by  envy.  3.  Personal  excellences.  David  "  behaved  himself  wisely "  (ver.  5) ; 
"  very  wisely "'  (ver.  15)  ;  "  more  wisely  than  all "  (ver.  30).  He  acted  prudently, 
cautiously,  skilfully,  and  therefore  prosperously, 

"  Base  envy  withers  at  another's  joy. 
And  hates  the  excellence  it  cannot  reach  "  (ThomsonX 

I.  Divine  approbation,  which  appears  in  prosperous  enterprises.  "  And  Baul  was 
afraid  of  David,  because  the  Lord  was  with  him,"  &c.  (ver.  12).  "  And  Cain  was 
very  wroth,"  &c.  (Gen.  iv,  5;  1  John  iii.  2).  The  envy  felt  at  the  favour  shown  to 
another  by  God  is  peculiarly  criminal,  because  of  its  opposition  to  God  himself. 

III.  It  is  marked  by  many  odious  features.  1.  Unreasonableness.  2.  In  most 
cases  ingratitude.  David  had  conferred  a  great  benefit  on  Saul  and  Israel  by  his 
victory  over  Goliath ;  he  "  went  out  whithersoever  Saul  sent  him,"  and  fought  his 
battles  ;  and  often  soothed  his  melancholy  with  the  music  of  his  harp  (ver.  10).  3. 
Injustice.  He  did  him  "shame"  (ch.  xx.  34)  by  entertaining  suspicions  of  his 
loyalty  and  treating  him  as  a  traitor.  4.  Ungodliness  and  all  unoharitableness. 
"Charity  envieth  not."  "  Envy  is  the  worst  of  all  passions,  and  feadeth  upon  the 
spirits,  and  they  again  upon  the  body ;  and  so  much  the  more  because  it  is  per- 
petual, and,  as  it  is  said,  keepeth  no  holidays"  (Bacon,  'Essays'). 

IV.  It  is  pboductivb  of  much  deadly  fruit,  in  relation  both  to  others  (Prov. 
^zvii.  4)  and  to  the  envious  man  himself  (Prov.  ziv.  80)  ;  partly  of  hatred  and  partljr 

iBAM.  AA 


864  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xvin.  1—30. 

of  grief.  "  As  it  shows  itself  in  hatred  it  strikes  at  the  person  envied  ;  but  as  it 
affects  a  man  in  the  nature  of  grief  it  recoils  and  does  execution  upon  the  envier. 
It  lies  at  the  heart  like  a  worm,  always  gnawing  and  corroding  and  piercing  it  with 
ft  Becret,  invisible  sting  and  poison"  (South,  •  Sermons,'  Iviii.).  In  Saul  it  produced 
unrest  of  soul,  increased  subjection  to  the  power  of  evil — "it  came  to  pass  (yn.  the 
morrow,"  &o.  (ver.  10);  ungovernable  rage — "he  poised  the  javelin"  twice;  craft 
and  hypocrisy;  fear  (vers.  11,  15);  continual  enmity  (ver.  21);  deliberate  avowal 
of  murderous  intentions  (ch.  xix.  1)  ;  open  and  unceasing  persecution  ;  despair  and 
self-destruction.  "When  in  the  last  judgment  envy  is  placed  at  the  bar  of  God, 
what  an  indictment  will  be  laid  against  the  evil  spirit  I  The  insulting  anger  of 
Eliab,  the  cruelty  of  Joseph's  brethren,  the  murderous  wrath  of  Cain,  and  the  greatest 
share  in  the  greatest  crime  in  the  world — the  crucifying  of  the  Lord  of  glory — will 
be  charged  upon  him.  To  cast  this  demon  out  of  our  bosoms  before  that  final  con- 
demnation is  one  purpose  of  Jesus,  and  with  all  our  hearts  we  should  pray  for  his 
complete  and  speedy  victory  "  (C.  Vince). 

Conclusion : — In  order  to  the  cure  or  prevention  of  this  evil  passion,  seek  a 
renewed  heart;  dwell  much  on  the  Divine  love  "that  spurns  all  envying  in  its 
bounty ; ''  estimate  aright  temporal  advantages ;  entertain  lowly  thoughts  of  self ; 
learn  to  admire  excellence  in  others,  and  regard  it  as  if  it  were  your  own ;  check  the 
fint  impulse  of  jealous  or  envious  feeling ;  and  "  commit  thy  way  unto  the  Lord." 

j"  O  man  1  why  place  thy  heart  where  there  doth  need 
Exclusion  of  participants  in  good  ! 

Heaven  calls, 
And,  round  about  yon  wheeling,  courts  your  gaz* 
With  everlasting  beauties.     Yet  your  eye 
Turns  with  fond  doting  still  upon  the  earth. 
Therefore  he  smites  you  who  mscemeth  all"  (Dante,  '  Purg.'  xlv.). — JX 

Vers.  17 — 30.  (Gibiah.) — Simplieily.  .  There  is  a  simplicity  which  springs  from 
ignorance,  and  is  displayed  in  folly  and  presumption  (Prov.  xxii.  3).  There  is  also  a 
simplicity  which  is  the  fruit  of  innocence,  truthfulness,  and  goodness,  and  appears  in 
an  ingenuous  mind,  a  guileless  disposition,  and  straightforward  speech  and  conduct. 
In  its  best  sense  {simpHcUas — without  fold  or  twist)  it  is  opposed  to  duplicity,  de- 
ception, and  "  cunning  craftiness  "  (Rom.  xii.  8  ;  xvi.  19  ;  2  Cor.  i.  12  ;  xi.  3)  ;  and 
it  was  exemplified,  in  an  eminent  degree,  by  David,  especially  in  his  earlier  inter- 
course with  Saul ;  for,  through  familiarity  with  court  life,  and  much  more  in  conse- 
quence of  the  straits  to  which  he  was  reduced  by  the  craft  and  persecution  of  the 
king,  the  simple-minded,  open-hearted  shepherd  youth  once  and  again  turned  aside 
from  the  right  path  (ch.  xxi.  2).     Consider  simplicity  as — 

I.  Beset  by  the  wokkinq  of  cbaft.  Having  given  way  to  envy,  and  in  a  violent 
fit  of  madness  threatened  tlie  life  of  David,  Saul  continued  to  hate  and  fear  him 
(Mark  xi.  18),  and  sought  to  get  rid  of  him,  though  indirectly  from  restraint  of  con- 
science and  secretly  from  fear  of  the  people  (Mark  vi.  20 ;  Luke  xxii.  2).  Sin  works 
in  the  dark.  Malicious  craft  often — 1.  Seeks  to  accomplish  ends  which  it  may  not 
dare  to  avow.  Springing  from  jealousy  for  personal  position  and  renown,  it  aims  at 
the  depreciation  of  every  one  by  whom  they  seem  to  be  endangered ;  and  at  his 
removal,  whether  accidentally  by  the  hands  of  others,  or  by  his  committing  some 
overt  act  which  may  justify  his  open  punishment  (vers.  17,  21,  25).  And  toward 
these  ends  it  works  with  ever  greater  directness  and  less  concealment ;  for  that 
which  is  hidden  in  the  heart  must  sooner  or  later  come  to  light.  2.  Makes  use  of 
M/r  professions,  and  uses  pretexts  which  are  specious,  false,  and  hypocritical. 
David  was  assured  that  no  harm  was  really  meant  him,  and  made  "  captain  over  a 
thousand  "  (ver.  13) ;  whereas  he  was  removed  from  the  presence  of  the  king  because 
he  was  hated  and  feared,  and  that  he  might  be  exposed  to  greater  danger.  His  not 
receiving  the  fulfilment  of  Saul's  promise  (ch.  xvii.  25)  was  probably  accounted  for 
by  his  lack  of  wealth  and  social  status  (ver.  25)  ;  but  the  promise  was  repeated  in- 
sincerely. "  Only  be  thou  valiant  for  me  "  (expose  thyself  to  every  hazard), "  andjight 
the  LorcFs  battles"  (with  zeal  for  Jehovah,  which  I  know  thou  hast),  and  (sub  voce) 
"  let  not  my  hand  be  upon  him,"  Ao.  (ver.  17).     On  the  loss  of  Merab  he  was  consoled 


CH.  xvm.  1-410.]  THE  PIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  355 

by  the  promise  of  Miohal  (ver,  21),  but  only  as  "  a  snare,"  and  her  love  was  made 
UBe  of  for  the  purpose.  And  at  length  (when  the  king  had  formed  his  plan,  and  felt 
sure  of  its  success),  he  was  told  by  his  servants  (as  if  in  confidential  communication), 
"  Behold,  the  king  hath  delight  in  thee,"  &c.  (ver.  22),  "desireth  not  (iny  dowry," 
&c.  (ver.  25)  ;  "but  Saul  thought  to  make  David  fall  by  the  hand  of  the  Philis- 
tines." 3.  Adopts  means  which  are  unworthy,  base,  and  godless.  Sclieming,  plot- 
ting, murderous  attempts  on  life  under  the  sanctities  of  affection  and  religion ;  at 
lieart,  infatuated  opposition  to  the  will  of  God.  If  it  were  not  the  Divine  purpose 
that  David  should  be  king,  why  fear  him  ?  if  it  were,  of  what  avail  would  resist- 
ance be  ? 

II.  Displayed  in  the  midst  of  craft.  The  snares  that  were  woven  around  David 
seem  plain  enough  to  us ;  but  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that  they  were  at  first 
observed  by  him.  The  simple-hearted  man — 1.  Is  accustomed  to  look  upon  others  at 
sincere  like  himself,  regards  their  statements  and  assurances  as  truthful,  and  is  slow 
to  suspect  their  evil  intentions.  Even  to  the  last  David  could  hardly  believe  that 
Saul,  of  his  own  accord,  sought  his  life  (ch.  xxvi.  19).  He  is  "  simple  concerning 
evil.  Large  experience  makes  men  cautious ;  but  it  is  better  to  be  deceived  a  hun- 
dred times  than  to  lead  a  life  of  continual  suspicion.  2.  Entertains  modest  and 
lowlj/  views  of  himself,  takes  contempt  and  disappointment  without  complaint,  and 
accepts  humbly  and  cheerfully  whatever  honour  may  be  conferred  upon  him  (vers. 
18,  23).  "  Seekest  thou  great  things  for  thyself  ?  seek  them  not "  ( Jer.  xlv.  6). 
"A  pious  man  is  even  in  prosperity  humble  in  heart."  3.  Is  intent  upon  the  honest, 
faithful,  and  efficient  discharge  of  the  duty  that  lies  before  him,  and  fears  danger 
little  because  he  fears  God  much  (vers.  6,  14,  27).  "  David's  calm  indifEerence  to 
outward  circumstances  affecting  himself  were  very  strikingly  expressed  in  his  con- 
duct. Partly  from  his  poetic  temperament,  partly  from  his  sweet,  natural  unselfish- 
ness, and  chiefly  from  his  loving  trust  in  God,  he  accepts  whatever  happens  with 
equanimity,  and  makes  no  effort  to  alter  it "  (Maclaren).  It  has  been  remarked  that 
"  genius  is  simply  the  carrying  into  the  maturity  of  our  powers  the  simplicity  and 
ardour  of  childhood." 

III.  Preserved  from  the  devices  of  craft.  It  is  the  best  means  of  preservation, 
inasmuch  as — 1.  It  affords  the  least  occasion  for  an  adversary  to  take  an  advantage. 
Although  the  ingenuous  man  may  appear  to  lie  open  to  attack,  yet  he  is  really  most 
effectually  guarded  against  it.  2.  It  attracts  the  respect  of  other  men  (ver.  16), 
gains  the  love  of  those  who  warn  and  help  him  (ver.  28 ;  ch.  xix.  11),  and  makes  it 
difficult  for  his  enemies  to  prevail  over  him.  3.  It  insures  the  favowr  of  God. 
"The  Lord  was  with  him"  (vers.  12,  14,  28)  to  guide,  defend,  and  help  him  (Ps. 
XDvii.  24,  33).     "  In  thee  do  I  trust." 

IV.  Eesulting  in  an  end  opposed  to  that  of  craft.  1.  Instead  of  returning  no 
more  from  the  conflict,  he  returns  in  triumph,  and  repeives  an  imwilling  honour  from 
the  hand  that  was  lifted  np  against  him  (vers.  27,  28 ;  Eev.  iii.  9).  2.  Instead  of 
being  less  an  object  of  terror  to  the  wicked,  he  is  more  so  (ver.  29).  3.  Instead  of 
being  deprived  of  the  love  of  the  people  of  God  (ver.  16:  "All  Israel  and  Judah 
loved  David  "),  he  is  more  completely  enthroned  in  their  hearts  (ver.  30). 

Remark — 1.  How  ineffectual  are  the  devices  of  the  wicked  against  "  the  upright 
in  heart."  2.  How  beneficial  may  even  their  devices  become  when  met  with  "  sim- 
plicity and  godly  sincerity."  3.  How  inexpressibly  beautiful  is  the  character  of 
the  Son  of  David — "  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  4.  How  necessary  is  the  "  anoint- 
ing of  the  holy  One,"  that  we  may  become  like  unto  him. — D. 

Vers.  1 — 9. — Love  and  jealottsy.  One  great  exploit  performed  in  the  sight  of  two 
armies  took  David  at  once  and  for  ever  out  of  obscurity.  Thenceforth  he  was  a  man 
much  observed.  The  quiet  pastoral  life  at  Bethlehem  was  ended,  and  could  never 
be  resumed.  Sudden  success  brings  rapid  distinction,  but  also  brings  trials  and  risks 
from  which  the  obscure  are  free.  David  leaped  at  a  bound  into  honour  and  fame, 
but  for  that  very  reason  he  found  himself  at  the  beginning  of  his  troubles.  Well 
that,  before  those  troubles  began  to  press  him,  he  knew  the  ^rd  as  his  refuge ;  well, 
too,  that  h«  won  to  bimaelf  is  the  very  sphei*  of  danger  a  loving  and  faithful 
tnimi. 


86«  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xviil  1—80 

I.  Jonathan's  love.  If  there  was  a  man  in  Israel  who  had  reason  to  be  Jealous 
of  David,  it  was  the  Prince  Jonathan.  He  was  a  gallant  soldier,  and  here  was  a 
greater  hero  to  eclipse  him.  He  had  by  personal  valour  gained  a  signal  victory  over 
the  Philistines,  and  here  was  a  personal  courage  still  more  brilliant,  and  a  discom- 
fiture of  the  enemy  more  easy  and  more  complete.  He  was  the  heir  to  the  throne, 
and  if  this  youth  should  aspire  to  rule  as  well  as  deliver  Israel,  it  was  Jonathan  whom 
he  would  supplant.  Yet  in  this  generous  prince  there  appeared  not  even  a  shade 
of  envy.  He  saw  in  the  young  shepherd  a  congenial  spirit— a  temper  adventurous 
as  his  own,  with  a  faith  in  God  firm  and  ardent  as  his  own.  The  soul  of  Jonathan 
was  knit  to  the  soul  of  David.  It  was  good  for  Jonathan  to  find  a  friend  who  could 
evoke  an  admiration  and  afEection  so  intense.  He  could  no  longer  look  up  to  his  own 
father  with  respect  or  confidence.  In  the  circle  or  court  about  the  king  the  finer 
qualities  of  Jonathan's  nature  found  no  harmony,  no  encouragement.  But  here  was 
one  who  could  understand  him,  and  in  whom  he  could  see  and  admire  what  a  leader 
in  Israel  ought  to  be.  It  was  good  for  David,  too,  to  find  that  he  was  cared  for,  that 
his  pure  and  devout  patriotism  was  appreciated,  and  that  he  had  the  fraternal 
sympathy  of  at  least  one  in  that  higher  grade  of  life  on  which  he  was  now  so 
suddenly  to  enter.  The  time  was  at  hand  when  such  strong  and  faitlif  ul  love  would 
be  very  precious. 

II.  Saul's  jealgust.  At  first  it  appeared  as  though  David  was  to  have  nothing 
but  honour.  The  king  obeyed  his  good  impulse,  and  gave  the  young  liero  high  pro- 
motion among  his  officers,  with  the  evident  approval  of  the  soldiers  and  all  the 
people.  But  a  black  cloud  of  jealousy  soon  gathered.  Saul  could  not  bear  to  hear 
this  new  champion  praised  more  than  himself;  and  he  began  to  brood  over  the 
thought  that  this  might  be  the  man  at  whom  Samuel  hinted,  to  whom  the  Lord  would 
give  the  kingdom.  "What  can  he  have  more  but  the  kingdom?  And  Saul  eyed 
David  from  that  day  forward."  We  soon  read  of  the  jealous  king  trying  to  take 
David's  life.  Oh,  cruel  envy  I  No  worthiness,  no  goodness  is  a  defence  against  it. 
The  sight  of  good  excites  it  to  evil.  It  is  the  passion  of  a  mean  spirit ;  or,  if  it 
fastens  on  a  character  which  has  some  great  qualities,  it  tends  to  weaken  and  degrade 
it.  Indeed,  no  more  wretched  fate  can  befall  any  man  than  to  be  filled  with  envy, 
and  so  to  chafe  and  jibe  at  all  who  surpass  him ;  to  become  a  prey  to  jealousy,  and 
mistmst  or  disparage  all  who  seem  to  please  God  or  man  more  than  he.  How  fatal 
for  Saul  himself  was  this  jealous  passion  I  By  the  help  of  David  the  king  might  have 
recovered  something  of  his  lost  health  and  happiness,  and  repaired  some  of  the  errors 
of  his  reign.  But  once  jealousy  took  possession  of  him  all  this  was  impossible. 
Saul  became  gloomy,  crafty,  and  cruel ;  and  the  more  David  did  for  the  kingdom, 
bearing  himself  wisely  in  camp  and  court,  the  more  was  he  watched  with  envious 
eyes,  and  pursued  with  sullen  hatred,  "  Wrath  is  cruel,  and  anger  is  outrageous ; 
but  who  is  able  to  stand  before  envy  ?  "  This  seemed  an  ominous  beginning  for 
David ;  but  it  served  its  purpose  'in  the  training  through  which  God  meant  him  to 
pass.  After  Saul  was  anointed  he  was  put  through  no  suoli  ordeal.  The  slight 
opposition  which  was  made  to  his  sudden  elevation  was  soon  surmounted,  and  the 
son  of  Kish  stepped  up  to  the  throne  of  Israel  with  very  little  difficulty.  But  this 
was  really  ominous.  It  was  a  sign  that  God  was  to  have  little  service  or  glory  from 
King  Saul.  The  son  of  Jesse  had  a  higher  destiny,  and  therefore  he  was  tried  and 
proved.  His  faith  was  tested  as  by  fire ;  his  discretion  was  ripened  by  the  know- 
ledge that  jealous  eyes  were  watching  him ;  his  patience  was  perfected ;  his  stay- 
ing power  developed  through  an  experience  hard  and  harassing. 

IIL  Suggestions  of  Jbsus  Christ,  lovkd  and  hated.  As  David  in  his  youth, 
and  on  the  threshold  of  hia  public  career,  overcame  the  strong  enemy  of  Israel  in 
single  combat,  so  Jesus  in  youth,  and  on  the  threshold  of  his  public  life,  encountered 
the  adversary  of  the  people  of  God,  and  overcame  the  tempter  in  the  wilderness. 
Then,  as  David  endured  much  before  he  reached  the  throne,  so  Jesus  Christ  endured 
much  before  God  raised  him  up  and  gave  him  glory.  And  during  that  time  of  his 
lowly  suffering  Jesus  was,  like  his  human  ancestor  David,  solaced  by  love  and  pursued 
by  envy.  1.  Loved.  The  Son  of  David  had  the  applause  of  the  multitude,  and  bore 
himself  80  wisely  that  the  keenest  observers  could  find  no  fault  in  him.  Withal  hf 
k*d  til*  power  ox  koittinf  toala  to  himBelf,  to  aa  to  make  them  wiUing  to  foraaka  tU 


«H.  xvm.  1—80.]  THE  FIK8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  Ml 

for  his  lake.  Now  this  wm  always  a  strong  characteristio  at  David — a  charm  ol 
character  and  bearing  which  attached  to  him  many  loyers  and  friends.  Jonathan 
loved  him  in  youth  as  his  own  sonl.  His  warriors  were  so  devoted  to  him,  that  he  had 
but  to  wish  for  water  from  the  well  of  Bethlehem,  and  three  heroes  dashed  through 
che  ranks  of  the  Philistines  to  draw  water  and  bring  it  to  their  chief.  Ittai  tibe 
Gittite  and  others  are  evidences  that  David  retained  this  attaching  power  even  in  old 
age.  And  did  not  the  Son  of  David,  with  an  attraction  which  we  cannot  analyse  or 
define,  draw  to  himself  the  sons  of  Zebedee,  and  the  sons  of  Jonas,  the  brother  and 
sisters  at  Bethany,  Mary  of  Magdala,  and  many  more  who  found  in  his  companion- 
ship and  favour  all  that  their  hearts  desired  ?  Did  he  not  afterwards  draw  to  him- 
self the  persecutor,  Saul  of  Tarsus,  and  engage  the  all-enduring  loyalty  and  love  of 
Paul  ?  And  are  there  not  thousands  on  thousands  who,  though  they  have  not  seen 
him,  love  him,  and  in  whose  eyes  he  is  never  more  worthy  of  love  than  when  contem- 
plated as  One  despised  and  rejected  of  men,  "  a  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with 
grief  "  ?  It  was  a  solace  to  Jesus  in  his  deepest  suffering  that  they  who  knew  him 
best  loved  him.  How  often  he  dwelt  on  it,  on  the  night  in  which  he  was  betrayed  I 
"  If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  commandments."  "  He  that  loveth  me  shall  be  loved  of 
my  Father."  "  The  Father  himself  loveth  you,  because  ye  have'loved  me."  Just  as 
it  comforted  David  when  hunted  and  proscribed  to  know  that  Jonathan  loved  him 
truly  and  well,  so  it  comforted  the  Son  of  David,  that  though  men  might  hate  and 
kill  him,  there  were  those  who  loved  him  truly  and  well,  and  whom  neither  death  nor 
life  could  separate  from  his  love.  2.  Hated.  We  have  seen  how  David's  courage 
and  discretion  stirred  Saul's  jealousy.  A  man  so  rare  in  his  qualities,  so  evidently 
fitted  for  greatness,  drew  after  him  eyes  of  cruel  envy.  So  it  befell  the  Son  of  David. 
Because  Jesus  drew  to  him  disciples  and  friends,  the  priests  and  rabbis  hated  him. 
Because  he  was  followed  by  multitudes,  the  rulers  took  counsel  together  against  him. 
Because  he  answered  and  acted  wisely,  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  were  filled  with 
malice  against  him.  Wherever  he  went,  jealous  eyes  watched  him,  and  crafty  ques- 
tions laid  wait  for  him.  The  Scripture  was  fulfilled:  "They  hated  me  without  a 
cause."  Pontius  Pilate  easily  detected  the  motive  (no  just  cause)  which  led  the 
Jewish  Council  to  arraign  the  Son  of  David  at  his  judgment-seat.  "  He  knew  that  for 
envy  they  had  delivered  him."  So  it  is  to-day.  Jesus  Christ  is  proclaimed  as 
mighty  to  save.  The  world  is  being  filled  with  his  name,  and  everywhere  cries 
ascend  of  "  Hosanna  to  the  Son  of  David."  And  how  is  it  taken  ?  Some  love,  but 
some  also  hate.  Some  feel  as  Jonathan  did.  They  are  quite  drawn  out  of  them- 
selves to  the  Lord  Jesus.  He  is,  he  must  be,  their  Beloved  and  their  Friend.  And  how 
significant  of  his  greatness  it  is  that  be,  now  unseen,  awakens  in  human  hearts  a  faith 
as  strong,  an  attachment  as  ardent,  as  thrilled  the  breasts  of  apostles  who  accompanied 
him  and  women  who  ministered  to  him  in  Galilee  I  Paul,  who  had  not  seen  him  in 
the  flesh,  loved  him  as  truly  and  served  him  as  enthusiastically  as  Peter  and  John, 
who  had.  Christians  of  the  eleventh  century,  like  Bernard  of  Clairvaui,  or  of  the 
fifteenth,  like  him  who  wrote  as  Thomas  k  Eempis,  clave  to  him  as  devoutly  as  the 
Fathers  who  lived  within  a  few  generations  of  the  apostles.  And  comparative 
modems,  like  Herbert,  Bengel,  Rutherford,  Madame  Guyon,  Brainerd,  Whitefield,  the 
Wesleys,  Toplady,  Hervey,  Henry  Martyn,  McCheyne,  Adolph  Monod,  have  held  him 
as  precious  as  did  the  most  fervent  spirits  of  earlier  times.  Jesus  Christ  has  always 
known  how  to  draw  men  to  himself,  and  hold  them  by  cords  of  spiritual  attraction,  so 
that  they  have  loved  him  as  their  own  souls.  Others,  however,  eye  him  as  Saul  eyed 
David,  in  order  to  find  fault  with  him.  Oh,  what  a  triumph  it  would  give  to  a  certain 
class  of  men  if  they  could  only  find  a  blot  in  the  Lord  Jesus ;  if  they  could  show  him  to 
have  been  no  better  or  higher  than  other  men  I  But  it  cannot  be  done.  His  way  ia 
perfect.  His  character,  however  closely  scrutinised,  reveals  no  flaw.  It  comes  to 
this,  that  men  hate  him  because  he  is  so  good.  They  love  the  darlmess  rather  than 
the  light,  beoaoae  their  deeds  are  eviL — F. 

Vers.  29, 80. — David  proved  and  tried.  I.  Exsuflabt  coNsnor  ukbib  tbial.  One 
MS  hardly  imagine  a  course  of  events  more  likely  to  turn  •  young  man's  head 
and  make  him  giddy  with  elation  than  the  rapid  promotion  of  the  youthful  David. 
Brought  at  once  from  comparative  obscurity  into  the  full  blase  of  public  admiration 


BM  THE  Fm&rr  book  of  SAMUEL.  [oh.  mn.  1-^. 

as  a  national  hero,  appointed  as  an  officer  of  bigh  rank  in  the  army,  made  goc-in- 
law  to  the  king,  and  at  the  same  time  trnsted  and  honoured  by  the  people,  the  son 
of  Jesse  had  mnch  to  tempt  him  to  self-complacence.  It  is  a  sign  that  the  Lord 
was  with  him  that  he  bore  himself  meekly,  circumspectly,  and  with  "  sublime  re- 
pression of  himself."  A  man  who  is  conscious  of  fitness  for  a  great  position  can 
afford  to  wait.  It  must  come  to  him,  if  he  lives  long  enough  ;  and  if  he  is  not  to 
live,  why  should  he  fret  his  few  years  with  an  idle  ambition  ?  David  had  something 
better  than  such  a  consciousness ;  he  knew  himself  to  be  anointed  and  ordained  of 
God  to  fill  an  eminent  place  in  his  service.  True,  that  nothing  seems  to  have  been 
said  about  the  kingship  at  the  private  anointing  in  Bethlehem ;  and  David's  gift  of 
sacred  song  seemed  to  point  him  out  as  successor  of  Samuel  rather  than  of  Saul. 
But  kings,  not  prophets,  were  anointed ;  and  the  thought  of  being  king,  especially 
ftfter  the  exploit  at  Elali,  must  have  passed  and  repassed  through  the  young  hero's 
mind.  Yet  because  be  believed  God  be  did  not  make  haste.  If  the  high  and  peril- 
ous seat  of  a  king  of  Israel  was  destined  for  him,  let  it  come ;  but  he  would  not 
frasp  it,  or  climb  into  it  by  dispossessing  its  first  occupant.  Not  by  him  would 
aul  be  dethroned,  or  any  dishonour  done  to  a  head  which  had  received  a  holy 
anointing.  God  would  give  what  he  pleased,  as  and  when  he  might  see  fit.  Enough 
that  David  should  act  wisely  and  justly  in  the  station  to  which  he  was  assigned. 
This  was  no  fatalism.  The  history  shows  that  David  used  all  lawful  (and  some 
rather  questionable)  endeavours  to  preserve  his  own  life,  and  that  he  missed  no 
opportunity  to  advance  his  public  interest.  He  was  far  from  inferring  that,  as 
God  had  marked  out  for  him  a  destiny,  he  must  not  give  any  heed  to  his  way  or  to 
his  safety,  because  God  would  bring  his  own  purpose  to  pass.  On  the  contrary,  he 
knew  that  the  fulfilment  of  the  destiny  must  be  through  his  own  discretion,  yalour, 
and  proved  fitness  for  the  royal  dignity.  Therefore,  while  David  would  not  push 
his  way  ambitiously  to  the  throne,  he  was  careful  to  do  nothing  that  would  make 
such  promotion  impossible.  In  fact  David  took  the  course  which  may  be  recom- 
mended to  every  young  man  who  desires  to  rise  in  the  esteem  and  confidence  of 
others.  He  did  well  whatever  was  given  him  to  do.  He  behaved  himself  wisely  as 
a  minstrel,  as  a  soldier,  as  a  prince.  The  historian  marks  the  steps  of  his  advance — 
"wisely,"  "very  wisely,"  "more  wisely  than  all  the  servants  of  Saul"  (vers.  14,  16, 
SO).  If  we  read  "  prospered,"  "  prospered  exceedingly,"  "  prospered  more,"  the  lesson 
remains  the  same.  We  are  reminded  of  the  youthful  Joseph,  always  prosperous  in 
administration,  whether  in  Potiphar's  house,  in  charge  of  the  prison,  or  in  the  govern- 
ment of  Egypt.  It  was  because  the  Lord  was  with  him  (Gen.  xxxiz.  2,  23).  Yet 
the  promotion  of  Joseph  was  through  his  well-approved  discretion  and  fidelity  winning 
for  him  more  and  more  confidence  (Gen.  xxxix.  39 — 41).  So  David  prospered; 
every  step  of  his  elevation  bringing  out  more  clearly  to  view  his  fine  combination  of 
boldness  and  discretion,  and  his  consequent  fitness  to  rise  yet  higher,  and  to  be  the 
leader  and  ruler  of  all  Israel.  Happy  the  nation  where  such  proved  fitness  counts  for 
more  than  the  highest  birth  or  the  strongest  interest  1  If  survival  of  the  fittest  be  a 
rule  in  nature,  selection  of  the  fittest  is  the  true  principle  for  the  public  service.  Not 
that  every  one  who  holds  an  inferior  position  well  is  fit  to  hold  a  higher  and  rise 
toward  the  highest.  Men  have  their  range,  beyond  which  they  are  ill  at  ease  and 
incapable.  But  this  is  certain,  that  men  who  are  fit  for  a  leading  position  will  reveal 
their  capacity  while  serving  in  a  subordinate  place.  Only  in  judging  of  this  account 
must  be  taken  not  of  brain  power  and  acquired  knowledge  merely,  but  of  character, 
and  that  moral  influence  which  character  and  conduct  give.  Is  it  not  on  this  prin- 
ciple that  God  promotes  the  heirs  of  glory  ?  All  who  have  received  his  grace  are 
anointed  ones ;  but  they  have  to  serve  before  they  rule,  and  to  be  tested  in  labours 
and  patience  before  they  can  reign  with  Christ.  Has  not  our  Saviour  taught  in 
parables  that  his  people  must  be  servants  till  he  returns,  and  that  only  good  and 
faithful  servants  are  to  enter  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord  ?  Has  not  St.  Paul  spoken 
of  eternal  life  as  given  to  those  "  who  by  patient  continuance  in  well-doing  seek  for 
glory,  honour,  and  immortality  "  ?  Behold  the  way  to  "  the  honour  that  comes  from 
God  only."  Behave  wisely  in  the  present  sphere  of  duty.  Do  well,  and  do  it  witl? 
patience.  Make  not  your  advancement  in  thin  world,  or  even  in  the  world  to  come,  a 
matter  of  passionate  anxiety.     Fost/tr  and  obey  the  senao  oi  duty,  attend  oonaoi- 


OH.  XTUi.  1—30.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  369 

cntionsly  to  the  obligations  of  your  present  station,  and  fear  not  but  the  Lord  will 
gire  yon  bb  mnch  elevation  aa  is  good  for  you  in  this  present  time,  and  in  the  age  t» 
come  a  place  and  a  portion  with  the  King  and  with  his  saints. 

IL  Trb  imfrebbion  which  David  fboduosd.  1.  On  the  people.  They  were 
captivated  by  his  gallantry  and  his  discretion.  Both  in  martial  skill  and  in  civil 
administration  he  surpassed  all  the  public  men  of  his  country,  and  was  fast  becoming 
a  popular  idol.  It  is  too  true  that,  notwithstanding  this,  Saul  was  able  to  drive  him 
into  exile,  and  found  soldiers  enough  to  pursue  him  for  his  life.  Popular  favour  did 
not  protect  him  from  such  outrage.  Yet  two  facts  are  worth  noting.  (1)  That 
David  gave  clear  evidence  of  a  man  who  could,  and  therefore  should,  sooner  or  later, 
lead  his  countrymen.  This  early  approval  of  himself  to  all  observers,  however  obscured 
or  disparage,d  during  the  days  of  his  persecution,  was  not  forgotten  by  the  people, 
and  helped  his  ultimate  elevation  to  the  throne.  (2)  That,  though  many  turned 
against  him  at  the  bidding  of  Saul,  David  from  this  very  time  drew  to  himself 
mends  that  would  not  forsake  him,  for  they  saw  in  him  the  hope  of  Israel ;  and, 
following  him  to  the  caves  among  the  rocks  of  Judah,  and  even  to  the  land  of  the 
Philistines,  were  the  companions,  first  of  bis  tribulation,  and  then  of  his  kingdom  and 
glory.  2.  On  the  king.  The  effect  of  David's  well-doing  on  Saul  was  sinister  and 
shameful.  The  good  points  which  had  once  appeared  in  this  unhappy  man  now 
recede  from  view,  and  the  bad  points  of  his  character  come  out  in  strong  relief  under 
the  baleful  influence  of  jealousy.  When  he  was  himself  the  sole  hero,  and  the  eyes 
of  all  Israel  turned  to  him,  he  could  be  gracious  and  even  humble  in  his  bearing. 
But  elevation  had  made  him  proud ;  power  had  made  him  wilful ;  and  a  bad  con- 
science made  him  hate  and  fear  a  well-doer  near  the  throne.  He  felt  that  this  youth 
from  Bethlehem  was  far  the  better  man,  and  he  suspected  that  the  nation  thought  so 
too.  Envy  completed  the  moral  ruin  of  Saul.  As  the  worm  seeks  out  the  best  fruit  to 
eat  the  heart  of  it,  so  envy  fastens  on  the  best  and  noblest  persons  to  hate  and  hurt 
them.  It  goes  by  quick  steps  to  injury — even  to  murder.  "  Saul  spake  to  Jonathan 
his  son,  and  to  all  his  servants,  that  they  should  kill  David."  0  cursed  envy  I  0 
hideous  ingratitude  I     0  foul  and  furious  jealousy  I 

III.  The  treatment  of  Jesus  Christ  forkshadowbd.  The  Son  of  David  lived 
unblamably,  answered  discreetly,  behaved  himself  wisely.  The  people  gathered  to 
him  in  multitudes,  with  eyes  and  ears  of  admiration.  They  judged  hira  worthy  to 
be  made  their  king.  It  is  true  that  the  fickle  populace  took  part  with  their  rulers 
against  our  Lord,  just  as  the  fickle  subjects  of  Saul  took  part  with  him  against  the 
son  of  Jesse.  But,  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  other,  some  hearts  clave  to  the  persecuted 
One.  And  as  all  the  malice  that  pursued  David  failed  to  keep  him  from  the  kingdom 
to  which  God  had  destined  him  and  for  which  God  had  fitted  him,  so  the  rejection, 
betrayal,  and  crucifixion  of  Jesus  could  not  keep  him  from  the  throne  far  above  all 
principality  and  power  which  was  his  in  virtue  of  an  eternal  covenant.  The  rulers 
hated  him  without  a  cause ;  his  very  wisdom  and  goodness  irritated  them,  and  they 
took  counsel  together  how  they  might  slay  him.  For  envy  they  delivered  him  up 
to  judgment,  and  demanded  that  he  should  be  crucified.  At  the  period  described  in 
our  text  a  crisis  had  arrived  in  Israel.  Men  were  forced  to  choose  between  Saul 
and  David,  for  these  were  contrary  the  one  to  the  other,  and  could  not  live  in  unity. 
We  know  what  side  such  a  man  as  Doeg  took.  But  David  had  his  friends,  who 
dared  everything  rather  than  renounce  his  cause.  Better,  in  their  opinion,  to  be  exiles 
and  pilgrims  with  him  than  to  remain  with  the  moody  tyrant  from  whom  the  Lord 
had  departed.  So,  in  the  days  of  his  showing  to  Israel,  many  refused  Jesus,  but 
S'ime  ?,lave  to  him.  Better,  in  their  opinion,  to  be  cast  out  of  the  synagogues,  to  go 
forth  without  the  gate,  bearing  his  reproach,  than  to  take  part  with  the  world  that 
hated  nim,  especially  with  that  hard  and  gloomy  Judaism  from  which  the  Lord  had 
departed.  The  crisis  continues.  Before  all  men  the  alternative  lies — ^for  Christ,  or 
against  him.  Oh,  receive  him  whom  the  world  has  rejected ;  give  him  your  hearts 
identify  and  associate  yourselvea  with  the  "  once  despised  Jesua."— P. 


860 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  XIX.  1— 2i, 


EXPOSITION. 

BncoiasiTi  AmnrPTB  itfon  David's  Lifk  rBusTBATSD  bt  thi  Loti  o*  JovArmAM 
AND  MicnAL,  JlXD  hnallt  bt  Flight  (oh.  xiz.). 


OHAPTEB  Xli 

Jonathan's  lovb  for  David  (vera.  1 — 7). 
Ver.  1. — Sanl  spake  to  Jonathan  his  son  .  .  . 
that  they  should  kill  David.  The  transla- 
tion of  the  last  clause  ia  untenable  ;  it  really 
means  "about  killing  David,"  and  so  both 
the  Septuagint  and  the  Syriac  render  it. 
The  descent  of  men  once  full  of  noble  im- 
pulses, as  was  the  case  with  Saul,  into  open 
crime  is  gradual,  and  with  many  halts  on 
the  way.  Saul  first  gave  way  to  envy,  and 
instead  of  struggling  against  his  bad  feelings, 
nourished  them.  Then,  when  scarcely  ac- 
countable for  his  actions,  he  threatened 
David's  life  ;  and  next,  with  growing  malice, 
encouraged  him  in  dangerous  undertakings, 
in  the  hope  that'  in  one  of  them  he  mi^t 
be  slain.  And  now  he  goes  one  step  farther. 
He  talks  to  Jonathan  and  his  officers  con- 
cerning the  many  reasons  there  were  for 
Dayid'a  death  ;  ar^es  that  without  it  there 
will  be  no  security  for  himself  and  his 
dynasty ;  represents  David  probably  as  a 
traitor,  with  secret  purposes  of  usurping  the 
throne  ;  and  reveals  what  hitherto  had  been 
but  the  half-formed  wishes  of  his  heart.  But 
even  now,  probably,  he  still  spoke  of  David's 
death  as  a  painful  necessity,  and  had  many 
misgivings  in  his  own  mind.  But  he  was 
really  encouraging  himself  in  crime,  and  by 
cherishing  thoughts  of  murder  he  was  grada- 
aUy  descending  towards  the  dark  abyss  into 
which  he  finally  felL 

Vers.  2,  8. — Until  the  morning.  Rather, 
"in  the  morning."  Saul's  purpose  was 
taking  shape,  and  as  there  are  always  men 
too  ready  to  commit  crime  at  the  bidding  of 
a  king,  there  was  the  danger  that  secret 
murder  might  be  the  quick  result  of  Sanl'i 
open  communication  of  his  wishes  to  his 
men  of  war.  Jonathan,  therefore,  warns 
David  of  the  king's  malice,  and  urges  him 
to  hide  himself  until  he  has  made  a  last 
entreaty  for  him.  This  was  to  take  place  in 
the  field,  the  open  common  land.  There 
was  no  idea  of  David  overhearing  the  con- 
versation, but  when  the  king  took  his  usual 
walk  Jonathan  was  to  join  him,  and  hold  a 
conference  with  him  apart  in  the  unenclosed 
hill  pastures.  After  probing  his  father's  real 
feelings  he  would  continue  his  walk,  and, 
without  awakening  any  nupicions,  would 
meet  David  and  communicate  to  him  the 
resalt,  What  I  see,  that  I  will  teii  thee. 
More  exactly,  "I  will  see  what  (he  says), 
md  wiU  teU  thee," 


Vers.  4 — 7, — In  the  field  Jonathan  inter- 
cedes for  David,  aasnres  hii  father  of  his 
friend's  innocence,  reminds  him  of  his  noble 
exploit,  end  of  Saul's  own  joy  at  it,  and 
beseeches  him  not  to  shed  innocent  blood. 
And  Sanl,  fickle  and  selfish,  yet  not  destitute 
of  noble  feelings,  repents  of  his  purpose,  and 
with  characteristic  impetuosity  takes  an  oath 
that  David's  life  shall  be  spared.  Where- 
upon a  reconciliation  takes  place,  and  David 
resumes  his'  attendance  npon  the  king's 
person. 

Renewed  attkuft  to  blat  David  nra- 
TKATED  BT  MioHAL  (vers.  8 — 17).  Vers.  8, 
9. — The — more  correctly  an — evil  spirit  from 
Jehovah.  The  Mendiy  relations  between 
Saul  and  David  continued  for  some  time ; 
but  when  at  length  war  broke  out  again, 
David  acquitted  himself  with  his  usua^ 
ability  and  snccess,  whereupon  Saul's  envy 
and  jealousy  returned,  and  fits  of  melancholy, 
deepening  into  insanity,  once  again  over- 
clouded his  reason.  It  is  no  longer  called 
"an  evil  spirit  from  God,"  as  in  ch.  iviii.  10, 
but  from  Jehovah,  aa  in  ch.  zvl  14,  suggest- 
ing that  it  was  no  longer  a  natural  influence, 
but  that  Saul,  having  broken  his  covenant 
relations  with  Jehovah,  was  now  punished  by 
him.  While  in  this  moody  state  the  same 
temptation  to  slay  David  with  his  javelin 
came  over  him,  but  with  such  violence  that  he 
was  no  longer  able  to  restrain  his  evil  intent 

Vers.  10 — 12. — Sanl  sought  to  imite 
David.  The  verb  used  here  is  not  that, 
rendered  cast  in  ch.  xviiL  11,  where  probably 
we  had  the  record  of  a  purpose  threatened, 
but  not  carried  out  Here  Saul  actnally 
threw  his  javelin  at  David  with  such  violence 
that  it  was  fixed  into  the  wall.  But  David, 
though  playing  some  instrument  of  music  at 
the  time,  was  on  his  guard,  and  slipped 
away.  And  David  fled,  and  escaped  that 
night  As  usual,  the  historian  gives  the 
ultimate  results  of  Saul's  violence  first,  and 
then  returns  and  gives  the  particulars  ;  for 
plainly  David  first  went  home,  and  it  was 
only  when  he  found  that  the  house  was 
surrounded  by  Saul's  emissaries  that  he  fled 
away  to  find  refuge  with  SamueL  Sanl  also 
sent  messengers.  As  ia  often  the  case,  thii 
outbreak  of  violence  on  Saul's  part  broke  down 
all  the  former  restraints  of  nf>right  feeling 
and  conscience.  He  had  lost  his  self-respect, 
was  openly  a  murderer  as  regards  everything 
but  the  success  of  his  attempt,  and  he  deter- 
mined that  that  should  not  oe  long  wanting. 
He  sends  penous,  therefore,  t«  w»tch  David  • 


OH.  xn.  1— M.] 


THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAUUEL. 


861 


honie,  with  orden  that  when  in  the  morning 
he  came  out,  enepecting  no  danger,  they 
■hould  fall  npon  him  and  slay  him.  But 
Michal  in  Bome  way  or  other  became  aware 
of  her  husband's  danger.  Possibly  she  had 
been  at  hep  father's  house  in  the  afternoon, 
and  with  quick  observation  had  noticed  that 
more  than  usual  was  going  on,  and  seeing 
that  her  own  house  was  the  object  of  these 
preparations,  had  divined  their  intent  j  or 
possibly  Jonathan  may  have  given  her  in- 
formation, and  so  she  warned  David  of  his 
danger.  As  the  entrance  was  guarded,  he 
was  let  down  through  a  window,  like  St. 
Paul  afterwards,  and  so  began  the  weary  life 
of  wandering  which  lasted  through  so  many 
troubled  years. 

Ver.  13.— Michal  took  an  Image.  Liter- 
«lly,  "the  teraphim,"  a  plural  word,  but 
.  used  here  as  a  singular.  Probably,  like  the 
corresponding  Latin  word  penates,  it  had  no 
singular  in  common  use.  It  was  a  wooden 
block  with  head  and  shoulders  roughly  shaped 
to  represent  a  human  figure.  Laban's  tera- 
phim were  so  small  that  Rachel  could  hide 
them  under  the  camel's  funiiture  (Gen.  xxxi. 
84),  but  Michal's  seems  to  have  been  large 
■enough  to  pass  in  the  bed  for  a  man.  Though 
the  worship  of  them  is  described  as  iniquity 
(ch.  XV.  23),  yet  the  superstitious  belief  that 
they  brought  good  luck  to  the  house  over 
which  they  presided,  in  return  for  kind  treat- 
ment, seems  to  have  been  proof  against  the 
teaching  of  the  prophets ;  and  Hosea  de- 
scribes the  absence  of  them  as  on  the  same 
level  as  the  absence  of  the  ephod  (Hosea  iii. 
4).  A  pillow  of  goats'  hair  for  his  bolster. 
More  correctly,  "a  goat's  skin  about  its 
head."  So  tho  Syriac  and  Vulgate.  The 
object  of  it  would  be  to  look  at  a  distance 
like  a  man's  hair.  The  Septuagint  has  a 
goat's  liver,  because,  this  was  supposed  to 
palpitate  long  after  the  animal's  death,  and 
so  would  produce  the  appearance  of  a  person's 
breathing.  But  this  involves  a  different 
reading,  for  which  there  is  no  authority  ;  nor 
was  Michal's  deception  intended  for  close 
observation.  She  would  of  course  not  let 
any  one  disturb  David,  and  all  she  wanted 
was  just  enough  likeness  to  a  man  to  make  a 
person  at  a  distance  suppose  that  David  was 
there.  Soon  or  later  her  artifice  would  be 
found  out,  but  her  husband  would  have  had 
the  intervening  time  for  effecting  his  escape. 
As  the  word  rendered  pillow,  and  which  is 
found  only  here,  comes  from  a  root  signify- 
ing "to  knot  together,"  "to  intertwine," 
some  commentators  think  that  it  means  a 
network  of  goats'  hair,  perhaps  to  keep  off 
flies.  But  this  is  a  mere  guess,  and  not  to 
be  set  against  the  combined  authority  of  tho 
two  versions.  With  a  cloth.  Hebrew,  beged. 
This  beged  was  David's  every-day  dress,  and 
vsnld  grwtJy  aid  JCidial  in  her  ^us  wti- 


fice.  It  was  a  loose  mantle,  worn  over  tha 
close-fitting  mM  (see  ch.  ii  19).  Thus  Ezra 
(oh.  ix.  3,  5)  says,  "I  rent  my  beged  and  my 
meil,"  which  the  A.  V.  with  characteristic 
inexactness  translates  "  my  garment  and  my 
mantle."  In  Gen.  xxviii  20,  where  it  ia 
rendered  raiment,  Jacob  speaks  of  it  as  the 
most  indispensable  article  of  dress  ;  and  in 
Gen.  xxxix.  12,  where  it  is  rendered  garment, 
we  find  that  it  was  a  loose  plaid  or  wrapper. 
In  those  simple  days  it  was  used  for  warmth 
by  night  as  well  as  for  protection  by  day, 
and  it  is  interesting  to  find  David  in  his  old 
age  still  covered  up  for  warmth  in  bed  by 
his  beged  (1  Kings  L  1),  where  it  is  trans- 
lated clothes. 

Vers.  14 — 17. — When,  after  waiting  till 
the  usual  hour  for  David's  appearance,  he 
came  not,  the  watchers  send  and  inform 
Saul,  who  now  orders  his  open  arrest.  But 
Michal  despatches  u  messenger  to  tell  her 
father  that  he  is  sick.  Upon  this  Saul 
orders  bed  and  all  to  be  brought,  that  he 
may  slay  him.  As  an  Oriental  bed  is  usually 
a  mere  strip  of  carpet,  this  would  be  easy 
enough.  But  when  the  messengers  force  their 
way  through,  in  spite  of  every  obstruction 
which  Michal  can  devise  to  waste  time,  and 
come  up  close  to  the  sleeping  figure,  "Lo, 
teraphim  in  the  bed,  and  a  goatskin  at  its 
head."  They  carry  the  news  to  Saul,  who 
sends  for  Michal,  and  reproaches  her  for 
letting  his  enemy  go.  And  she,  afraid  of 
bringing  her  father's  anger  npon  herself, 
answers  with  a  falsehood,  such  as  we  find 
David  also  too  readily  having  resort  to ; 
for  she  tells  Saul  that  his  flight  was  David's 
own  doing,  and  that  she  had  taken  part  in 
it  only  to  save  her  life.  Why  should  I  kill 
thee  1  She  pretends  that  David  had  told 
her  not  to  force  him  to  kill  her  by  refusing  to 
give  her  aid  in  his  escape.  Saul,  no  doubt, 
saw  that  she  had  been  a  willing  agent ;  but  as 
she  professed  to  have  been  driven  to  do  what 
she  had  done  by  David's  threats,  he  could 
say  no  more. 

David's  flight  to  Samttel  at  Ramab 
(vers.  18 — 24).  Ver.  18. — David  .  .  .  came 
to  Samuel.  We  have  seen  that  there  is 
every  reason  to  believe  that  David  had  been 
taught  and  trained  by  Samuel  among  tha 
sons  of  the  prophets,  and  now,  conscious  of 
his  innocence,  he  flees  for  refuge  to  his  old 
master,  trusting  that  Saul  would  reverence 
God's  prophet,  and  give  credence  to  l.ia 
intercession  and  his  pledge  that  David  was 
guiltless.  He  and  Samuel  went  and  dwelt 
in  Kaioth.  Rather  in  Nevayoth,  as  in  tha 
written  text.  This  is  not  the  name  of  a 
place,  but  signifies  "dwellings,"  "lodgings," 
and  is  always  translated  in  the  Chaldea 
"house  of  study,"  t.  e.  stndent'i  lodginga. 
Somewhere  near  to  Bamah  Samuel  had 
erected  bvuldingt  to  ie««iT«  \m  young  s>m|| 


SM 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUBL. 


[oh.  ziz.  1—24 


wko  were  called  "sons  of  the  prophets/'  not 
because  their  fathers  were  prophets,  bnt 
because  they  were  under  propnetie  training, 
with  prophets  for  their  teachers,  though  not 
necessarily  intended  to  be  prophets  them- 
selves. At  first  Samuel,  we  may  suppose, 
built  one  nevaih,  one  simple  hospice  for  his 
students,  and  then,  as  their  numbers  grew, 
another,  and  yet  another,  and  so  the  plural, 
nevayoth,  came  into  vogue  as  the  name  of 
the  students'  quarters. 

Vers.  19,  20. — On  hearing  where  Dayid 
was,  Saul  sends  messengers  to  arrest  him, 
and  we  thus  incidentally  gain  a  most  in- 
teresting account  of  the  inner  condition  of 
Samuel's  schools.  Evidently  after  Saul  had 
become  king  Samuel  devoted  his  main  ener- 
gies to  this  noble  effort  to  raise  Israel  from 
the  barbarous  depths  into  which  it  had 
sunk  ;  and  when  the  messengers  arrive  they 
enter  some  hall,  where  they  find  a  regularly 
organised  choir,  consisting  not  of  "sons  of 
the  prophets,"  young  men  still  under  train- 
ing, but  of  prophets,  men  who  had  finished 
their  preparatory  studies,  and  arrived  at  a 
higher  elevation.  The  Chaldee  Paraphrast 
calls  them  seribesj  and  doubtless  those 
educated  in  Samuel's  schools  held  an  analo- 
gous position  to  that  of  the  scribes  in  later 
days.  And  Samuel  himself  was  standing — 
not  as  appointed  over  them;  he  was  the 
founder  and  originator  of  these  schools,  and 
all  authority  was  derived  from  him.  What 
the  Hebrew  says  is  that  he  was  "  standing  as 
chief  over  them,"  and  they,  full  of  Divine 
enthusiasm,  were  chanting  psalms  to  God's 
glory.  So  noble  was  the  sight,  that  Saul's 
messengers  on  entering  were  seized  with  a 
like  enthusiasm,  and,  laying  aside  their 
murderous  purpose,  joined  in  the  hearty 
service  of  the  prophetic  sanctuary.  Instead 
of  they  saw  the  Hebrew  has  "  he  saw,"  but 
as  all  the  versions  have  the  plural,  it  is 
probably  a  mere  mistake.  The  Hebrew  word 
for  company  is  found  only  here.  By  trans- 
posing the  letters  we  have  the  ordinary  word 
ibr  congregation,  bnt  possibly  it  was  their 
own  technical  name  for  some  peculiar 
arrangement  of  the  choir. 

Vers.  21 — 24. — Saul  sends  messengers  a 
second  and  even  a  third  time  with  the  same 
result,  and  finally  determines  to  go  in  person. 
Having  set  out,  ha  came  to  a — more  correctly 


the — ^eat  well  that  is  in  Sechu — more  pro- 
bably the  cistern  or  tank  thei«.  From  the  valu* 
of  water  it  was  no  doubt  a  well-known  spot  at 
the  time,  but  in  the  present  mined  state  of  th« 
country  all  such  works  have  perished.   Sochn, 
according   to    Conder    ('Handbook'),    was 
probably  on  the  site  of  the  present  ruin  of 
Suweikeh,   immediately  south  of   Beeroth. 
Having  there  made  inquiries  whether  Samuel 
and  David  were  still  at  Ramah,  courageously 
awaiting  his  coming,  he  proceeds  on  his  way. 
But  even  before  arriving  m  Samuel's  presence, 
with   that    extraordinaiT  susceptibility    to 
external    impressions  which  is  so  marked 
a  feature  in  his  character,  he  begins  singing 
psalms,  and  no  sooner  had  he  entered  the 
Ifevayoth  than  he  stripped  off  his  clothes — 
his  heged  and  meil — and  lay  down  naked — 
i.  e.  with  only  his  tunic  upon  him — all  that 
day  and  all  that  night     His  excitement 
had  evidently  been  intense,  and  probably  to 
the  chanting  he  had  added  violent  gesticula- 
tion.    But  it  was  not  this  so  much  as  the 
tempest  of  his  emotions  which  had  exhausted 
him,   and  made   him  thus   throw  himself 
down  as  one  dead.     And  once  again  the 
people  wondered  at  so  strange  an  occurrence, 
and  called  back  to  mind  the  proverb.  Is  Saul 
also  among  the  prophets  1     W  hen  first  used 
(ch.  X.  11)  Saul's  enthusiasm  was  an  outburst 
of  piety,  genuine  but  evanescent,  and  which 
had  long  since  passed  away.     What  was  it 
now  ?    'The  Chaldee,  as  explained  by  Rashi, 
says  he  was  mad.     Uore  probably,  in  the 
violent  state  of  excitement  under  which  Saul 
had    for   soma    time   been    labouring,   the 
thought  of  seeing  Samuel,  from  whom  he 
had  been  so  long  separated,  brought  back  to 
his  mind  the  old  days  when  the  prophet  had 
loved  and  counselled  him,  and  made  him 
king,  and  been  his  true  and  faithful  friend. 
And    the  remembrance   overpowered    him. 
What  would  he  not  have  given  to  have  con- 
tinued such  as  he  then  was  1    And  for  a 
time  he  became  once  again  the  old  Saul  of 
Ramah  ;  but  the  change  was  transient  and 
fitful ;  and  after  these  twenty-four  bonis  of 
agony  Saul  rose  up,  full  perhaps  of  good 
intentions,  but  with  a  heart  unchanged,  and 
certain,  therefore,  very  quickly  to  disappoint 
all  hopes  of  real  amendment,  and  to  become 
a  still  more  moody  and  relentless  tyrant. 


H0MILETI08. 

Vers.  1 — ^7. — Open  enmity  and  open  friendship.  The  facts  are— 1.  Saul  reveaU 
his  purpose  to  kill  David.  2.  This  being  made  known  to  Jonathan,  he  arranges  with 
David  to  let  him  learn  the  result  of  an  efiort  to  turn  Saul  from  his  purpose,  3.  He 
pleads  with  Saul  David's  good  services  and  personal  risks,  God's  approval,  and  the 
King's  own  joy  therein.  4.  Saul  yields  to  persuasion,  resolves  not  to  shed  "  innocent 
blood,"  and  recalls  David  into  his  personal  service.  The  historian  traces  the  progresa 
of  Saul  to  ruin,  and  of  David  to  royal  honours,  and  here  brings  out  the  trouM4 


OH.  xnt.  1—24.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  S6S 

hostility  of  Saul  on  the  one  side,  and  the  open  services  of  Jonathan's  friendship  on 
the  other.  Father  and  son  are  at  cross  purposes  concerning  the  life  of  one  who  in  the 
providence  of  God  is  to  supplant  both.  Each  performs  his  part  with  perfect  natural- 
ness ;  and  in  the  progress  of  the  conflict  between  enmity  and  friendship  there  is  a 
revelation  not  only  of  the  individual  characteristics  of  the  men,  but  also  of  principles 
in  constant  operation.     We  have  here  an  instance  of — 

I.  The  inevitable  qeowth  of  secret  sin.  Except  In  occasional  seasons  of 
moodiness,  Saul's  conduct  towards  David  had  not  found  formal  expression.  His 
servants  probably  set  down  his  violence  (ch.  xviii.  11)  to  irritability,  and  we  have 
seen  how  cleverly  Saul  had  striven  to  throw  on  Providence  the  slaying  of  David 
while  he  was  doing  him  honour  (ch.  xviii.  17 — 30),  The  frustration  of  these  secret 
schemes  brought  out  the  fact  that  the  sin  so  long  cherished  in  the  heart,  and  for  very 
shame  concealed,  had,  by  that  very  nurture,  gained  such  power  over  tlie  entire  man 
as  to  force  its  way  into  open  day,  regardless  of  all  considerations  of  prudence  and 
self-respect.  The  murder  in  intent  became  murder  avowed.  The  ruling  passion  of 
the  inner  life  now  became  the  acknowledged  master,  and  a  public  avowal  of  servitude 
to  it  is  therefore  voluntarily  made.  Saul's  experience  is  but  an  instance  of  the 
experience  of  multitudes.  Progress  in  wickedness  is  from  within  outwards.  Lust, 
when  it  hath  conceived,  brings  forth  sin  (James  i.  15).  Every  deliberate  murder,- 
theft,  deed  of  adultery,  fraud,  and  rebellion  against  Christ's  authority  was  at  first 
germinal  in  the  heart.  Each  stage  of  internal  growth  lessened  the  power  of  the  will 
over  its  progress,  till  at  last  it  revealed  its  evil  nature  in  open  acts.  This  psycho- 
logical genesis  of  sin  is  an  awful  fact,  and  may  well  cause  those  to  tremble  whose 
dalliance  with  secret  evil  becomes  habitual.  Truly  he  who  committeth  sin  is  "the 
servant  of  sin,"  and  every  consideration  of  duty  and  interest  should  urge  us  to  cry 
daily  for  a  "clean  heart,"  and  that  sin  may  have  "no  more  dominion  "  ov£r  ns  (Pi. 
cxxxix.  23 ;  Bom,  vi.  14). 

II.  The  ptupiditt  consequent  on  the  dominion  op  sin.  Facts  prove  that  all 
sin  is  a  species  of  madness.  Adam  and  Eve  imagined  that  a  thicket  would  hide 
them  from  God.  Saul's  clearness  of  intellect  suffered  by  his  first  public  disobedience  j 
and  now  that  the  evil  passion  had  gained  ascendancy,  extreme  stupidity  appears  in 
his  soliciting  the  aid,  in  the  execution  of  his  cruel  purpose,  of  Jonathan,  David's 
bosom  friend  (ch.  xviii.  1 — 4;  xix.  1).  If  he  knew  nothing  of  their  friendship, 
which  is  very  improbable,  he  ought  to  have  known  enough  of  so  good  and  devout  a 
son  as  to  be  sure  that  he  would  be  no  party  to  a  base  and  villanous  deed.  If  he 
imagined  that  Jonathan  was  likely  to  be  actuated  by  jealousy  of  a  rival,  he  per- 
formed the  stupid  act,  common  to  base  men,  of  thinking  that  reasons  which  have 
force  with  themselves  have  force  with  others.  In  proportion  to  the  power  of  sin 
over  the  will  is  the  effect  of  it  on  the  intellect.  Even  the  most  clever  sinners,  when 
seeking  to  cover  their  sin  from  man,  manifest  some  infatuation  or  folly  which  affords 
the  clue  to  their  crime.  But  it  is  especially  in  relation  to  God  and  the  future  issues 
of  sin  that  this  stupefying  effect  appears.  It  is  only  this  blinded  spirit  that  explains 
the  ease  with  which  men  read  of  the  coming  "terrors  of  the  Lord  "  (2  Cor.  v.  10, 11  ; 
iv.  3,  4  ;  Eeb.  ii.  3). 

III.  "The  domestic  borrowb  created  by  sin.  It  was  with  a  sad,  heavy  heart 
that  Jonathan  had  witnessed  the  gradual  decay  of  his  father's  character,  but  the 
saddest  blow  was  when  the  father  sought  to  make  the  son  partaker  in  his  sin.  The 
grief  of  the  son  would  be  proportionate  to  his  piety.  To  be  tempted  by  a  father,  to 
have  filial  obedience  tested  in  deeds  of  evil,  to  see  the  utter  ruin  of  a  parent's  moral 
character,  was  a  bitter  trial ;  and,  as  a  true  son,  Jonathan  could  not  but  bear  these 
sorrows  as  a  fearful  secret.  In  how  many  families  are  there  sorrows  of  this  kind  1 
How  many  a  child  has  to  watch  the  decay  of  a  father's  reputation,  to  bear  induce- 
ments to  sin,  and  to  hide  deeds  and  intentions  of  evil  1  A  parent  is  far  gone  when 
children  are  prompted  to  wrong.  A  child  is  indeed  a  "  child  of  sorrow"  when  com- 
pelled to  carry  on  a  pure  heart  the  secrets  of  a  sinful  home. 

IV.  The  triomph  of  religious  friendship.  It  is  scarcely  likely  that  Saul  would 
speak  to  Jonathan  about  killing  David  without  pointing  out  how  dangerous  a  rival 
he  was  to  both  father  and  son.  It  raised  in  Jiinathini's  mind  the  conflict  of  worldly 
interest  and  fidelity  to  a  friend.    Not  a  few  have  yielded  to  such  temptations.     But 


9U  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  nx.  1—24 

JTonathsn'g  pure  soul  was  equal  to  the  occasion.  His  conduct  was  marked  by 
exquisite  delicacy  of  feeling  and  wisdom.  He  would  not  so  degrade  his  father  as  to 
tell  David  that  he  had  been  asked  to  slay  his  friend,  while  he  assured  David  of  his 
real  danger.  While  not  assuming  the  tone  of  an  advocate,  he  skilfully  handled  facts 
so  as  to  achieve  the  end  in  view.  The  point  of  the  temptation  was  to  sacrifice  friend- 
ship to  private  and  public  interests.  There  are  persons  still  subject  to  the  same 
trial.  May  we  not  also  see  something  analogous  to  the  common  temptations  of 
Christians  to  renounce  the  "anointed  One"  for  reasons  pertaining  to  earthly  wealth 
and  glory?  Where  there  is  real  oneness  of  heart  with  Christ,  no  blandishments  of 
sin,  no  prospect  of  greater  worldly  distinction,  avail  to  break  the  sacred  bond. 

V.  The  force  of  truth  on  the  conscience.  Jonathan  simply,  in  a  kindly,  gentle 
way,  conversed  with  his  father  on  the  matter,  and  called  his  attention  to  a  few  facts, 
— David's  risks,  services,  and  evident  approval  by  God,  and  Saul's  own  joy  in  his 
victories, — and  then  asks  whether  such  innocent  blood  should  be  shed.  The  effect 
even  on  the  impenitent  Saul  is  to  soften  his  hard  heart  and  draw  forth  the  declaration 
that  he  shall  be  spared.  Happy  the  son  who  has  such  influence  with  an  unhappy, 
wicked  father  1  In  dealing  with  hardened  sinners  <Aree<AMM'«  are  wecessary.  1.  Truth 
to  present  to  the  conscience.  That  David  was  innocent  Saul  knew ;  but  ordinarily 
passion  blinded  him  to  the  due  recognition  of  it.  If  we  can  hold  forth  "  the  word 
of  life,"  the  actual  truth  concerning  Christ,  so  that  it  shall  shine  straight  in  upon  the 
conscience,  men  cannot  but  acknowledge  its  power,  and  it  will  exercise  some  restraint 
on  their  conduct.  2.  A  kindly,  unaffected  manner.  It  was  the  manner  of  Jonathan 
that  secured  an  attentive  hearing  and  disarmed  Saul's  suspicion.  Harsh  language 
tends  to  arouse  antagonism.  The  secret  of  success  lies  in  so  presenting  the  truth 
that  it  stands  forth  alone,  unmixed  with  disturbing  elements  from  our  personality. 
"  He  that  winneth  souls  is  wise  "  (Prov.  xi.  30).  3.  Prayerfulnesa  of  spirit.  We 
may  be  sure  that  Jonathan  as  well  as  David  prayed  in  spirit  on  this  occasion.  The 
tone  of  our  mind  is  wonderfully  affected  by  prayerf  ulness.  We  then  speak  for  God 
and  man  with  a  gentle  force  which  guilty  men  cannot  but  feel. 

General  lessons: — 1.  More  attention  should  be  called  to  the  importance  of  crushing 
out  sinful  feelings  on  their  first  appearance,  and  means  suggested  for  so  doing.  2. 
Parents  and  persons  in  positions  of  influence  should  be  earnestly  warned  of  the 
fearful  crime  of  seeking  to  induce  young  persons  to  violate  their  sense  of  right  and 
truth.  3.  The  good  that  is  in  us  may  be  much  more  utilised  if  we  strive  to  act  with 
the  "  wisdom  of  the  serpent  and  the  harmlessness  of  the  dove." 

Vers.  8 — 17. — Revived  sins  and  troubles.  The  facts  are — 1.  The  fresh  fame  of 
David  arouses  the  latent  ill-will  of  Saul,  who  seeks  in  vain  to  smite  him  with  a 
javelin.  2.  David  fleeing  to  his  house,  Saul  sends  men  to  lie  in  wait  for  and  slay 
him.  3.  Michal  warns  him  of  danger,  and  during  the  night  aids  his  escape.  4.  By 
a  clever  device  she  diverts  his  enemies  from  an  immediate  pursuit,  and  on  being 
accused  of  aiding  her  father's  enemy,  she  pleads  self-preservation.  'The  troubles  of 
life  are  but  temporarily  overcome.  It  was  destined  for  David  to  smite  the  national . 
enemy,  since  he  went  forth  as  none  other  did,  strong  in  the  "  name  of  the  Lord." 
The  fame  of  his  exploits  no  sooner  reached  the  ears  of  Saul  than  the  effect  of 
Jonathan's  recent  endeavour  to  reconcile  him  to  David  was  utterly  lost ;  and  hence 
arose  a  series  of  new  troubles  for  persecutor  and  the  persecuted.     We  see  here — 

L  That  A  RADICAL   CHANGE    OF  DISPOSITION  IS  THE    ONLY    GUARANTEE  OF  CONDUCT 

AND  CHARACTER.  The  change  wrought  in  Saul  by  Jonathan's  recent  presentation  of 
truth  was  only  superficial.  The  old  sin  was  loved  and  unrepented  of.  The  nature 
of  the  man  was  alienated  from  the  life  of  God ;  and  hence  on  the  slightest  approach 
of  temptation  the  old  spirit  broke  forth.  It  is  universally  true  that  no  intellectual 
reeognUion  of  truth,  no  acquiescence  of  conscience  in  the  injustice  of  a  course,  no 
reformation  consequent  on  human  influence  over  the  feelings  or  the  intelligence,  will 
make  man,  or  enable  him,  to  be,  what  he  ought  to  be.  The  fundamental  disposition 
moBt  be  renewed.  There  are  instances  of  this  in  Christian  history.  The  lion  become* 
•  lamb.  A  Saul  of  Tarsus  becomes  an  apostle  of  Christ.  It  is  in  the  nature  of 
things  tbat  so  it  should  be.  For  in  the  ordained  subordination  of  the  powers  of  the 
mind  tbare  ia  «  ruling  disposition  to  which  all  bend :  if  it  be  pnre  til  will  move  in  • 


OH.  XIX.  1—24.]  THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  3M 

holy  direction  ;  if  it  be  impure  the  whole  life  will  be  stained.  Out  of  the  heart  are 
the  issues  of  life.  It  is  the  weakness  of  all  systems  of  morality  that  they  exalt 
virtue  and  teach  the  evils  of  vice,  but  furnish  no  adequate  power  to  render  the  life 
virtuous  in  the  highest  sense  of  the  term.  Moralists  may  be  immoral.  The  doing 
of  truth  is  not  involved  in  a  knowledge  of  it.  Here  it  is  that  the  New  Testament 
comes  in  to  supplement  man's  knowledge,  and  to  perfect  codes  of  morality.  By  the 
gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  it  builds  up  outward  character  from  within,  and  insures  that 
at  last  sin  shall  have  no  dominion  over  us.  There  is  danger  of  men  overlooking  this 
trvth,  especially  when  "  many  run  to  and  fro,  and  knowledge  is  increased."  Civil- 
isation, b}'  securing  a  presentable  exterior,  diverts  attention  from  the  "hidden  man 
of  the  heart."  The  indirect  effect  of  Christianity  is  to  incorporate  with  the  ordinary 
character  many  of  the  virtues  nourished  only  by  itself,  and  hence  men  imagine  that 
society  would  be  what  it  is  without  Christianity.  It  is  extremely  impoji;ant,  therefore, 
to  insist  on  the  New  Testament  teaching  of  the  need  of  a  radical  change  by  the 
power  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  to  seek  to  bring  our  children  early  under  his  renewing 
power,  and  to  pray  constantly  that  men  may  be  renewed  and  become  new  creatures 
in  Christ  Jesus. 

II.  That  THE  AFFLICTIONS  OFTEN  BSFALLINO  THE   BEBVANTS  OF  OOD  PUT  A  8EVEBB 

STRAIN  ON  THEIR  FAITH.  If  Ps.  lix.  W8S  written  in  reference  to  this  persecution, 
we  can  see  the  propriety  of  the  assertion,  "  Not  for  my  transgression,  and  not  for  any 
sin  of  mine  "  (Ps.  lix.  3),  do  they  "  set  themselves."  To  a  young  man  conscious  of 
his  integrity,  and  not  without  hope  of  being  accepted  of  God,  it  must  have  seemed  a 
strange  providence  which  allowed  his  life  to  be  so  troubled.  Could  Samuel's  anoint- 
ing really  have  a  Divine  significance  ?  (ch.  xvi.  13).  Was  it  not  a  mistake  to  have 
left  the  quiet  sheepfold  for  the  scene  of  conflict  ?  (ch.  xvii.  20).  Would  it  not  be 
well  even  now  to  retire  into  private  life  ?  Why  should  an  innocent,  sincere  soul  have 
such  constant  reason  to  cry,  "  Awake  to  help  me,  and  behold  ?  "  (Ps.  lix.  4).  The 
experience  is  not  nxmfined  to  David.  One  greater  than  David,  when  in  pursuit  of  his 
higher  work  in  the  world,  was  a  "  Man  of  sorrows,  and  acquainted  with  grief."  And 
likewise  for  many  a  year  his  Church,  when  pursuing  her  holy  and  beneficent  course, 
was  exposed  to  relentless  persecution.  It  is  still  true  that  "  many  are  the  a£3ictions 
of  the  righteous,"  and  that  "  through  much  tribulation  "  we  enter  the  kingdom.  But 
all  this  is  not  a  matter  of  chance,  nor  an  indication  of  imperfect  wisdom  and  love. 
The  world  is  evil,  and  goodness  can  only  live  in  it  by  conflict.  It  is  part  of  the  great 
battle  of  the  universe  that  sin  shall  be  exterminated  by  endured  sorrows.  History 
proves  that  the  purest  lives  and  most  beautiful  virtues  have  flourished  in  times  and 
by  means  of  severe  trial.  Every  sufEerer  knows  how  blessed  it  is  to  be  driven  nearer 
to  God.  The  tribulation  is  only  for  a  brief  space,  and  works  out  a  far  more  exceed- 
ing and  eternal  weight  of  glory.  Hence  faith  can  bear  the  strain ;  the  more  so  as 
God  does  succour  and  delight  the  soul  with  his  comforts  (Ps.  lix.  17 ;  xciv.  19). 

III.  That  THOSE  WHO  DEVISE   EVII,  AGAINST  THE  SERVANTS  OF  GOD  ARE   B0METIME8 

CAUGHT  IN  THEIR  OWN  DEVICES.  In  the  exercise  of  his  low  cunning  Saul  gave 
Michal  to  David  that  she  might  he  a  snare  to  him  (ch.  xviii.  21),  her  character  and 
tendencies  being  such  as  might  in  his  judgment  bring  him  into  trouble.  It  now 
turned  out  that  the  snare  for  David  became  a  snare  for  Saul  (Ps.  vii.  14, 15).  Wicked 
men  cannot  always  reckon  safely  on  their  instruments.  Men  laid  snares  for  Christ, 
but  were  entangled  in  their  own  talk  (Matt.  xxii.  15 — 22).  Pharaoh  thought  he 
would  find  Israel  "  entangled  in  the  land  "  (Exod.  xiv.  3),  and  he  found  himself 
ensnared  therein  to  his  own  destruction.  Snares  are  laid  for  the  Church  of  God  in 
modern  times,  and  some  of  these  will  doubtless  prove  the  reverse  of  the  original 
intent.  We  are  invited  with  persuasive  voice  to  enter  the  pathway  of  severe  historical 
criticism  and  of  physical  science,  and  it  is  hoped  thereby  to  disenchant  us  of  the 
fascination  of  a  supernatural  Christianity.  Men  are  as  confident  of  the  result  as 
was  Saul  when  he  gave  Michal  to  David  (ch.xviiL  21) ;  but  we  have  nothing  to  fear, 
for  criticism  and  science  thus  far  only  bring  out  the  truth  that  the  Christ  is  unex- 
plainable  on  any  hypothesis  but  that  of  the  supematural ;  and  hence,  on  the  ordinaiy 
principles  of  scientific  research,  men  are  bound  to  accept  that  bypothasia,  or  «]n 
declare  themselvea  unscientific.  "  He  must  nign  till  he  hath  pat  all  enemiea  imdM 
hif  fMt"(lCor.  ZV.S6). 


S66  THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAKUEL.  [(S.  ux.  1—24 

IV.   That  ALTBOUQH  HTPSBVIOT  KOBAL  CONDITOT  HAT  SUBSEBTK  TBI  IBTERESTB  OF 

Qod'b  bebyants,  it  NEVEBTEELE8S  IS  DiSHONOtTBiKO  TO  THEM.  Michal  acted  a  lie, 
and  also  told  deliberate  lies,  in  order  to  shield  David  and  then  herself.  The  issue 
was  advantageous  to  David,  aa  it  put  a  wide  distance  between  him  and  his  pursuers. 
The  statement  of  the  facts  in  Scripture  is  by  no  means  identical  with  approval  of 
them.  God's  purposes  have  sometimes  been  furthered  by  the  actions  of  imperfect 
men,  but  the  actions  have  been  their  own,  and  never  have  had  Divine  approval.  It 
is  true  still  that  many  a  defective  "earthen  vessel"  is  the  instrument  of  good. 
Indeed,  were  God  to  refrain  from  working  out  his  blessed  purposes  of  mercy  till  we 
were  all  pure  as  the  angels,  the  prospects  of  the  world  would  be  dark  enough.  The 
safe  rule  is  "  not  to  do  evil  that  good  may  come."  Good  does  come  often  in  spite  of 
evil,  as  when  God's  truth  is  difiused  in  spite  of  the  mixed  motives  and  strifes  of 
those  engaged  in  his  service,  and  when  comfort  and  joy  flow  to  the  poor  from  money 
given  even  for  purposes  far  from  benevolent.  The  command  of  God  is  "  Lie  not  one 
to  another"  (Levit.  xix.  11).  It  is  not  for  us  to  say  that  dangers  will  be  avoided  by 
occasional  lies.  The  principle  involved  in  truth-speaking  is  of  vast  importance  in 
all  times  and  places,  and  is  worth  the  sacrifice  of  much  for  its  vindication.  Suppose 
a  man  is  slain  rather  than  utter  a  lie,  does  not  his  martyrdom  for  truth,  in  the 
enduring  moral  sphere,  bring  greater  good  to  moral  beings  and  himself  than  could 
have  come  from  trampling  on  a  sacred  principle  for  a  present  advantage  ?  God, 
moreover,  does  not  leave  his  servants  when  they  do  right.  Had  Michal  stated  the 
facts  she  would  have  saved  her  husband  from  slander,  and  there  were  ten  thousand 
ways  by  which  God  could  have  frustrated  the  purpose  of  the  men  and  shielded 
David.  Our  duty  is  to  be  true  and  leave  consequences  to  God.  God  does  not  lie — 
we  are  children  of  God  ;  Christ  did  not  lie — we  are  followers  of  Christ.  We  may  be 
sure  that  permanent  good  must  ensue  on  our  being  conformed  to  Christ,  the  image  of 
God.  There  is  a  gain  which  is  loss,  and  a  loss  which  is  gain  (Ps.  xxivii.  3 — 8,  27, 
28  ;  Mark  viii.  36  ;  Ephes.  v.  9  ;  vi.  14). 

General  lessons: — 1.  The  influence  of  Christians  may  restrain  the  development  of 
sin  in  some  of  its  grosser  forms,  but  it  is  an  imperfect  Christianity  which  rests  in 
that.  2.  The  "wrath  of  man"  is  made  to  praise  God,  in  that  persecutions  issue  in 
greater  spirituality  of  mind  and  fitness  for  permanent  service  (Rom.  v,  3 — 5).  3.  We 
need  not  fret  and  be  uneasy  about  the  snares  of  the  wicked  if  only  we  are  in  God's 
service,  as  time  is  on  our  side  (Ps.  xxxvii.).  4.  Christians  should  strive  to  put  down 
all  practical  forms  of  falsehood  prevalent  in  society,  and  train  children  in  a  severe 
love  of  truth  at  any  cost. 

Vers.  18 — 24. — SaitMy  refuge  and  spvritual  restraint.    The  facts  are — 1.  David 

takes  refuge  with  Samuel  at  Naioth  in  Ramah.  2.  The  messengers  sent  by  Saul  to 
take  David  are  restrained  in  the  presence  of  Samuel  and  the  prophets,  and  themselves 
begin  to  prophesy.  3.  Other  messengers  come  under  the  same  influence.  4.  Ven- 
turing to  go  himself,  he,  on  approaching  the  place,  also  falls  under  the  prophetic 
influence,  and  is  utterly  overcome  by  it  in  the  presence  of  Samuel.  Human  wisdom 
may  be  almost  confounded  by  the  prominent  facts  of  this  section,  but  this  must  not 
be  taken  as  proof  of  our  infallibility,  nor  of  the  unfitness  of  the  event  with  the  order 
of  Divine  providence.  Had  it  been  left  to  man  to  invent  and  regulate  the  process 
by  which  the  earth  and  life  upon  it  arrived  at  the  forms  now  familiar  to  us,  would 
he  have  introduced  some  of  those  ancient  physical  conditions  and  changes  which 
must  have  been  so  utterly  unlike  what  now  prevail  ?  Tlie  convulsions,  the  trans- 
formations, the  climatic  conditions,  the  huge  fonns  of  life  of  some  past  ages  are  as 
much  unlike  the  present  facts  as  the  spiritual  manifestations  of  the  prophetic  schools 
are  unlike  the  orderly  course  of  Christian  influence.  It  is  only  of  late  years  that 
men  1  ave  in  some  degree  traced  the  naturalness  of  the  physical  process,  and  oven 
now  there  is  diversity  of  opinion  on  the  subject.  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  there- 
fore, if,  in  man's  comparative  ignorance  of  the  unseen  spiritual  sphere  in  which  the 
great  development  of  God's  purpose  in  Christ  really  occurs,  he  should  not  be  able  to 
supply  all  the  links  connecting  the  spiritual  manifestations  of  the  era  of  Samuel 
with  the  rigid  legal  era  of  Moses  and  the  more  calm  and  orderly  methods  of  tht 
Christian  dispensation. 


OL  zn.  1—24.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  Ml 

"  Blind  nnbelief  ia  sure  to  err, 
And  scan  his  work  in  vain ; 
Ck>d  is  his  own  interpreteT, 
And  he  trill  make  it  pLiiiL* 

Looking  at  the  teaching  of  the  section,  we  aeA~ 

I.  An  important  spiRiTnAL  power  being  nouribhbd  amidbt  the  Ttrsvon.  o» 
PUBLIC  AFFAIRS.  While  battles  were  being  fought,-  and  the  kingdom  was  troubled 
with  the  unsatisfactory  condition  of  the  court,  Samuel  was  quietly  gathering  around 
himself  a  band  of  men  who,  devoting  attention  to  the  records  of  Israel's  history,  the 
exercise  of  psalmody  and  music,  and  the  spiritual  interests  of  men,  were  becoming  a 
power  to  influence  the  national  life  in  days  to  come.  The  extent  and  strength  of 
that  influence  cannot  be  minutely  traced,  because  of  its  spiritual  nature ;  but  the 
higher  tone  of  national  life  during  the  reigns  of  David  and  Solomon  was  doubtless 
largely  due  to  it.  Centres  of  sjnritual  vnfiuence  are  formed  when  the  great  political 
world  is  intent  on  its  wars  and  intrigues.  Notably,  Christianity  arose  and  found  its 
first  nourishment  amidst  the  quiet  valleys  and  hills  of  Palestine  while  Boman  impe- 
rialism was  intent  on  conquests  and  ignorant  almost  of  its  existence.  The  band  of 
men  and  women  who  met  for  prayer  in  an  upper  room  (Acts  i.  13,  14)  cultivated 
there  the  power  which  afterwards  penetrated  into  all  parts  of  the  Boman  empire. 
The  quiet  retreats  and  colleges  of  the  middle  ages  in  some  respects  were  the  seats  of 
an  influence  which  the  world  could  ill  spare.  During  the  close  of  the  last  century 
small  bodies  of  Christians  nourished  here  and  there  the  missionary  spirit  which  has 
since  affected  the  destinies  of  millions  in  the  East  and  South.  Amidst  all  the  con- 
flicts of  politics  and  controversies  of  science  and  worry  of  commerce  there  are  quiet 
fellowships  of  Christians  devoted  to  the  nourishment  of  a  life  destined  to  conserve 
and  elevate  the  national  life.  The  Christian  Church  has  tieed  to  form  and  sustain 
"  schools  of  the  prophets "  to  meet  the  demands  of  the  age.  Samuel's  course  and 
the  injunctions  of  Paul  to  Timothy  (1  Tim.  iii.  1—7 ;  v.  21,  22 ;  2  Tim.  iL  4 ;  cf. 
Ephes.  iv.  11 — 15)  suggest  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the  Church  as  a  whole,  and  not  to 
be  left  as  a  private  enterprise  to  a  few  zealous  individuals,  to  provide  for  the  training 
of  men  for  spiritual  service.  Had  more  care  been  devoted  to  this  in  years  past  it 
had  been  well  for  the  world. 

II.  The  eorrowfui.  soin,  seeks  bbfuqe  from  thi  cabis  and  tbocblki  of  lifs 
IN  fellowship  with  the  dbvoiit.  It  was  a  spiritual  instinct  that  drew  David  to 
Samuel.  The  penalties  of  public  life  had  already  fallen  heavily  upon  him.  He  had 
found,  even  in  the  beginning  of  his  career  of  service  to  mankind,  that  "  offences 
must  needs  come."  The  whole  tone  of  life  around  the  throne  was  out  of  accord  with 
his  most  cherished  aspirations.  He  was  conscious  of  being  misvmdetstood  and  mis- 
represented. The  earlier  days  of  quiet  service  and  holy  communion  with  God  were 
now  but  sweet  memories,  bringing  the  bitter  realities  of  daily  life  into  stronger 
relief.  With  bounding  heart  and  rapid  flight,  therefore,  did  he  seek  consolation, 
counsel,  and  rest  with  the  honoured  man  who  once  anointed  him  to  some  unexplained 
service.  Many  liave  been,  and  still  are,  in  full  sympathy  with  the  troubled  David. 
The  devout  heart  is  brave,  and  dares  not  shun  to  fight  the  holy  battles  of  the  Lord  in 
daily  life.  Belig^on  is  to  flourish  in  face  of  evil  and  care,  and  not  away  in  solitude. 
The  business  of  life  must  not  be  left  to  the  greedy  and  the  vile.  The  great  prayer 
was  not  that  the  disciples  should  be  taken  from  the  world,  but  that  they  should  be 
kept  from  its  evil  (John  xvii.  16;  cf.  1  Cor.  v.  10).  Yet  human  nature  cries  out 
under  the  strain ;  the  spiritual  mind  is  disgusted  with  the  sins  it  witnesses ;  the 
sense  of  belonging  to  a  higher  citizenship  rises  in  force;  sympathy  with  kindred 
spirits  is  longed  for;  the  support  of  stronger  natures  is  a  pressing  need  ;  and  oppor- 
tunities for  prayer  and  for  contemplation  on  the  loftier  aims  of  life  are  earnestly 
desired.  Under  this  common  inspiration,  Jacob  and  Moses  and  Elijah  sought  each 
his  "  Bethel,"  and  found  strength  for  the  coming  trials  and  relief  from  present  oares. 
It  was  in  the  same  participation  in  human  infirmities  and  sorrows  that  Christ  loved 
to  retire  from  the  alien  world  to  seek  solace  with  his  Father  and  with  his  people 

glatt.  liv.  23 ;  xvii.  1 ;  Mark  vi.  31 ;  John  xi.  3,32—36 ;  xii.  1,2 ;  Heb.  v.  7).  For 
e  same  reason  we  love  to  retire  from  the  turmoil  of  life  to  the  fellowship  of  a 


968  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xn.  1—3^ 

pious  home,  »  meeting  for  prayer  and  connsel,  and  the  aervlce  of  the  aanotnary.  It 
18  helpful  to  court  occasional  retirement.  The  "  communion  of  sainta "  ahonld  b* 
more  than  an  article  in  our  creed. 

III.    A  DlTINB    BE8TBAINT   IS   PUT   ON   THE   ENBMIB8   OF  GOD'S    8IBTANTS.       Sanl'l 

wicked  desperation  was  great  when  he  sent  to  Naioth  to  take  David,  and  at  its  highest 
pitch  when,  after  three  despatches  of  men,  he  ventured  to  go  to  the  abode  of  Samuel 
on  a  cmel  errand.  Hitherto  Saul  appeared  to  be  fighting  solely  against  David ;  but 
now  that  the  mysterious  spirit  of  prophecy  came  upon  his  messengers  and  rendered 
them  harmless,  it  ought  to  have  been  obvious  to  him  that  in  persecuting  David  he 
was  at  war  with  Ood.  The  knowledge  of  this  mysterious  restraint  on  them  could 
Tint  but  add  to  his  mental  confusion,  though  it  was  not  sufficient  to  the  subjugation 
of  his  wild  passion.  Tet  Saul  was  not  bereft  of  reason ;  and  could  he  have  toavelled 
to  Bamah  on  such  an  errand  without  passing  in  review  events  prior  and  subsequent 
to  his  last  intercourse  with  Samuel  ?  (ch.  xv.  26 — 35).  Must  he  not  have  gone  back 
in  thought  to  the  fearful  day  when  the  prophet  declared  the  doom  of  his  reign ;  the 
earlier  .days  when  as  king  he  received  the  cheers  ot  the  people  and  the  instruc- 
tions of  the  prophet  (ch.  z.  24, 26)  ;  and  the  still  earlier  time  when,  fresh  from  hia 
anointing,  on  meeting  a  band  of  prophets,  the  spirit  of  prophecy  came  on  him  and 
turned  mm  into  another  man  ?  (ch.  x.  6—9).  And  now,  after  long  separation,  he 
was  drawing  near  to  that  revered  man  of  God  and  the  company  of  the  prophets,  not 
the  former  Saul,  full  of  hope  and  courage,  but  a  man  sinkmg  deeper  and  deeper  in 
sin,  and  with  only  the  courage  bred  of  remorse.  If  he  waa  to  be  restrained  and 
rendered  harmless,  what  more  natural  method — more  in  harmony  with  the  character- 
istics of  the  age  and  locality,  and  the  psychological  facts — ^than  that  for  a  season  the 
old  prophetic  excitement  should  come  upon  him?  It  is  no  solitary  fact  that  the 
mental  and  moral  atmosphere  of  a  place  exercises  power  over  men.  The  main  truth, 
hvwever,  is  that  God  restrains.^  Divine  restraint  enters  into  all  things.  The  nature 
of  things  is  but  their  limit  assigned  by  God.  The  original  relation  of  forces  in  the 
physical  world  is  so  settled  by  God  that  their  interaction  shall  be  bounded  by  definite 
results.  To  every  effect  wrought  out  in  the  development  of  the  material  universe  it 
has  been  virtually  said,  "  Thus  far  shalt  thou  go,  and  no  farther."  Scripture  makes 
known  the  restraint  which  God  puts  on  hearts  and  on  moral  beings.  Lions  dare  not 
touch  a  Daniel.  Evil  spirits  beg  permission  of  Christ  before  they  can  go  forth. 
Men  sent  to  seize  the  Saviour  were  unable  to  fulfil  their  mission  (John  vii.  46),  and 
soldiers  were  powerless  in  his  presence  (John  xviii.  3—6).  The  history  of  the 
Church  and  of  individual  Christian  life  brings  out  instances  of  the  restraining  power 
which  silently  lays  hold  of  man  and  renders  his  enmity  innocuous.  "  It  shall  not 
come  nigh  thee  "  (Ps.  xci.  7)  has  often  been  verified.  In  all  these  instances  we  have 
but  glimpses  of  that  unseen  Power  by  which  in  due  time  all  principalities  and  powers, 
and  whatever  opposeth  itself  to  God  and  his  Church,  shall  be  either  turned  unto  him 
or  deprived  of  their  power  of  injury  (Isa.  xi.  9 ;  xxxv.  9,  10 ;  1  Oor.  xv.  24 — ^26 ; 
PhiL  u.  9—11 :  Col.  L  19,  90 ;  Bev.  xxi.  22—27). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTH0B8. 

t^erB.! — 7.  (Gibeah,) — The  proof  of  true  friendihip.  Adversity  is  the  tonchstone 
of  friendship,  as  of  many  other  things ;  and  its  expenence,  sooner  or  later,  is  certain. 
Notwithstanding  the  secret  jealousy  and  plotting  of  Ss'il,  the  prosperity  of  David 
continued  to  increase ;  and  at  length,  unable  to  endure  the  sight  of  it,  he  "  spoke  to 
Jonathan  his  son,  and  to  all  his  servants,  about  killing  David."  Persons  in  high 
places  are  generally  attended  by  some  men  who,  like  Doeg  (ch.  xxi.  7 ;  xiii.  22)  and 
Cush  (Ps.  vii.,  inscription),  are  ready  to  carry  out  their  evil  wishes.  The  danger  of 
David  was  now  imminent.  And  with  the  revelation  of  it  to  him  by  Jonathan  his 
troubles  began.  Whilst  adversity  shows  the  insincerity  and  worthlessness  of  false 
friends,  it  also  shows  the  sincerity  and  worth  of  true.  "  In  adverse  hours  the  friend- 
ship of  the  good  shines  most."    The  proof  of  true  friendship  appears  in — 

I.  The  steadfastness  op  its  attachment.  "Jonathan  deli^htwi  much  in  David." 
Notwithstanding — I.  Misrepresentation  oh  the  part  of  enemies.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  Saul  spoke  of  David  as  treaohwonaly  aimit^  at  the  throne.    The  moa^ 


OB.  XTX.  1—24.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  869 

of  others  were  full  of  detraction  and  calumny,  by  which  they  sought  to  destroy  him 
as  with  sharp  swords  (Ps.  lix.  7).  2.  Urgent  claims  on  the  part  of  friends  and 
kindred.  A  father's  wishes  are  sometimes  opposed  to  a  friend's  welfare.  3.  Self- 
imterest.  If  David  were  spared  Jonathan's  accession  to  the  throne  would  be  jeopardised 
(ch.  xxi.  13).  But  true  friendship  stands  the  test.  It  "  thinketh  no  evil "  of  a  friend, 
will  do  him  no  wrong,  nor  admit  the  least  feeling  of  jealousy  or  envy.  The  wintry 
storm  only  serves  to  strengthen  its  attachment.  "  Yet  these  two  charges  of  incon- 
stancy and  of  weakness  condemn  most  men :  either  in  their  prosperity  they  despise  a 
friend,  or  in  his  troubles  they  desert  him  "  (Cicero). 

II.  The  faithfulness  op  its  communications.  "  And  Jonathan  told  David,"  &c. 
(vers.  2,  8).  1.  It  reveals  the  whole  truth  and  conceals  nothing.  "  If  you  think  any 
one  your  friend  in  whom  you  do  not  put  the  same  confidence  as  in  yourself  you  know 
not  the  real  power  of  friendship  "  (Seneca).  2.  It  gives  the  best  counsel  in  its  power. 
3.  It  promises  aid  as  it  may  be  needed. 

III.  The  belf-dbvotion  of  its  endeavours.  "And  Jonathan  spake  good  of 
David,"  &c.  (vers.  4,  5).  1.  It  nndeTgoea  personal  risk  in  undertaking  the  cause  of 
«  friend.  2.  It  makes  earnest  entreaty  on  behalf  of  the  absent  one ;  asserting  his 
innocence,  enumerating  his  services,  setting  forth  his  claims  upon  gratitude  and 
esteem,  and  remonstrating  against  his  being  injured  "  without  cause  "  (ver.  5 ;  John 
XV.  25).  3.  It  shows  a  prudent  and  respectful  regard  for  those  whom  it  wishes  to 
influence.  In  Jonathan  prudence  and  pnnciple  were  combined.  "  Prudence  did  not 
go  so  far  as  to  make  him  silent  about  the  sin  which  Saul  was  purposing  to  commit ; 
principle  was  not  so  asserted  as  to  arouse  his  father's  indignation     (W.  M.  Taylor). 

IV.  The  VALUE  of  its  achievements.  "  And  Saul  hearkened,"  &c.  (vers.  6,  7). 
"  How  forcible  are  right  words  I "  Even  the  heart  of  Saul  is  moved,  and  his  better 
feelings  gain  the  ascendancy.  How  often  by  a  generous  and  prudent  attempt  at 
peace-making  is — 1.  A  threatening  eml  averted.  2.  A  reconciliation  of  the  alienated 
eflEected.  3.  Intercourse  between  friends  renewed,  "  as  in  times  past"  "  Blessed 
are  the  peacemakers,"  &c.  (Matt.  v.  9).  "There  are  four,  young  man"  (says  an 
Eastern  sage),  "  who,  seeming  to  be  friends,  are  enemies  in  disguise — the  rapacious 
friend,  the  man  of  much  profession,  the  flatterer,  and  the  dissolute  companion.  These 
four,  young  man,  are  true  friends — the  watchful  friend,  the  friend  who  is  the  same  in 
prosperity,  and  adversity,  the  friend  who  gives  good  advice,  and  the  sympathising 
friend"  ('Contem.  Eev.,'  xxvii.  421).— D. 

Vers.  8 — 18.  (Gibeah.)— ZJaw'cP*  escape  from  court.  "And  David  fled,  and  escaped 
that  night"  (ver.  10).  "There  was  war  again"  (ch.  xvii. ;  xviii.  5,  30),  victory  by 
David  again,  an  evil  spirit  upon  Saul  again  (ch.  xvi.  23 ;  xviii.  10)  ;  and,  as  David 
once  more  sat  in  the  palace,  "  playing  with  his  hand,"  the  king  not  merely  brandished 
his  spear  as  before,  but  hurled  it  at  him.  It  was  his  last  attempt  of  the  kind.  After 
what  had  taken  place  he  might  not  be  trusted  again ;  and  David  fled,  first  to  his  own 
house,  and  during  the  night  from  the  city.  It  is  one  of  the  memorable  nights  of  the 
Bible.  1,  That  night  was  the  commencement  of  his  open  persecution  hy  Saul,  and 
of  the  long  and  varied  troubles  he  experienced  as  an  outlaw.  He  had  been  at  court 
some  three  or  four  years,  and  now  at  three-and-twenty  went  forth  to  his  seven  years' 
wanderings  (2  Sam.  v.  6:  "  He  lived  seventy  years" — Josephus).  2.  That  night  was, 
as  is  commonly  thought,  the  occasion  of  the  composition  of  the  first  of  Davids 
psahns.  Psalm  lix.,  'the  refuge  of  the  persecuted,'  "is  perhaps  the  oldest  of  the 
Davidic  psalms  that  have  come  down  to  us "  (Delitzsch).  It  is  not  necessary  to 
suppose  that  it  was  actually  written  on  the  night  of  his  escape.  The  thoughts  and 
feelings  then  entertained  may  have  been  penned  subsequently ;  perhaps  while  h« 
continued  at  Bamah  with  Samuel  and  "  the  prophets  "  (vers.  18,  20).  Other  psalms 
have  been  referred  by  some  to  the  same  occasion — ^viz.,  Ps.  vi.,  vii.,  xi.  "  His  harp 
was  his  companion  in  his  flight,  and  even  iB  the  midst  of  peril  the  poet's  nature 
appears  which  regards  all  life  as  materials  for  song,  and  the  devout  spirit  appears 
which  regards  all  trials  as  occasions  of  praise  "  (Maclaren).  How  wide  ana  deep 
was  the  stream  of  sacred  song  of  which  this  was  the  commencement  I  3.  That  night 
afforded  one  of  the  most  remarkable  instances  of  the  protecting  and  guiding  prov^ 
dence  of  God  by  whioh  the  life  of  David  was  manifestly  ordered.    Notic*— 


870  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oH.  m,  1— J4. 


I.  His  danqee,  and  the  anxiety  and  distress  by  which  it  was  naturally  attended 
(vers.  11,  14,  17,  compared  with  Ps.  lix.).  Adversity — 1.  Often  follows  closely 
upon  prosperity.  In  the  morning  David  occupied  a  position  of  high  honour  as  the 
king's  son-in-law,  the  successful  general,  the  popular  hero ;  at  night  he  was  hiding  in 
secret  and  fleeing  for  his  life.  Vicissitude  is  the  law  of  life  ;  and  none,  however 
exalted,  may  boast  of  their  security  or  continuance  (Job  xxix.  18).  2.  Appears  some- 
times to  fall  most  heavily  upon  the  godly  man.  "  Not  for  my  transgression  nor  for 
my  sin"  (Ps.  lix.  3).  Why  should  it  be  permitted?  To  test,  manifest,  strengthen, 
and  perfect  his  character.  David  had  been  tried  by  prosperity,  he  must  also  be  tried 
by  adversity.  3.  Is  due,  in  great  measure,  to  the  opposition  and  persecution  of  the 
ungodly.  What  a  picture  is  here  presented  of  the  enemies  of  David,  "when  Saul 
sent  messengers,  and  they  watched  the  house  to  kill  him  "  I  (Ps.  lix.  3,  6,  14).  And 
what  a  revelation  does  it  make  of  the  wickedness  of  the  human  heart,  which  was 
consummated  in  the  crucifying  of  the  Lord  of  glory  I  "  As  then  he  that  was  bom 
after  the  flesh,"  &c.  (Gal.  iv.  29).  The  conflict  is  renewed  in  every  age  and  in  every 
individual  life.  "  All  that  will  live  godly,"  &c.  (2  Tim.  iii.  12).  4.  Leads  the  good 
man  to  more  entire  trust  in  Ood  and  more  earnest  prayer.  This  i*  one  of  its  chief 
purposea. 

"  Deliver  me  from  mine  enemies,  O  my  God  I  .  ■  • 
O  Jehovah,  God  of  hosts,  God  of  Israel  I  .  .  ,  , 
O  my  Strength,  on  thee  will  I  wait, 
For  God  is  my  Fortress." 

6.  It  never  ro  bitter  to  him  as  trouble  to  the  wicked,  for  he  has  peace  within  and 
undying  hope.  How  different  was  it  with  David  in  this  respect  from  what  it  was 
with  Saul  I  6.  However  long  the  good  man  may  suiter  from  the  persecution  of  the 
wicked,  his  deliverance  is  certain;  for  "God  is  Ruler  in  Jacob,"  &c.  (Ps.  lix.  13). 
"  By  hira  actions  are  weighed." 

II.  His  deliverance  (vers.  11,  12,  17,  18).  The  interposition  of  Providence,  to 
which  it  was  due — 1.  Is  not  made  without  the  watchful  and  diligent  use  of  appro- 
priate means.  David  did  not  presumptuously  wait  in  the  palace  or  his  own  house, 
but  availed  himself  of  the  opportunity  of  escaping.  "  When  they  persecute  you," 
&c.  (Matt.  X.  23).  2.  Is  shown  in  turning  iog'ooti  what  was  meant  for  evil.  The 
snare  that  was  woven  for  his  soul  (ch.  xvh.  21 ;  ver.  11 ;  Ps.  lix.  3)  aided  his  escape. 
3.  Often  fills  the  wicked  with  disappointment  and  confusion  when  most  confident  of 
success  (ver.  17).  4.  Provides  a  home  for  the  good  man  when  driven  out  of  their 
society.  "  Came  to  Samuel  and  told  him  all,"  &c.  That  night  he  was  received  by  his 
revered  friend,  to  whose  instructions  he  had  doubtless  often  listened ;  and  with 
whom  else  could  he  have  found  such  sympathy  and  shelter?  6.  Causes  him  to  ren<2er 
praw«  to  Ood. 

"  But,  as  for  me,  I  will  sing  of  thy  strength, 
Tea,  1  will  shout  aloud  of  thy  mercy  in  the  momingi 
For  thou  hast  been  a  Fortress  to  me, 
And  a  Refuge  in  the  day  when  I  was  in  distreaa  i 
O  my  Strength,  unto  thee  will  I  harp, 
For  God  is  my  Fortress,  my  merciful  God." 

6.  Conduces  to  the  benefit  of  many.  These  Psalms  of  David — the  result  (under  "  an 
unction  from  the  Holy  One  ")  of  his  distresses  and  deliverances — are  among  our 
greatest  spiritual  treasures.  "  They  are  for  all  time.  They  never  can  be  outgrown.  No 
dispensation  while  the  world  lasts  and  continues  what  it  is  can  ever  raise  us  above 
the  reach  or  the  need  of  them.  They  describe  every  spiritual  vicissitude,  they  speak 
to  all  classes  of  minds,  they  command  every  natural  emotion.  They  are  penitential, 
jubilant,  adorative,  deprecatory ; — they  are  tender,  mournful,  joyous,  majestic ; — soft 
as  the  descent  of  dew  ;  low  as  the  whisper  of  love  ;  loud  as  the  voice  of  thunder ; 
terrible  as  the  almightiness  of  God  1 "  (Binney,  '  Service  of  Song  in  the  House  of 
the  Lord ').— D. 

Vers.  11 — 17.  (Gibeah.) — Michal.  The  women  mentioned  in  the  Books  of  Samuel 
are,  for  the  moat  part,  distinguiBhed  for  their  eminent  piety.    But  what  siuJl  b»  isaid 


OH.  xa.  1—24.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  871 

o£  Michal,  the  wife  of  David?  She  was  a  daugliter  of  Saul,  inherited  much  of  hia 
temperament  and  disposition,  and  (unlike  Jonathan)  was  without  the  religious  prin- 
ciple by  which  they  might  have  been  controlled  and  sanctified.  She  was — 1.  Impree- 
sionable  and  impidsive.  Fascinated  by  his  personal  ajipearance  iind  popularity,  the 
young  princess  "loved  David,"  and  made  no  secret  of  her  affection;  but  she  does 
not  appear  to  have  perceived  anything  of  his  highest  qualities.  The  relation  of 
husband  and  wife,  no  less  than  that  of  friends,  is  firmest  when  sanctified  by  common 
faith  and  love  toward  God.  2.  Ccmable  of  a  noble  action.  Under  the  influence  of 
strong  feeling  she  warned  David  of  his  danger  and  aided  his  escape,  at  the  risk  of 
her  own  life.  3.  Designing  and  deceptive.  Her  quick-wittedness  devised  the  means 
of  escape,  deceived  the  messengers  of  Saul  to  gain  time,  and  invented  a  ready  story 
to  disarm  her  father's  wrath.  Her  fear  of  her  father  was  greater  than  her  love  for 
truth ;  and  her  love  for  her  husband  greater  than  her  hatred  of  sin.  "  She  could  tell 
lies  for  David,  but  she  had  not  the  courage  and  the  faith  to  go  with  him  into  suffer- 
ing, or  to  tell  the  truth  for  him "  (W.  M.  Taylor).  4.  Superstitious.  Teraphim 
(ch.  XV.  23).  See  Bible  Dictionaries.  It  is  not  said  that  David  knew  of  her  posses- 
sion of  these  idolatrous  objects.  6.  Changeable  and  wayward.  During  the  wander- 
ings of  David  she  was  given  in  marriage  to  Phalti,  apparently  without  reluctance 
(ch.  XXV.  44)  ;  and  (as  appears  when  restored  to  David)  "she  had  evidently  gained 
his  affections;  he  most  likely  had  won  hers"  (2  Sam.  iii.  16).  6.  Proud,  jealous, 
and  scamful.  Proud  of  her  birth  and  rank,  jealous  of  her  rivals,  Abigail  and 
Ahinoam  (2  Sam.  vi.  16,  20 — 23 ;  Blunt, '  Script.  Coincidences,'  p.  126),  and  •oomf  ul 
toward  her  husband.     "  She  despised  him  in  her  heart." 

"  Preceding  the  blest  vessel,  onward  came, 
With  light  dance  leaping,  girt  in  humble  (jiiise 
Israel's  sweet  harper ;  in  that  hap  he  seemed 
Less  and  yet  more  kmgly.     Opposite 
At  a  great  palace,  from  the  lattice  forth 
Looked  Michal,  like  a  lady  full  of  scorn 
And  sorrow"  (Dante,  'Purg.'  x.). 

7.  UnspirituaZ,  and  destitute  of  sympathy  with  the  feelings  of  boundless  gratitnde^ 
joy,  and  adoration  expressed  before  the  Lord. — D. 

Ver.  20.  (Bamah.) — Samuel  the  president.  Of  Samuel  one  more  glimpse  is 
afforded  before  his  life  closes.  After  his  separation  from  Saul  he  appears  to  have 
devoted  himself  to  the  training  of  a  body  of  younger  men  to  carry  on  his  prophetic . 
work.  The  flight  of  David  to  him  shows  that  an  intimate  relationship  had  previously 
subsisted  between  them.  He  went  to  him  for  counsel  and  sanctuary,  and  the  inter- 
course of  the  young  hero  with  the  old  prophet  is  full  of  suggestion.  Samuel  might 
have  advised  him  to  make  armed  resistance  against  the  godless  tyranny  of  Saul ;  in 
which,  with  his  great  popularity,  he  might  have  succeeded,  but  only  at  the  cost  of  • 
long  and  ruinous  civil  war.  As  at  the  rejection  of  Saul  he  avoided  violent  measures 
in  support  of  the  theocracy,  so  now  he  counselled  the  same  course,  and  took  David 
with  him  from  his  own  house  to  Naioth  (dwellings),  or  the  common  residence  of 
"  the  company  of  the  prophets "  (ch.  x.  10),  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bamah.  It 
was  the  chief  home  of  order,  light,  and  religion ;  the  centre  of  spiritual  influence. 
"  He  found  there  only  temporary  safety,  indeed,  from  Saul's  persecution,  but  abiding 
consolation  and  strength  m  the  inspired  prophetic  word,  in  the  blessings  of  the 
fraternal  community,  and  in  the  consoling  and  elevating  power  of  the  holy  poetic  art, 
whereby  he  doubtless  stood  in  peculiarly  intimate  connection  with  the  community ' 
(Erdmann).  "  God  intended  to  make  David  not  a  warrior  and  a  king  only,  but  s 
prophet  too.  As  the  field  fitted  him  for  the  first  and  the  court  for  the  second,  so 
Naioth  shall  fit  him  for  the  third"  (Hall).  How  long  he  continued  is  not  stated; 
but,  on  hearing  of  his  refuge,  Saul  sent  three  times  to  take  him  by  force,  and  ulti- 
mately went  himself  for  the  purpose.  The  messengers  found  an  assembly  {lahak, 
nsed  here  only,  probably  by  a  transposition  of  letters,  i.  q.  hahal — Gesenius)  of  pro- 
phets engaged  in  religious  exercises  under  the  presidency  of  SamueL  It  is  not 
DsoesMiy  to  suppose  that  the  service,  which  may  have  had  •  special  character,  was 

bb2 


3'?3  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  las.  xix.  1—24. 

conducted  in  a  large  hall,  though  there  may  have  been  such ;  it  was  probably  in  the 
open  air,  and  capable  of  being  seen  and  heard  from  a  distance  (ver.  23).  With 
respect  more  particularly  to  Samuel,  notice — 

I.  His  honoured  position — "standing  as  appointed  over  thein,"  or  as  leader;  not 
probably  appointed  by  any  official  act  of  theirs,  but  generally  recognized  and 
honoured,  and  directing  their  holy  exercises.  The  honour  in  which  he  was  held  was 
due  to— 1.  The  pre-eminent  aut?K>riti/he  possessed  as  a  prophet  of  the  Lord  (ch.  iii. 
19).  3.  The  high  character  he  had  so  long  sustained  in  that  office,  and  the  course  of 
labour  he  had  pursued.  3.  The  special  work  he  had  accomplished  in  gathering 
around  him  such  young  men  as  seemed  to  be  qualified  by  their  gifts  and  piety  to  act 
as  prophets  in  Israel,  and  forming  them  into  a  school  or  cUege  (  f  p  ophets.  He 
was  the  venerable  founder  of  their  order,  and  reaped  the  reward  of  his  labours  in 
their  reverence  and  affection,  and  still  more  in  their  devotion  to  Jehovah  and  their 
zeal  for  his  honour. 

II.  His  peophbtio  associatbb.  They  were  "  prophets,"  not  "  sons  "  or  disciples 
"  of  the  prophets  "  (3  Kings  ii.  3),  who  seem  to  have  occupied  in  later  times  a  more 
dependent  and  inferior  position.  They  were  a  union  or  free  association  of  men 
"  endowed  with  the  Spirit  of  God  for  the  purpose  of  carrying  on  tbeir  work,  the 
feeble  powers  of  junior  members  being  directed  and  straightened  by  those  of  a 
higher  class  "  (Kitto,  'Cyc.  of  Bib.  Lit').  Among  them  probably  were  Gad  (ch. 
xxii.  5 ;  3  Sam.  xxiv.  11),  Nathan  (3  Sam.  vii.  3 ;  xii.  1),  and  Heman,  the  grandson 
of  SamueHl  Chron.  vi  33;  xxv.  5;  "the  king's  seer,"  &c.).  1.  They  had  been 
under  his  instrtuition  in  the  knowledge  of  God  and  his  law,  and.  as  subservient  to 
this,  in  reading  and  writing,  poetry,  music,  and  singing.  "Education  is  not  a 
panacea  for  all  human  ills,  but  it  is  an  indispensable  condition  both  of  individual  and 
of  natural  progress  ('  Expositor,'  iii.  344).  3.  Thoy  were  in  sympathy  with  his 
purposes  concerning  the  true  welfare  of  the  people  of  Israel,  and  strove  to  carry 
them  into  effect.  They  formed  "  a  compact  phalanx  to  stand  against  the  corruption 
which  had  penetrated  so  deeply  into  the  nation,  and  to  bring  back  the  rebellious  to 
the  law  ana  the  testimony  "  (Keil).  3  They  were  endowed,  like  Samuel  himself 
with  a  particular  measure  of  the  Divine  Spirit  for  the  accomplishment  of  their  work. 
By  his  influence  they  were  drawn  together,  variously  gifted,  and  sometimes  impelled 
to  ecstatic  utterances, 

III.  His  devout  occupation.  He  presided  over  the  prophets,  and  took  part  with 
them  in  "prophesying,"  or  uttering  with  a  loud  voice  the  praises  of  God.  His  last 
recorded  act  was  one  of  worship,  and  under  his  influence  David's  intense  love  for 
public  worship  was  probably  acquired.  The  service  was — 1.  Accompanied  with 
music  (as  in  ch.  x.  10).  "  A  principal  part  of  their  occupation  consisted — under 
the  guidance  of  some  prophet  of  superior  authority,  and  more  peculiarly  under  the 
Divineinfluence,  as  moderator  and  preceptor — in  celebrating  the  praises  of  Almighty 
God,  in  hymns  and  poetry,  with  choral  chaunts,  accompanied  by  stringed  instruments 
and  pipes  "  (Lowth)  3.  Edifying.  Whilst  their  utterance  expressed  their  inward 
feeling  it  was  also  the  means  of  teaching  and  exhorting  one  another,  and  of 
"awakening  holy  susceptibilities  and  emotions  in  the  soul,  and  of  lifting  up  the 
spirit  to  God,  and  so  preparing  it  for  the  reception  of  Divine  revelations."  3.  United, 
which  tends  by  the  power  of  sympathy  to  intensify  feeling,  strengthen  faith,  enlaree 
desire,  and  perfect  those  dispositions  in  connection  with  which  worship  is  acceptable 
to  God. 

IV.  His  powerful  inpluenob.  "  The  Spirit  of  God  came  upon  the  messengers," 
&c.  The  immediate  effect  was  to  transform  these  men,  to  protect  David  from  their 
power,  and  to  afford  a  sign  of  the  opposition  of  God  to  the  designs  of  Saul.  More 
generally,  the  influence  of  Samuel  was  put  forth  in  and  through  the  "company  of 
prophets"  for — 1.  The  maintenance  of  the  principle  of  the  theocracy,  which  was 
imperilled  by  the  conduct  of  Saul  The  prophets  were  its  true  representatives  and 
upholders  in  every  subsequent  age.  2.  The  elevation  of  the  people  in  wisdom  and 
righteousness.  Their  work  was  to  teach,  reprove,  and  exhort  those  with  whom  they 
came  into  contact ;  and  "  through  such  a  diffusion  of  prophetic  training  the  higher 
truths  of  prophecy  must  have  been  most  rapidly  diffused  among  the  people,  and  a 
new  and  higher  life  formed  in  the  nation  "  (Ewald).   3.  The  prepa/ration  of  men  for 


tm  fix.  1—24.]  THE  PIE8T  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  «7« 

a  better  time — the  advent  of  Christ,  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  procIamsF 
tion  of  the  gospel.  The  prophets,  not  the  priests,  were  the  true  foramnners  of  th« 
gospel  ministry. — D.  • 

Vers.  22 — 24.  (Bamab.^ — 77ie  meeting  of  three  remarkable  men.  Thii  appe&rs  to 
have  been  the  only  occasion  on  which  Samuel,  Saul,  and  David  were  present  at  the 
same  time  and  place.  The  mepting  was  a  notable  oije,  and  may  be  compared  with 
others  (Exod.  x.  16 ;  1  Kings  xviii.  16 ;  Acts  xxv.  24).  Besides  the  three  men  just 
mentioned,  there  was  also  present  One  infinitely  greater,  and,  although  invisible,  his 
power  was  displayed  in  a  marvellous  manner.  Considered  in  relation  to  the  Divine 
power,  the  narrative  sets  before  us — 

I.  An  aged  frofhet  .  imbued  with  fbabless  dionitt.  His  danger  was  great. 
What  Saul  might  do  may  be  judged  from  the  fear  which  Samuel  expressed  on  a 
former  occasion  (oh.  xvi.  2),  and  from  what  he  actually  did  not  long  afterwards  (ch. 
xxii.  18,  19).  But  the  prophet  went  on  with  his  holy  service  calm  and  undismayed. 
He  was  inwardly  sustained  by  Divine  power,  as  others  have  since  been  in  danger 
and  suffering  (Acts  xvi.  25).  Such  fearlessness  is  possessed  by  God's  servants  in 
connection  with — 1.  A  firm  persuasion  that  they  are  in  the  path  of  dwty.  They  have 
within  "  a  peace  above  all  earthly  dignities,  a  still  and  quiet  conscience. **  If 
oonacience  "  does  make  cowards  of  as  all,"  it  idso  makes  as  heroes.     And 

**  He  that  hath  light  within  his  own  clear  breast 
May  lit  in  the  centre  and  enjoy  bright  day  ; 
But  he  that  hides  a  dark  aoul  and  foul  thoughts 
Benighted  walks  nnder  the  midday  son  "  (Milton,  'Oomni'). 

2.  A  vivid  realisation  of  the  presence  and  might  of  the  Lord.  Faith  "  sees  him  who 
is  invisible  "  and  "  the  mountain  full  of  horses  and  chariots  of  fire  "  (2  Kings  vi.  17). 

3.  A  strong  assurance  of  deliverance  from  their  adversaries. 

II.  A   PERSECUTING  MONARCH   TURNED   INTO  A  HARMLESS  ENTHUSIAST.     The  Divine 

power  was  exerted  first  upon  Saul's  messengers  and  then  upon  himself.  In  a  some- 
what similar  manner,  if  not  to  the  same  extent,  it  is  often  exerted  upon  evil  and 
persecuting  men — 1.  In  connection  with  the  utterances  of  the  praises  of  God  by  his 
servants  (2  Chron.  xx.  22  ;  Ps.  cxlix.  6).  Instances  are  not  unknown  in  which  "one 
that  believeth  not "  has  come  into  their  assembly,  and,  hearing  their  praises,  has  fallen 
down  on  his  face  and  worshipped  God  (1  Cor.  xiv.  24,  25).  This  was  not  the  first 
time  that  Saul  was  so  afEected,  and  the  recollection  of  his  earlier  experience  had 
probably  some  influence  upon  him.  But  then  it  was  a  sign  that  the  power  of  God 
was  for  him,  nov)  that  it  was  against  him.  2.  In  order  to  restrain  the  wicked  from 
carrying  out  their  evil  designs.  He  who  holds  the  hearts  of  men  in  his  hand  thereby 
«ays,  "  Do  my  prophets  no  harm  "  (1  Chron.  xvi.  22).  3.  In  order  to  restore  them  to 
the  right  way.  It  was  to  Saul  more  than  a  warning  that  he  was  fighting  against 
God.  "  He  was  seized  by  this  mighty  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  a  more 
powerful  manner  than  his  servants  were,  both  because  he  had  most  obstinately 
resisted  the  leadings  of  Divine  grace,  and  also  in  order  that,  if  it  were  possible,  his 
hard  heart  might  he  broken  and  subdued  by  the  power  of  grace.  If,  however,  he 
should  nevertheless  continue  obstinately  in  his  rebellion  against  God,  he  would  then 
fall  under  the  judgment  of  hardening,  which  would  be  speedily  followed  by  his 
destruction  "  (Keil). 

III.  An   INNOCENT   FUQITIVI   EESCUED   FBOM   IMPENDING  DEBTBUCTIOH.      David  Was 

saved  from  the  hand  of  Saul,  and  even  (as  it  would  appear)  formally  reconciled  to 
him  (ch.  XX.  18,  27).  The  putting  forth  of  the  power  of  God  was  to  him — 1.  An 
indication  of  the  varied  and  abundant  resourcet  of  God  to  protect  in  the  greatest. peril 
2.  An  assurance  of  Divine  approbation  in  the  way  of  trust  and  obedience.  3.  An 
encouragement  to  patient  endurance.  He  might  be  tempted  to  reach  the  goal  for 
which,  as  he  was  now  probably  fully  aware,  he  was  destined  (ch.  xx.  16;  xxiii.  17) 
by  violent  measures ;  but  ever  as  he  thought  on  this  scene,  together  with  the  coonsel 
and  the  whole  course  of  the  venerable  prophet,  ha  would  feel  that  "  the  way  of  Older 
m  the  best," 


8T4  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xii.  1—24 

"  The  way  of  order,  though  it  lead  tlirough  windings, 
Is  the  best     Right  forward  goes  the  lightning 
And  the  cannon-ball  ;  quick,  by  the  nearest  path, 
They  come,  opening  with  murderous  crash  their  w%j 
To  blast  and  ruin  !     My  son,  the  quiet  road 
Which  men  frequent,  where  peace  and  blessings  travel, 
Follows  the  river's  course,  the  valley's  bendings  ; 
Modestly  skirts  the  corn-field  and  the  vineyard, 
Revering  property's  appointed  bounds, 

And  leading  safe,  though  slower,  to  the  mark  "  (Schiller,  '  Walleisteln'X 

D. 

Vers.  18 — U. — Religious  consolation  and  religious  excitement.  The  conBolation 
was  tasted  by  David  ;  the  excitement  was  shown  by  Saul. 

I.  CJoNSOLATiON.  We  are  not  surprised  to  learn  that  David,  when  driven  from  his 
honse  by  the  deadly  malice  of  the  king,  betook  himself  to  the  prophet  Samuel  at  Iiia 
residence  in  Hamah.  In  reporting  the  treatment  he  had  received  to  the  venerable 
prophet,  he  reported  it  to  God,  whose  authority  was  represented  by  Samuel.  The 
path  of  his  life  seemed  to  be  blocked  by  the  undeserved  ill-will  of  Saul.  Was  there 
any  further  instruction  for  liim  from  the  Lord?  There  is  no  evidence  that  Samuel 
had  held  any  communication  with  Dii  vid  from  the  time  of  his  visit  to  Bethlehem  to 
anoint  the  young  shepherd  ;  but  it  tniiy  be  assumed  that  he  had  kept  a  watchful  eye 
on  his  career,  and  prayed  much  for  a  youth  with  so  great  a  destiny.  Some  painter 
ought  to  show  us  their  meeting:  the  aged  prophet,  his  countenance  traced  with 
sorrow  for  his  own  unworthy  sons,  and  not  less  for  the  untoward  career  of  Saul, 
receiving  with  outstretched  arms  and  ready  sympathy  the  fugitive  David,  in  the  very 
perfection  of  his  gallant  youth,  yet  coming  with  weary  steps  and  dejected  visage. 
The  old  man  took  the  young  chief  to  shelter  with  him  in  Naioth,  where  was  a  settle- 
ment of  prophets — a  group  of  dwellings  where  servants  of  God  lived  in  retreat  and 
cultivated  sacred  song  and  fraternal  fellowship.  David  was  not  to  tarry  long  in  such 
a  refuge,  but  it  was  good  for  him  to  visit  it.  It  solaced  and  strengthened  his  spirit 
in  God.  Undisturbed  by  the  jealousies  of  the  court  and  the  dangerous  frenzy  of 
the  king,  surrounded  by  an  atmosphere  of  devotion,  mingling  not  merely  with  aged 
seers  like  Samuel,  but  also  with  young  men  of  his  own  age  whose  time  was  spent  in 
sacred  study  and  brightened  with  music  and  song,  David  must  have  been  in  his  best 
element.  He  was  a  good  soldier,  and  happy  at  the  head  of  his  troops,  charging  the 
Philistines.  But  he  was  still  more  a  thinker,  a  poet,  a  minstrel,  a  prophet,  a  man  of 
fervent  spirit  toward  God,  and  so  must  have  been  happier  in  the  goodly  fellowship 
of  the  prophets  at  Naioth  than  in  the  rush  of  battle  and  the  pride  of  victory.  There 
is  no  record  of  the  words  of  consolation  and  counsel  which  Samuel  spoke  to  him ; 
but  doubtless  we  have  traces  and  echoes  of  them  in  those  psalms  in  which  David  has 
discussed  the  afflictions  of  the  servants  of  Jehovah,  and  sung  of  their  ultimate 
deliverance  and  reward.  Ps.  lix.  is  traditionally  ascribed  to  the  period  when  the 
armed  men  sent  by  Saul  surrounded  David's  house  to  put  him  to  death.  As  it  is 
highly  artificial  in  structure,  it  can  hardly  have  been  composed  on  the  spur  of  the 
moment.  Very  probably  it  was  written  at  Naioth  while  the  impression  of  the  danger 
was  fresh,  and  was  sung  among  the  prophets  there.  In  the  case  of  David  we 
read  of  no  agitation  or  excitement.  It  would  be  little  surprising  if  he,  fleeing  for 
his  life,  had  been  overcome  by  emotion  when  he  found  himself  in  safeguard.  But 
all  we  read  of  hia  bearing  is  rational  and  calm. 

II.  Excitement.  It  was  in  the  servants  of  Saul,  and  subsequently  in  Saul  himself, 
that  a  religions  excitement  appeared.  Three  successive  bands  were  despatched  by 
the  king  to  seize  his  son-in-law,  but  with  a  strange  result.  As  each  band  saw  the 
venerated  Samuel  stand  forth  at  the  head  of  the  prophets,  they  feared  to  do  violence 
to  one  under  such  august  protection.  Niiy,  more ;  the  spiritual  enthusiasm  of  the 
prophets  communicated  itself  to  them  and  overmastered  them,  so  that  they  forgot 
their  errand  and  joined  in  the  burst  of  holy  song.  King  Saul  himself,  provoked  by 
the  failure  of  his  emissaries,  went  to  Naioth,  and  he  was  more  completely  over- 
powered than  they.  We  have  seen  already  that  his  temperament  was  exceedingly 
amenable  to  the  impressions  of  music  and  song.     We  remember  how  he  had  flung 


m.  XJX.  1—84.]  THB  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  171 

himself  among  the  prophets  in  the  very  outset  of  his  history ;  and  although  sadly 
deteriorated  in  character,  he  still  retained  his  early  sensibilities.  Indeed,  through  the 
Tery  disorder  of  his  faculties  he  had  become  more  susceptible  than  ever  of  religions 
excitement ;  so  -when  he  reached  Naioth  he  was  quite  beyond  himself.  The  spirit- 
nal  electricity  of  the  place  was  too  much  for  him,  and  he  fell  into  a  very  paroxysm 
of  enthusiasm.  At  first  ■when,  on  the  way  to  Naioth,  he  lifted  his  voice  in  some 
sacred  chant,  it  was  well,  and  the  historian  does  not  hesitate  to  say  that  "the  Spirit 
of  God  was  upon  him."  But  at  Naioth  he  behaved  like  a  fanatical  devotee  of  some 
heathen  god,  or  a  wild  dervish  of  the  East.  He  threw  ofE  his  royal  tunic,  and  after 
long  and  exhausting  exercise  of  body  and  spirit  lay  in  nothing  but  his  under-dress, 
prone  and  probably  motionless,  on  the  ground  for  "  all  that  day  and  all  that  night" 
But  though  "  among  the  prophets,"  he  was  not  of  them.  It  was  a  mere  fit  of  fervour 
soon  to  pass  away.  The  heart  of  Saul  was  by  this  time  hopelessly  "  jangled  and  out 
of  tune."  The  subject  of  temporary  religious  excitement  needs  to  be  carefully 
thought  out  and  discreetly  handled.  But  it  can  never  be  fully  explained — at  all 
events  not  till  more  is  known  of  the  action  of  the  nervous  system,  and  til!  more  light 
falls  on  the  mysterious  question  of  contagious  emotion  and  imitative  cerebral  stimu- 
lation. One  or  two  things,  however,  are  plain  enough,  and  deserve  to  be  noted ;  e.  g. — 
1.  There  is  a  religiows  excitation  which  carries  toiih  it  no  moral  influence  whatever. 
It  is  not  feigned  or  insincere.  He  who  is  the  subject  of  it  is  really  lifted  up  or  carried 
along  as  with  a  rush  of  earnest  feeling.  He  cries  for  mercy ;  he  prays  with  strong 
supplication  ;  or  he  sings  of  pardon  and  of  unutterable  joys.  His  emotions  are  all 
aglow,  and  his  brain  is  stirred  to  unusual  activity.  This  occurs  the  more  easily  if 
one  who  is  constitutionally  accessible  to  such  gusts  of  feeling  falls  among  others  who 
are  much  in  earnest.  He  finds  himself  where  prayers  burst  forth  from  importunate 
souls,  and  hymns  are  sung  with  a  swing  of  enthusiasm.  At  once  he  feels  as  those 
around  him  do.  Yet  there  is  no  change  of  his  moral  nature ;  he  is  merely  a  person 
of  susceptible  or  imitative  constitution,  who  has  caught  the  contagion  of  religion 
from  others,  yet  has  not  come,  and  may  never  come,  to  repentance.  It  is  not  for  a 
moment  to  be  denied  that  in  many  cases  a  real  moral  and  spiritual  change  is  produced 
in  the  midst  of  much  excitement ;  but  the  excitement  is  only  an  accompaniment  of 
the  change — perhaps  necessary  for  some  minds,  but  always  fraught  with  some  degree 
of  danger.  The  only  thing  of  lasting  value  is  the  exercise  of  conscience,  and  the 
turning  of  the  afEections  and  will  to  God  in  Christ.  2.  The  degree  in  which  new  reUoious 
emotion  overpowers  the  hody  is  generally  pr<^ortioned  to  the  ^eviows  ignorance  of  the 
miTid,  or  its  estrangement  from  God.  David  at  Naioth  fell  into  no  frenzy,  lay  m  no 
swoon,  because  he  was  a  man  of  God,  and  devout  feeling  flowed  through  him  unim- 
peded, found  in  him  a  congenial  heart.  But  Saul  had  been  in  an  evil  mood ;  envy 
and  murder  were  in  his  breast.  So,  when  a  pure  and  sacred  impulse  came  upon  him,  it 
met  resistance  ;  and  there  were  bodily  manifestations  which,  far  from  being  marks  of 
grace,  were  signs  of  a  moral  state  at  variance  with  the  Spirit  of  God.  This  case 
should  teach  caution  in  ascribing  any  religious  value  to  prostrations,  trances,  and  long 
fasts.  These  things  most  frequently  occur  in  cases  of  a  morbid  hysterical  tempera- 
ment, or  in  very  ignorant  persons  who  are  disturbed  and  terrified,  or  in  instances 
where  religious  feeling,  suddenly  flowing  in  on  unprepared  minds,  encounters  obstin- 
ate obstruction.  When  the  mind  is  thoughtful  and  refined,  or  when  the  heart  is 
gentle  and  open  to  any  good  influx,  religious  fervour  seldom  causes  any  disorder  in 
the  nervous  system  or  the  physical  constitution.  We  may  be  reminded  here  that 
David  could  show  no  small  excitement,  for  he  danced  before  the  ark  in  the  sight  of 
all  Israel  (2  Sam.  vi.  14).  True  ;  but  in  all  the  enthusiasm  of  that  great  occasion 
King  David  was  sober-minded  and  self-possessed.  He  had  good  reasons  for  leading 
the  sacred  processional  dance,'  as  may  afterwards  be  shown ;  but,  far  from  giving 
way  to  excitement,  or  losing  his  senses  like  Saul,  he  went  calmly  through  the  duties 
of  an  eventful  and  fatiguing  day.  He  ofEered  burnt  offerings  and  peace  offerings. 
Then  he  blessed  the  people,  causing  provisions  to  be  distributed  among  them.  And 
after  all  this  "  David  returned  to  bless  his  house."  Such  is  the  enthusiasm  we  desire. 
To  be  full  of  joy  before  the  Lord,  but  at  the  same  time  to  be  of  a  healthy  mind, 
ready  for  public  or  private  duty  hour  bv  hour.  But  we  see  no  good  in  nervous 
•zcitement  or  hysterical  ecstasy.    When  we  consider  that  the  Bible  is  a  collection  of 


S7< 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  zx.  1 — TS. 


Eastern  books,  and  that  the  East  has  always  been  the  home  of  strange  religioua 
extravagances,  we  recognise  in  the  well-balanced  sobriety  of  mind  which  pervades 
the  Bible  a  new  proof  of  its  Divine  inspiration.  It  takes  notice  of  the  varied 
phenomenal  efiecta  of  strong  religious  feeling  on  the  human  frame ;  it  tells  of  long 
prostrations,  excited  movements,  and  prophetic  trances ;  but  it  always  attaches 
moral  significance  and  value  not  to  such  abnormal  conditions,  but  to  the  efEects 
which  appear  and  remain  in  character  and  life.  The  greatest  of  all,  the  Man  Christ 
Jesus,  the  Lord  whom  we  are  to  love  and  follow,  is  shown  to  us  full  of  a  sublime 
enthusiasm,  but  full  at  the  same  time  of  meekness  and  of  wisdom.  The  Scriptures 
teach  us  to  be  calm  and  fervent,  fervent  and  calm.  If  rushes  of  devout  emotion  come 
upon  us,  be  it  so.  If  men  who  have  no  faith  call  us  fanatical  and  mad,  be  it  so.  Such 
men  said  of  our  Master,  "  He  rageth,  and  hath  a  demon  ; "  and  of  Paul,  "  Thou  art 
beside  thyself."  But  let  the  evidence  of  our  Christian  faith  and  principle  be  found 
not  in  any  moods  of  excitement,  but  in  the  moral  excellence  we  exhibit,  the  fruit  of 
the  Spirit  we  bring  forth.  So  shall  we  find  consolation  and  strength  when  others 
only  expose  their  weakness ;  and  every  pause  at  Naioth,  or  the  place  of  prayer  and 
holy  fellowship,  will  brae*  oar  spirits  for  the  trials  that  must  y«t  befall  us  before  we 
u*  perfected. — IT 


EXPOSITION. 

JOMATHAH  SHSKAVOTTBB  TO  BBOONCILI  SauL  TO  DATID  (OH.  XZ.)u 


CHAPTER  XX 

Jofathan's  covenant  with  David  bb- 
NEWED  (vers.  1 — 23).  Ver.  1. — Savid  fled 
from  Ifaiotli.  While  Saul  was  under  the 
influence  of  the  prophetic  enthusiasm  David 
escaped  ;  but  it  is  evident  that  this  visit  to 
Samuel,  and  the  extraordinary  occurrences 
which  attended  it,  were  not  without  a  good 
influence  for  the  time  upon  Saul's  mind. 
Some  sort  of  reconciliation  must  have  been 
patched  up,  probably  by  the  mediation  of 
Samuel ;  for  David  assumed  that  at  the  new 
moon  he  would  bo  expected  to  dine  at  the 
king's  table  (ver.  6),  and  that  Saul  would 
look  for  him  as  a  matter  of  course  (ver.  6). 
We  find,  moreover,  that  his  place  was  made 
ready,  not  only  on  the  new  moon  (ver.  25), 
but  also  on  the  following  day  (ver.  26).  But 
whatever  professions  Saul  may  have  made  to 
Samuel,  it  is  evident  that  no  promise  had 
been  made  personally  to  David,  and  taught 
by  past  experience  that  the  intention  of  slay- 
ing him  had  grown  more  and  more  fixed  m 
the  king's  mind,  he  feels  that  his  position 
Is  fall  of  danger,  and  takes  counsel  with 
Jonathan,  with  the  view  of  learning  whether 
he  might  venture  once  again  to  take  his 
place  as  a  member  of  Saul's  family. 

Yer.  2. — God  forbid.  An  exclamation  of 
horror;  literally,  "Far  be  it"  (see' on  ch.  ix. 
4S).  In  spite  of  the  many  proofs  of  Saul's 
bitter  hatred,  Jonathan  cannot  believe  that 
after  all  that  had  taken  place  at  Ramah  his 
father  would  still  persist  in  his  murderous 
purpose.  He  further  assures  David  that 
Saul  would  do  nothing  without  telling  him  ; 
literally,  without  uncovering  his  ear,  with- 
<Qt  teUing  it  him  privately  (see  on  ch.  iz. 


16).  The  phrase  is  used  again  in  vsr.  IX. 
For  will  do  nothing  the  written  text  reads 
"has  done  for  himself,"  which  the  Kri 
properly  corrects.  The  rashness  of  Saul's 
temper,  and  his  frank  talk  about  killing 
David  recorded  in  ch.  xix.  1,  confirm  Jona- 
than's statement  about  the  openness  of  his 
father's  ways,  and  he  therefore  assures  David 
that  he  may  take  his  place  in  safety. 

Vers.  3,  4. — ^Thy  father  certainly  knoweth, 
&c.  Though  Saul  did  not  know  the  entire- 
ness  of  Jonathan's  love  for  David,  yet  he  was 
aware  of  the  friendship  that  existed  between 
them,  and  consequently  might  keep  his  pur- 
pose a  secret  &om  Jonathan,  especially  if  he 
considered  that  his  frankness  in  speaking 
openly  to  his  son  and  servants  on  a  previous 
occasion  had  led  to  David's  escape.  David, 
therefore,  urges  upon  his  Mend  a  dififerent 
course,  to  which  he  assents.  But  how  are  we 
to  explain  the  entirely  different  views  taken 
of  Saul's  condnct  by  the  two.  When  David 
tells  his  fears  Jonathan  utters  an  exclamation 
of  horror,  and  says,  "Thou  shalt  not  die." 
Yet  he  knew  that  his  father  had  talked  to  him 
and  his  officers  about  putting  David  to  death ; 
that  he  had  tried  to  kill  him  with  his  own 
hand,  and  on  his  escape  had  set  people  to 
watch  his  house  with  orders  to  slay  him ; 
and  on  David's  flight  to  the  prophet  had 
thrice  sent  emissaries  to  bring  him  away  by 
force.  The  explanation  probably  lies  in 
Saul's  insanity.  '\Vhen  he  threw  hiajavelin 
at  David  and  during  the  subsequent  proceed- 
ings he  was  out  of  his  mind.  The  violent 
fit  at  Naioth  had  for  the  time  cleared  his 
reason,  and  he  had  come  back  sane.  Jona- 
than regarded  all  that  had  taken  place  u 
the  efiect  of  a  mind  diseased,  and  condoded. 


<9B, 


1—28.] 


THB  FIB8T  BOOK  OV  SAMUEL. 


177 


therefore,  that  David  night  now  letom  to 
his  home  and  wife,  and  resume  his  duties 
and  take  his  place  at  the  royal  table.  Shonld 
the  old  craze  come  back  about  David  beine 
his  rival  and  destined  snccessor,  Saul  would 
be  sure  to  talk  about  it,  and  then  Jonathan 
would  give  him  timely  warning.  But  David 
was  convinced  that  it  was  no  craze,  but  that 
Saul,  sane  or  insane,  had  determined  upon 
his  death. 

Vers.  6—7. — To-morrow  is  the  new  moon. 
The  first  day  of  the  new  moon  was  a  joyful 
festival,  its  appearance  being  greeted  with 
the  sounding  of  trumpets,  and  celebrated  by 
a  burnt  offering  and  a  sin  offering.     It  was, 
moreover,  kept  by  Saul  as  a  family  festival,  at 
which  David,  as  his  son-in-law,  was  expected 
to  be  present.    As,  moreover,  David  was  to 
hide  unto  the  third  day  at  even,  counting 
from  the  time  when  he  was  arranging  his 
plans  with  Jonathan,  it  is  plain  that  it  was 
the  mle  to  prolong  the  feasting  unto  the 
second  day.    When  then  Jonathan,  convinced 
by  David's  pleading,  had  consented  to  aid  him 
in  his  own  way,  they  arrange  that  he  shall 
absent  himself  from  this  festival,  and  remain 
during  it  hidden  out  of  sight.     In  case  Saul 
missed  him  and  asked  the  reason  of  his 
absence,  Jonathan  was  to  offer  as  an  excuse 
for  him  that  he  had  earnestly  requested  leave 
to  pay  a  hurried  visit  to  Bethlehem,  in  order 
to  be  present  at  an  annual  festival :  and  if 
Saul  took  the  excuse  in  good  part  it  would 
be  a  sign  that  he  had  no  malicious  purposes 
towards  David,  whereas  if  he  fell  into  a  rage 
it  would  be  a  proof  of  a  settled  evil  design. 
A  yearly  sacrifice  for  all  the  family.     For 
aU  the  mishpach/ih,  i.  e.  not  for  all  Jesse's 
household,  but  for  all  that  subdivision  of 
the  tribe  of  Judah  to  which  Jesse  belonged ; 
for  a  tribe  was  divided  into  families,  and 
these  again  into  fathers'  houses  (Josh.  vii. 
16,  17).    The  occasion  would  thus  be  a  grand 
one.     In  ch.  xvi.  2  we  have  an  instance  of 
a  special  sacrifice  at  Bethlehem,  but  this  feast 
of  the  muhpachah  was  held  every  year  ;  and 
evidently  before  the  temple  was  built  at 
Jerusalem  these  local  sacrifices  were  the  rule. 
We  may  well  believe  that  there  was  such  a 
festival,  and  that  the  fictitious  part  of  Jona- 
than's stoiy  was  that  David  had  been  sum- 
moned to  it 

Ver.  8. — Thou  hast  brought  thy  servant 
Into  a  covenant  of  Jehovah  with  thee.  As 
the  friendship  between  Jonathan  and  David 
had  been  cemented  by  the  invocation  of  the 
name  of  Jehovah,  it  was  one  firm  and  assured, 
ind  David  might  look  not  merely  for  one 
act  of  kindness,  but  for  constant  truth  and 
help.  It  was,  moreover,  Jonathan's  own 
doing ;  and  yet,  if  there  be  in  me,  David 
says,  iniquity,  i.  e.  treason  against  Saul,  if 
I  have  not  be«n  a  faithful  and  true  servant 
to  Jiim,  hat,  on  the  contrary,  have  plotted 


evil  against  him,  or  now  entertain  any  aTil 
designs,  then  let  the  covenant  be  abrogated. 
David  refuses  to  shelter  himself  under  it  id 
he  has  incurred  guilt,  aud  only  asks  that 
Jonathan,  by  the  authority  which  he  exer- 
cised as  the  king's  son,  should  himself  put 
him  to  death,  and  not  deliver  him  up  to  SanL 
Ver.  9.— Par  be  it,  the  word  rendered 
God  forbid  in  ver.  2.  It  indignantly  rejects 
the  idea  of  David  having  committed  anj 
crime.  The  rest  of  the  verse  is  an  incom- 
plete sentence ;  "If  I  knew  certainly  that 
evil  were  determined  by  my  father  to  come 

upon  thee,  and  did  not  tell  thee "    These 

broken  sentences  have  great  force  in  the 
original,  as  signs  of  intense  feeling  (comp. 
Luke  xix.  42).  We  must  complete  the 
sentence  mentally  in  some  such  way  as  the 
Syriac:  "then  Jehovah  do  so  to  me,  and 
more  also." 

Ver.  10.— Who  shall  tell  met  or  what  it 
&e.  The  (^  is  an  insertion  of  the  A.  V. 
Really  David's  question  is  very  involved 
and  nngranunatical,  as  wag  natural  in  his 
excited  state.  It  may  be  translated,  "  Who 
will  tell  me  (or,  how  shall  I  know)  what 
rough  answer  thy  father  will  give  thee  f " 
But  some  Jewish  authorities  render,  "  Who 
will  tell  me  if  so  be  that  thy  father  give 
thee  a  rough  answer  ? " 

Vers.  11— 13.— let  ns  go  out  Into  th« 
field.     David's  question  had  shown  Jonathan 
that  there  were  grave  difficulties  in  their 
way,  and  so  he  proposes  that  they  should 
walk  into  the  country,  to  be  able  to  talk  with 
one  another  more  freely,  and  concert  measures 
for  the  future.     And  there  Jonathan  binds 
himself  with  a  solemn  oath,  if  Saul's  inten- 
tions be  good,  to  send  a  trusty  messenger  to 
inform  David,  but  if  there  be  danger,  then 
to  come  and  tell  David  himself.    0  lord  God. 
With  a  few  MSS.  we  must  supply  the  usual 
formula  of  an  oath  :  "  As  Jehovah  the  God 
of  Israel   liveth."     About  to-morrow  any 
time,   or  the   third  day.     This  cumbrons 
translation  arose  out  of  the  mistaken  idea 
that   the  word  rendered  to-morrow  could 
only  be  used  in  that  limited  sense.    Strictly 
it  signifies  the  morning,  and  is  applicable  to 
any  morrow.     Jonathan  fixes  one  time,  and 
one  only,  and  the  passage  should  be  rendered, 
"By  this  time  on  the  third  morrow."    The 
meeting  was  to  be  on  the  morrow  after  the 
second  day  of  the  festival,  and  so  on  the 
third  morrow  after  the  conversation.     The 
whole    may  be    translated,    "  As    Jehovah 
the  God  of  Israel  liveth,  when  by  this  time 
on  the  third  morrow  I  have  searched  my 
father,  and,  behold,  there  be  good  for  David,, 
if  then  I  send  not  to  thee,  and  uncover  thy 
ear,  Jehovah  do  so  and  much  more  to  Jona- 
than."    The  alternative  case  is  then  put; 
and  if  the  news  be  evil,  Jonathan  undertakes 
himself  to  be  the  messenger,  and  David  is  to 


S7t 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  XX.  1—23. 


provide  for  his  safety  by  flight.  The  con- 
cluding prayer  that  Jehovah  might  be  with 
Dayid  as  he  had  been  with  Saul  contains 
the  game  presentiment  of  David  attaining 
to  great  power  and  dignity  which  is  more 
directly  expressed  in  the  foUowing  verses. 

Vers.  14,  16. — The  construction  of  this 
passage  is  very  difficult  if  we  retain  the  three 
negatives  of  the  Masoretic  text ;  but  most 
commentators,  following  the  reading  of  the 
Syriac  as  regards  at  least  one  of  them,  con- 
sider that  the  Masorites  have  been  mistaken 
in  the  vowels  which  they  have  attached  to 
the  consonants  (see  on  ch.  L  7).  Read  with 
other  vowels,  two  of  these  negatives  become 
interjections  of  desire — 0  that;  and  the  whole 
may  be  translated,  "And  0  that,  while  I 
still  live,  yea,  0  that  thou  wouldst  show  me 
the  kindness  of  Jehovah, — i.  e.  great  unfail- 
ing kindness,  such  as  was  that  of  Jehovah  to 
Israel, — that  I  die  not,  nor  shalt  thou  cut  off 
thy  kindness  from  iny  house  for  ever."  It 
was  the  sanguinary  custpm  in  the  East  on  a 
change  of  dynasty  to  put  all  the  seed  royal 
to  death  (1  Kings  xv.  29  ;  xvL  11,  &c.,  and 
comp.  2  Sam.  xix.  28).  As  then  Jonathan 
foresaw  that  it  was  Jehovah's  will  to  transfer 
the  kingdom  to  David,  he  binds  him  by  the 
memory  of  his  own  true  love  to  him  to  show 
mercy  to  his  race. 

Ver.  16. — This  verse  also  is  very  difficult, 
but  it  is  probably  to  be  taken  as  an  insertion 
of  the  narrator :  "  So  Jonathan  made  a 
covenant  with  the  house  of  David  " — that 
is,  so  as  to  bind  his  descendants — "saying. 
Let  Jehovah  require  it  at  the  hand  of  Davitfs 
enemies. "  These  last  words  probably  are  a 
euphemism,  and  mean  David  himsel£  So 
Bashi  explains  the  words.  The  courtesy  of 
an  Oriental  forbade  his  saying.  May  Jehovah 
punish  David  for  it,  but  he  prays  that  God 
would  requite  it  on  some  one.  But  if  the 
Divine  anger  visits  even  David's  enemies 
for  it,  how  much  more  the  guilty  perjurer 
himself 

Ver.  17. — Jonathan  caused  David  to  swear 
again.  So  strong  was  his  conviction  in 
David's  future  kingdom,  and  his  wish  that 
there  should  be  an  unbroken  bond  of  love 
between  the  two  families,  that  he  makes 
David  solemnly  repeat  his  promise.  The 
Septuagint  and  Vulgate,  by  altering  the 
vowels,  read,  "  And  Jonathan  sware  again  to 
David."  At  first  sight  this  interpretation 
seems  most  in  accordance  with  the  reason 
given  for  the  renewal  of  the  oath,  namely. 


Jonathan's  own  love ;  but  the  MasoretiQ 
text  agrees  better  with  what  has  gone  be* 
fore,  and  with  his  wish  that  their  covenant 
under  no  change  of  circumstances  should  be 
broken. 

Vers.  18,  19. — Jonathan  now  arranges 
his  plan  for  communicating  the  result  to 
David.  For  when  thon  hast  stayed  three 
days,  at  which  all  the  versions  stumble,  a 
slight  alteration  gives  the  right  sense :  "And 
on  the  third  day. "  David  on  the  third  day 
wastogodownqniokly — Hebrew,  "greatly, 
i.  e.  he  was  to  go  a  long  way  down  into 
the  valley.  The  rendering  guicMy  is  taken 
from  the  Vulgate,  but  makes  no  sense. 
It  did  not  matter  whether  David  went  fast 
or  slow,  as  he  was  to  hide  there  for  some 
time,  but  it  was  important  that  David  should 
be  far  away,  so  that  no  prying  eye  might 
chance  to  catch  sight  of  him.  When  the 
business  was  in  hand.  Literally,  "the  day 
of  the  business,"  probably  that  narrated  in 
ch.  xix.  2 — 1.  The  Septuagint,  Vulgate, 
and  Chaldee  all  understand  "a  working 
day,"  in  opposition  to  a  feast  day;  but 
"where  thou  didst  hide  thyself  on  a  week 
day  "  gives  no  intelligible  meaning.  By  the 
stone  Ezel.  As  the  name  Ezel  is  formed 
from  a  verb  signifying  to  go,  some  under- 
stand by  it  a  road-stone,  a  stone  to  mark 
the  way. 

Vers.  20 — ^28. — ^The  two  Mends  now  agree 
upon  the  sign.  Jonathan  was  to  shoot  three 
arrows  at  this  stone,  Ezel,  as  his  mark,  and 
was  then  to  send  his  servant  to  gather  them 
up.  When  he  had  gone  some  distance  Jona- 
than was  to  shout  to  him,  loud  enough  for 
David  to  hear.  If  Jonathan  said  that  the 
arrows  were  on  that  side  the  mark,  i.  e. 
between  it  and  Jonathan,  David  was  to  come 
forth  boldly,  as  all  was  weU.  But  if  Jona- 
than said  that  the  arrows  were  further  on, 
then  David  must  understand  that  he  was 
to  seek  safety  in  flight.  For  there  is  peace 
to  thee,  and  no  hurt,  the  Hebrew  has 
"there  is  peace  to  thee,  and  it  is  nothing," 
a  simpler  and  more  idiomatic  rendering.  As 
touching  the  matter,  &c.  Bather,  ' '  As  for 
the  word  that  we  have  spoken,  I  and  thou, 
behold,  Jehovah  is  between  me  and  thee  for 
ever. "  The  word  was  the  bond  and  covenant 
by  which  they  had  pledged  their  truth  to 
one  another.  Though  separated,  their  love 
was  to  continue,  and  Jehovah  was  to  be 
their  eternal  centre  of  onion,  and  the  witness 
to  their  covenant. 


nOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1  — 10. — Endangered  life  and  reputation.  The  facta  are  —  1.  David, 
believing  in  Saul's  purpose  to  lull  him,  flees  to  Jonathan,  and  inquires  into  the 
cause  of  this  persecution.  2.  Jonathan  quiets  him  by  the  assurance  that  Saul 
wonld  not  hide  any  purpose  from  him.     8.  On  David  referring  to  Saul's  know- 


OH.  XX.  1—23.]  THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  87» 

ledge  of  their  friendship  and  its  effect  on  his  methods,  Jonathan  expresses  readinesi 
to  do  whatever  David  may  suggest.  4.  Thereupon  David  suggests  a  means  by 
which  Saul's  disposition  towards  him  can  be  ascertained.  6.  He  further  pleads, 
on  the  ground  of  their  strong  friendship,  that  Jonathan  should  slay  or  aid  to 
deliver  him.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  coming  of  the  prophetic  spirit  on  Saul 
was,  among  other  reasons,  designed  to  help  him  once  more  to  a  due  consideration 
of  his  course.  But  by  this  time  David  appears  to  have  awakened  to  the  convic- 
tion that  the  recent  attempts  on  his  life  were  not  to  be  ascribed  to  fitful  outbursts 
of  madness,  but  to  a  fixed  purpose,  for  reasons  he  could  not  surmise.  As  then  he 
had  sought  refuge  with  Samuel  from  the  hand  of  passionate  violence,  so  now  he 
naturally  turns  to  his  beloved  friend  Jonathan  to  ascertain  from  one  presumably  in 
his  father's  secrets  the  causes  of  this  persistent  attempt  on  his  life,  and  to  demand 
of  him  the  ofSces  of  true  friendship.  A  triple  consciousness  pervades  this  appeal 
of  David :  namely,  of  integrity,  of  danger,  of  duty  of  self-preservation. 

I.  A  MAN  coNsciotiB  OF  INTEGEITT  OF  LIFE.  It  would  appear  that  David  was 
quite  unaware  of  the  secret  of  Saul's  conduct.  It  is  probable  that  he  knew  nothing 
of  that  fearful  doom  pronounced  by  Samuel  (ch.  xv.  26 — 29)  which  had  operated  so 
disastrously  on  the  guilty  mind  of  Saul.  With  the  innocence  of  an  unworldly  man, 
he  could  not  imagine  that  a  monarch  reigning  over  the  people  of  God  could  ever 
devise  destruction  against  a  subject  unless  he  believed  that  subject  to  have  com- 
initted  some  crime  worthy  of  death.  Possibly  the  king  might  be  under  an  unfounded 
impression ;  and  as  Jonathan  was  heir  to  the  throne  and  in  his  father's  confidence, 
he  would  surely  inform  his  friend.  At  all  events,  so  far  as  he  knew  his  own  heart, 
he  was  conscious  only  of  integrity.  "  What  have  I  done  ?  What  is  mine  iniquity  ?  " 
In  dealing  with  the  important  matter  involved  in  these  questions,  let  us  observe  that 
— 1.  Integrity  is  to  be  sought  in  every  man.  David  was  correct  in  the  assumption 
underlying  his  inquiry — that  every  one  ought  to  be  characterised  by  integrity  of  life, 
and  that  on  its  existence  alone  can  we  justly  claim  exemption  from  scorn,  suffering, 
abandonment,  and  a  right  to  respect,  enjoyment  of  life,  and  personal  protection. 
There  is  in  every  man  a  voice  unceasingly  demanding  of  him  uprightness,  moral 
soundness.  The  eye  with  which  we  look  on  one  another  is  guided  by  this  conviction. 
And  it  is  in  the  universal  recognition  of  the  truth  that  integrity  is  to  be  sought  in 
every  one  that  we  find  a  basis  of  appeal  in  the  name  of  righteousness,  and  a  rational 
place  for  the  doctrines  of  atonement  and  regeneration.  2.  Integrity/  is  to  be  regarded 
in  a  two/old  aspect.  It  will  be  observed  that  David  simply  raises  the  question  as  to 
what  he  had  done  in  relation  to  Saul  or  his  kingdom.  He  distinguished  between 
integrity  in  his  relations  to  man  and  integrity  in  his  relations  to  God.  All  moral 
relations  to  man  involve  moral  relations  to  God,  but  the  reverse  is  not  true.  Man's 
relations  to  God  are  wider  than  those  to  his  fellow-men.  Religious  morality  is  not 
identical  with  secular  morality.  The  spiritual  embraces  obligations  transcending  the 
humanly  moral.  Integrity  in  relation  to  man  lies  in  the  faithful  discharge  of  all 
obligations  due  to  man,  under  the  influence  of  pure  motives  in  detail,  and  a  supreme 
sense  of  justice  in  general.  But  integrity  in  relation  to  God  means  perfect  rightness 
of  spirit,  manifesting  itself  in  perfect  love  of  God,  perfect  obedience  to  God,  perfect 
purity  of  thought — in  fact,  conformity  in  every  secret  and  open  movement  of  will 
with  the  holy  will  of  God.  This  soundness,  this  health,  is  certain  to  insure  integrity  in 
relation  to  man,  but  the  reverse  is  not  true.  This  distinction  is  of  great  importance 
to  the  understanding  of  Scripture  and  the  regulation  of  life  (cf.  2  Chron.  vi.  36 — 39  ; 
Job  XV.  14 ;  Ps.  XV. ;  Isa.  xxxiii.  15,  16  ;  Eom.  iii.  23 — 28  ;  James  v.  16  ;  1  John  i.  8). 
3.  Integrity  in  its  human  relation  is,  in  ordinary  life,  maintained  without  self- 
assertion.  During  the  months  of  David's  service,  from  the  day  he  entered  into  con- 
flict with  Goliath  till  his  flight  to  Naioth,  he  had  been  a  true,  sincere  man,  doing  his 
duty.  But  all  this  time  he  was  not  conscious  of  anything  remarkable.  The  beauty 
of  integrity  of  life  lies  in  the  naturalness  which  suggests  no  reflection  upon  itself. 
True  virtue  excludes  self-admiration,  and,  when  in  exercise,  self-consciousness.  Our 
Saviour  never  refers  to  his  goodness  as  a  praise  to  himself.  The  sun  needs  only  to 
shine,  the  truth  only  to  be  (Matt.  vi.  1 — i;  Luke  xviii.  12).  4.  Integrity  may  be 
asserted  when  challenged  by  detractors,  or  when  wrong  is  done  to  one's  interests. 
David's  uprightness  of  life  would  have  gone  on  without  self-introspection  and  self- 


no  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUBL.  [oh.  xx.  1-*8. 

■Meition  were  it  not  that  he  was  subject  to  a  treatment  not  explicable  on  ordinaiy 
principles.  It  was  time  for  him  to  affirm  his  innocence,  and  bring  his  natoral 
integrity  into  distinct  consciousness.  He  often  does  this  in  the  Psalms,  not  to  claim 
righteousness  in  relation  to  God,  but  to  rebut  accusations  in  reference  to  his  conduct 
amongst  men.  It  was  the  same  sense  of  injustice  which  led  Job  to  assert  his  inno- 
cence of  many  of  the  charges  of  his  friends.  "  I  will  maintain  mine  own  ways  before 
him  "  (Job  XV.  13 — 16).  The  Apostle  Paul  also  vindicated  his  own  life  against  the 
insinuations  of  false  brethren  (2  Cor.  x.  8 — 11 ;  xi.  6 — 10,  21 — 30).  Oui  Saviour 
also,  when  persecuted  by  malicious  men,  could  ask,  "  Which  of  you  convinceth  me 
of  sin  ?  "  (John  viii.  46).  Only  a  stem  sense  of  duty — a  protest  against  wrong — will 
break  a  righteous  man's  silence  in  relation  to  himself.  5.  Integrity  before  man 
must  never  be  a  substitute  for  integrity  before  God.  David's  object  was  simply  vin- 
dication from  supposed  charges  of  wrong  deliberately  done  to  Saul.  He  had  a  deep 
consciousness  at  the  same  time  that  in  the  sight  of  3od,  as  a  spiritual  being,  he  was 
unworthy  and  in  need  of  mercy.  Only  such  a  man,  sensible  of  sinfulness  before 
God,  would  dwell  so  much  on  mercy  (Ps.  Hi.  8 ;  Ixii.  12 ;  Ixxxvi.  5),  and  at  the  same 
time  on  "integrity"  and  "uprightness"  (Ps.  vii.  8;  xxv.  21;  xxvi.  1;  xli.  42). 
Men  take  a  very  superficial  view  of  things  when  they  imagine  that  goodness  which 
passes  among  men,  and  is  a  fulfilment  of  our  earthly  obligations,  "  extendeth"  unto 
God  (Ps.  xvi.  2,  3).  This  was  one  of  the  deadly  errors  of  the  Pharisees,  and  it  wag 
exposed  by  the  whole  tenor  of  our  Saviour's  teaching  (Luke  xviii.  9 — 14;  John  iii. 
1 — 11).  As  we  have  not  integrity  before  God,  we  must  be  bom  again,  repent,  seek 
forgiveness  and  acceptance,  not  because  of  what  we  are  and  have  done,  but  because 
of  Christ  having  loved  us  and  given  himself  for  us  (Acts  iv.  12 ;  Bom.  iii.  24 — 28 ; 
iv.  6,  6;  v.  1,2;  Phil.  iii.  8,9). 

II.  A  MAN  SENSIBLE  OF  GREAT  PEBIL.  Two  perils  beset  David.  He  feared  death 
at  the  hand  of  Saul,  and,  most  of  all,  loss  of  reputation.  He  rightly  judged  that  if 
the  king  of  Israel  sought  his  life  and  chased  him  with  that  end  in  view,  the  impression 
would  be  conveyed  to  many  that  he  had  been  guilty  of  some  act  of  wrong  well 
known  to  Saul,  though  unknown  to  the  people.  An  upright  man,  although  able  to 
commit  himself  to  God,  dreads  to  be  thought  a  wrong-doer,  and  to  die  as  though  he 
were  such.  Hence  his  pleading  with  Jonathan,  his  pain  a,t  the  suspicion  of  want  of 
integrity,  his  desire  to  learn  whether  the  king's  mind  was  more  placable.  These  two 
perils  beset  us  all.  In  one  sense  we  are  safe  from  death  till  our  appointed  time  has 
come,  for  God's  care  fails  not ;  yet  in  relation  to  the  forces  at  work  around  us  we 
know  not  what  a  day  or  an  hour  may  bring  forth.  Life  is  begirt  with  powers  of 
destruction.  There  is  but  a  "  step  "  between  us  and  death.  "  In  the  midst  of  life 
we  are  in  death."  The  proper  ^ect  of  this  sense  of  peril  is  wholesome.  It  leads  to 
such  an  estimate  of  life  as  renders  it  wiser,  more  sober,  earnest,  and  devout  (Ps.  Trwiv, 
4 — 7 ;  xc.  12  ;  Eccles.  ix.  10 ;  xi.  9 ;  xii.  13 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  29 — 31).  But  to  a  sincerely 
good  man  danger  to  reputation  is  more  serious.  Many  would  rather  die  than  either 
actually  lose  character  or  be  deemed  to  have  lost  it.  They  can  sympathise  with 
David's  wish  that  Jonathan  would  slay  him  if  really  moral  cause  existed.  Our 
Saviour's  pain  was  great  because  of  the  effort  to  ruin  his  character.  But  though  all 
are  exposed  to  these  two  perils  in  common  with  David,  there  is  one  other  peril  of  life 
which  often  is  an  occasion  of  loss  of  reputation.  We  are  exposed  to  the  wiles  of  the 
devil.  As  Saul  sought  the  life  of  David,  so  Satan  goeth  about  seeking  whom  he  may 
devour  (1  Pet.  v.  8).  Everyday  the  adversary  destroys  by  "his  strong  ones."  The 
language  of  the  Psalmist  (Ps.  x.  8 — 10)  will  apply  with  wonderful  precision  to  the 
destroyer  of  souls,  the  "  murderer  from  the  begiiming  "  (John  viii.  44).  The  proper 
effect  of  this  sense  of  peril  is  to  induce  watchfulness,  avoidance  of  the  haunts  of 
iniquity,  prayer  for  strength,  and  such  consecration  to  work  as  shall  leave  no  time  or 
thought  for  dalliance  with  the  tempter  (Matt.  vii.  13 ;  xxvi.  41 ;  Ephes.  vi.  11, 12, 18). 

III.  A  MAN  INTENT  ON  SELF-PEESBRVATION.  While  in  Conflict  with  Goliath, 
amidst  the  regular  duties  of  his  public  course,  David  seems  to  have  been  under  no 
concern  for  his  life  or  reputation.  He  did  his  duty  and  trusted  in  God.  But  when 
he  suspected  attempts  in  the  dark  on  his  life  and  character,  he  felt  bound  to  devise 
means  of  securing  himself,  and  rightly  manifested  much  anxiety  in  relation  thereto. 
It  is  possible  that  charactei  maybe  so  defamed  during  Itfethat  only  death  will  proT« 


oi.  XI.  1—23.1  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  Ml 

its  vindication,  u  in  case  of  our  Saviour ;  nevertheless,  no  means  should  be  left 
unused  to  assert  our  innocence  and  if  possible  prove  it.  The  tubtle  powers  which 
threaten  our  life  may  be  often  avmdedhy  observance  of  laws  of  health  and  abstention 
from  unnecessary  risks.  Many  men  commit  slow  suicide  by  wilful  neglect  of  fresh  air, 
good  and  moderate  food,  and  by  excessive  toil  for  gain.  The  preservation  of  character 
may  often  be  secured  by  abstaining  from  the  "  appearance  of  evil,"  though  we  shall 
never  rid  ourselves  of  uncharitable  defamers. 

General  lesson*: — 1.  We  should  strive  to  be  free  from  the  narrow  suspicions  and 
uncharitable  thoughts  which  tend  to  injure  excellent  reputations  (1  Cor.  xiii.  4 — 7). 

2.  If  we  cannot  vindicate  our  reputation  before  men,  let  us  have  comfort  in  God's 
knowledge  of  us  (Ps.  xxxvii.  6,  6 ;  cxxxix.  1 — 4).  3.  Like  Jonathan,  we  should 
manifest  great  sympathy  with  those  whose  honourable  character  is  defamed  or  in 
peril.  4.  Our  supreme  concern  should  be  to  live  in  spirit  so  as  to  find  acceptance 
with  the  holy,  all-seeing  God. 

Vers.  11 — 23. — The  spring  of  self-sacrifice.  The  facta  are — 1.  Jonathan  and 
David  retire  from  observation  to  confer  furthar.  2.  Jonathan  undertakes  to  do  all 
that  David  requires,  and  solemnly  pledges  hiinsplf  to  let  him  know  the  mind  of  Saul. 

3.  He  pleads  wi' '  David,  in  prospect  of  his  el  i  'ion  to  power,  that  he  and  his  house 
may  receive  njercy.  4.  In  his  eagerness  he  .^^eks  a  renewal  of  David's  promise. 
6.  They  then  arrange  that,  after  consulting  with  Saul,  an  arrow  before  or  beyond  a 
certain  mark  shall  reveal  safety  or  danger.  This  beautiful  narrative  brings  out  the 
love  and  confidence  of  these  young  men  in  such  a  way  that  one  is  constrained  to  ask 
whether  there  is  not  here,  not  only  an  exquisite  instance  of  what  all  our  religious 
friendship  should  be  in  spirit  and  expression,  but  an  historical  foreshadowing  of  the 
relation  of  the  loving,  confiding  soul  to  the  true  Anointed  of  the  Lord.  We  know 
that  in  the  New  Testament  the  promised  land  is  a  shadow  of  the  "  better  country," 
the  "rock",  in  the  wilderness  a  figure  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  x.  4),  Zion  and  Jerusalem  a 
type  of  the  city  of  God,  and  David,  the  king  after  God's  own  heart,  a  pattern  of 
another  David,  the  only  begotten  of  the  Father,  the  eternal  King  in  Zion  (Isa.  ix.  7 ; 
Acts  ii.  26 — 36).  Also  in  the  Psalms  (Ps.  xlv.)  and  in  Isaiah  there  are  references  to 
the  deep  interest  of  the  Church  in  Christ  and  of  Christ  in  the  Church.  It  is  not,  then, 
unwarrantable  to  regard  the  devotion  of  Jonathan  to  the  coming  king,  and  because 
he  was  beloved  as  the  coming  king,  as,  at  all  events,  suggestive  of  an  analogous 
devotion  of  the  true  believer  to  Christ.  The  most  striking  feature  of  the  narrative 
before  us  is  the  utter  self-sacrifice  of  Jonathan  and  the  deep  love  from  which  it 
sprang.  We  may  notice  the  main  features  of  the  story,  and  in  doing  so  point  out 
their  truth  in  Christian  life. 

I.  There  is  A  full  AcqniEscENCE  in  David's  desihes  so  fab  as  thet  abe  kz- 
PLICITLY  KNOWN.  Some  might  regard  the  retirement  of  the  two  into  the  seclusion  of 
"the  field"  as  suggestive  of  the  private  and  sacred  communion  of  a  belirver  and 
Christ ;  but,  without  dwelling  on  that,  it  may  be  noticed  that  as  soon  as  privacy  was 
secured  Jonathan  at  once,  with  solemn  and  pathetic  earnestness,  pledges  himself  to  all 
that  David  had  so  far  required.  How  true  this  is  of  a  believer  in  Christ!  When 
the  "Anointed  of  the  Lord  "  makes  known  his  request,  whether  it  be  to  bear  witness 
for  him,  to  remember  his  death,  or  to  feed  and  clothe  the  little  ones,  the  true  heart 
responds  with  all  zeal  and  delight.  It  is  a  mark  of  a  true  Christian,  that  of  delight- 
ing to  do  his  will.  His  yoke  is  easy  and  his  burden  light.  It  was  a  very  delicate 
and  difficult  business  to  find  out  Saul's  mind,  and  involved  no  little  risk  to  Jonathan ; 
and  it  is  possible  that  much  in  which  we  have  to  acquiesce  involves  a  strain  and 
tension  of  feeling,  a  firmness  and  endurance,  a  risk  of  worldly  loss  and  a  certainty  of 

Eersonal  inconvenienc"  ■  hi*  nevertheless  all  is  welcome,  because  it  is  for  iiim  who 
as  won  our  love  and  is  worthy  of  the  best  service  we  can  ever  render. 

II.  There  is  A  DISTINCT  RECOGNITION  OF  HIS  KNDUEING  SUPKEMACT,  AND  A  COBRB- 
BFONOINO    SENSE    OF    PERSONAL    UNWOBTHINESS    OF    SUCH   DISTINGUISHED    FEIENDSHIP. 

It  is  hard  to  say  in  words  how  refined  spiritual  minds  obtain  all  their  knowledge. 
They  seem  to  possess  an  insight,  a  supersensual  instinct,  which  takes  them  straight 
through  the  present  external  conditions  to  the  abiding  reality.  At  all  events,  Jona- 
than was  convinced  that  his  beloved  friend  was  destined  to  be  king  in  Israel,  and  h« 


BM  THE  FIBST  BOOS  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  zz.  1— S8. 

speaks  as  one  not  worthy  of  such  hononr ;  and  yet,  with  all  this  rererence  and  aw« 
of  the  coining  majesty  and  power,  there  was  the  tender  love  "passing  that  of 
women."  Faith  saw  through  the  loneliness  and  oppressed  state  of  David,  and  recog- 
nised the  king  in  Zion.  This  was  the  reed  feeling  of  the  apostles,  in  their  better 
moods,  during  the  Saviour's  humiliation.  They  knew  that,  though  men  were  divided 
in  judgment,  he  was  "the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God"  (Matt.  xvi.  13 — 16). 
The  deep  love  of  John  when  reclining  on  his  bosom,  and  the  sense  of  unworthiness 
of  Peter  when  he  cried,  "  Depart  from  me,  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord  "  (Luke 
V.  8),  were  only  instances  of  the  feeling  which  usually  pervaded  their  minds.  And 
it  is  this  reeognitioti  and  the  feeling  accompanying  it  which  enters  into  every  believer's 
life.  He  is  the  King,  the  Hope  of  the  afflicted  nations,  the  "  Bestorer  of  paths  to 
dwell  in  "  (Isa.  Iviii.  12).  As  Jonathan  with  passionate  love  and  strong  confidence 
gazed  on  the  beautiful  face  of  David,  so  do  we  look  with  intense  interest  on  Christ 
and  feel  sure,  in  spite  of  the  slow  ages  and  the  present  antagonisms,  that  he  "  must 
reign,"  that  on  his  own  head  an  imperishable  crown  shall  flourish  (Ps.  Ixidi.).  And 
while  admiration,  joy,  and  satisfaction  attend  this  prevision  of  the  coming  glory,  the 
heart  is  filled  with  wonder  and  gratitude  in  being  permitted  to  call  that  Chosen  One 
I  Friend. 

III.  There  is  a  fbee  sitbbkndgb  of  all  that  is  dearest  to  the  bealisation 
>F  BIB  STTFBBHAtnr.  Nothing,  humanly  speaking,  was  more  precious  to  Jonathan 
than  his  right  to  the  succession,  and  the  prospects  of  power  and  distinction  involved 
.herein.  Nothing  in  history  is  more  beautiful  than  the  spontaneity  and  heartiness 
with  which  he  laid  aside  all  this,  and  found  joy  and  satisfaction  in  the  coming 
supremacy  of  David  (vers.  14 — 17).  What  noble  self-sacrifice  for  high  spiritual 
purposes  I  This  was  more  than  "  houses  and  lands,"  more  than  "  father  and  mother" 
(Matt.  xLi.  29).  Only  the  true  spiritual  vision  of  the  kingdom  of  God  will  account 
for  such  deviation  from  the  seLfish  ways  of  the  world.  "The  Lord"  was  in  the 
mind  of  Jonathan,  and  "the  Name"  (ch.  xvii.  45)  which  David  had  exalted  was  the 
"  Name  "  to  be  still  more  honoured  in  his  coming  reign.  And  in  this  is  the  essence 
of  our  Christian  life.  Surrender  of  all  for  Christ :  sacrifice  of  every  power,  prospect, 
hope,  and  wish  to  the  holy  purposes  for  which  the  "  Anointed  One  "  lives.  In  thit 
there  is  no  exaction  and  no  constraint.  Christ  does  not  demand  something  for  his 
mere  personal  gratification,  and  we  do  not  yield  to  a  loss  because  a  more  powerful 
One  claims  what  we  have.  Jonathan  and  David  were  as  one  (ver.  17).  They  had 
but  one  interest,  and  lived  for  one  object.  Loss  and  gain  were  inadequate  terms. 
The  surrender  to  one  was  as  a  surrender  to  self.  Loss  was  gain,  and  gain  was  loss. 
So  is  it  in  the  mystical  union  of  our  lives  with  Christ.  Though  we  give  up  all,  and 
perform  what  men  call  self-sacrifice,  we  yet  give  up  nothing.  For  us  "  to  live  is 
Christ."  Blessed  oneness  I  Always  giving,  always  receiving;  ever  denying  self, 
ever  enriching  self !  The  glory  of  the  King  is  our  glory ;  the  sorrows  of  our  heart 
are  his  sorrows ;  deeds  to  lus  are  deeds  to  him  (Matt.  xiv.  34 — 40 ;  John  xvii.  24 : 
Heb.  iv.  16). 

IV.  Love,  constant  and  mastebitjl,  is  the  spring  of  all  this  sblf-sacbificb. 
Jonathan's  love  was  the  master  passion — "  passing  that  of  women  " — pure,  steady, 
unaffected  by  public  opinion  and  j)rivate  influence  (vers.  30,  31),  illumined  and  regu- 
lated by  spiritual  insight,  prompt  in  expression,  giving  joy  and  satisfaction  to  every 
deed  and  word  that  might  bring  future  honour  to  David  or  present  comfort  in  trouble. 
This  undying  love,  this  regnant  force,  so  pure,  so  sweet,  so  strong,  so  gentle,  ennobled 
its  possessor,  and  was  regarded  by  its  object  as  the  most  beautiful  and  precious  thing 
on  earth.  Events  show  that  it  was  reciprocal  (ver.  41 ;  2  Sam.  i.  25,  26).  It  is  this 
strong  master  passion  that  lies  at  the  spring  of  all  our  true  Christian  service.  "  We 
love  him  because  he  first  loved  us."  "  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us."  We  do 
his  will,  lay  our  talents,  possessions,  prospects,  all  we  inherit  or  can  acquire,  at  his 
feet  because  we  love  to  do  so,  and  would  not  do  otherwise  if  we  could.  No  box  of 
ointment  is  too  costly  for  those  dear  feet  that  have  trodden  the  sorrowful  paths  of 
life  for  us  1  _No  crown  too  glorious  for  that  brow  that  once  was  pierced  and  pained 
for  us !  No  joy  too  excessive  in  final  enthronement  over  all  principality  and  power 
of  him  who  once  did  battle  for  us,  and  destroyed  the  gigantic  foe  of  God's  people  I 
To  measure  out  onr  service,  to  leokon  how  little  we  can  spare  or  do,  to  shut  him  out 


tm.  XX.  1—23.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  383 


from  any  section  of  onr  life — ^this  were  debasement  and  shame  indeed.  Lov^— 
•'  passing  that  of  women  " — seeks  satisfaction  in  living  for  Christ  and  glorying  only 
in  him. 

General  letsotu: — 1.  We  should  inquire  whether  any  of  Christ's  requirementa 
have  as  yet  been  disregarded.  2.  It  is  a  matter  of  doubt  whether  the  professing 
Christian  Church  fully  enters  into  the  joy  of  Christ's  coming  glory,  and  is  sufiSciently 
identified  in  hope  and  feeling  with  it.  3.  Each  one  may  ask,  Have  I  surrendered  all 
tlmt  is  precious  to  Christ  ?  Is  there  any  reserve  ?  4.  The  due  culture  of  love  for 
Christ  as  the  supreme  affection  of  life  demands  thought  and  care.  6.  The  cure  of 
many  of  the  sorrows  and  ills  of  Christians  and  Churches  lies  in  the  quickening  of 
this  personal  interest  in  Christ. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1  — 10.  (GiBEAH.)  —  The  intercourse  of  friends.  The  regard  which  true 
friends  have  for  each  other  prompts  to  much  communion.     In  it  they  find  an  exalted 

Eleasure,  and  a  sure  resource  of  help  and  comfort  in  adversity.  Hence  David,  in 
is  continued  distrust  and  fear  of  Saul,  hastened  to  his  friend  Jonathan.  Concern- 
ing their  intercourse,  notice — 1.  Its  entire  freedom.  They  tell  each  other,  without 
reserve,  all  that  is  in  their  hearts.  Such  freedom  can  be  wisely  indulged  only  in  the 
presence  of  a  friend.  "  A  principai  fruit  of  friendship  is  the  ease  and  discharge  of 
the  fulness  and  swellings  of  the  heart  which  passions  of  all  kinds  do  cause  and 
induce.  No  receipt  openeth  the  heart  but  a  true  friend,  to  whom  you  may  impart 
griefs,  joys,  fears,  hopes,  suspicions,  counsel,  and  whatsoever  lieth  upon  the  heart 
to  oppress  it,  in  a  kind  of  civil  shrift  or  confession.  It  redoubleth  joys,  and  cutteth 
griefs  in  halves  "  (Bacon, '  Essays ').  2.  Its  gentle  expostulations  and  reproofs.  "When 
David  said,  "  Thy  father  seeketh  my  life  "  (an  expression  often  used  in  the  Psalms), 
Jonathan  reproved  his  distnist — "  It  is  not  so ; "  and  only  after  a  solemn  oath  could 
be  induced  to  share  it  (ver.  9).  Rebuke  is  a  duty  and  evidence  of  true  friendship ; 
and  "  where  a  man's  ears  are  shut  against  the  truth  so  that  he  cannot  hear  it  from  a 
friend,  the  welfare  of  such  a  one  is  to  be  despaired  of."  "  As  many  as  I  love  I 
rebuke."  3.  Its  kindly  assurances.  "Whatsoever  thy  soul  desireth,  I  will  do  it  for 
thee."  Such  assurances  he  gave  generously,  sincerely,  solemnly,  and  repeatedly,  and 
they  imparted  encouragement  and  increased  confidence.  How  "  exceeding  great  and 
precious  "  are  the  promises  which  the  heavenly  Friend  has  given  for  this  purpose  to 
his  friends!  4.  It»  anxiovs  consultations  and  intelligent  counsels.  "The  second 
fruit  of  friendship  is  healthful  and  sovereign  for  the  understanding,  as  the  first  is 
for  the  affections ;  for  friendship  maketh  ■  indeed  a  fair  day  in  the  affections  from 
storm  and  tempests,  but  it  maketh  daylight  in  the  understanding  out  of  darkness 
and  confusion  of  thoughts ;  neither  is  this  to  be  understood  mdy  of  faithful  counsel. 
The  last  fruit  is  aid,  and  bearing  a  part  in  all  actions  and  occasions"  (Bacon).  5. 
Its  earnest  requests  of  aid  (ver.  8).  Although  it  is  the  part  of  friendship  to  grant 
help  to  a  friend  rather  than  to  beg  it  of  him,  yet  it  shows  itself  by  reliance  upon  him 
in  great  emergencies,  and  confidently  claims  the  fulfilment  of  former  assurances  • 
nor  will  it  look  for  aid  to  a  true  friend  in  vain.  6.  Its  manifest  imperfection.  For, 
like  all  things  earthly,  human  friendship  is  imperfect.  Its  communion  is  liable  to 
interruption  (vers.  10,  41).  It  often  entertains  thoughts,  devises  plans,  and  makes 
requests  which  are  mistaken  and  injurious.  The  statement  of  David  (though  founded 
upon  a  measure  of  truth)  was  a  mere  pretext,  and  through  failing  faith  in  God  he 
fell  into  "foolish  and  hurtful  devices."  It  also  omits  reproof  when  it  should  be 
given,  complies  with  doubtful  requests,  and  promises  what  it  is  not  able  to  perform. 
But  all  the  defects  which  are  found  in  the  highest  liuinari  friendship  are  absent  from, 
and  all  the  excellences  which  it  possesses,  and  infinitely  more,  are  present  in,  the 
friendship  of  Christ. — D. 

Ver,  3.  (GiBEAH.) — Only  a  step.  Our  path  in  life  lies  along  the  brink  of  a  river 
or  the  edge  of  a  cliff ;  and  we  may  by  a  step — a  single  step — at  any  moment  meet 
our  fate.  The  asseveration  of  David  may  be  regarded  as  the  expression  of  a  strong 
eonviction  ("  As  Jehovah  liveth,"  &c.)  of — 

I.  The  solbmnitt  of  death.      The  event  is  a  serious  one.     To  leave  familiar 


It4  -TE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  XZ.  1—». 

■Mues  and  beloyed  friendi,  to  "  be  mlised  "  from  our  aoonstomed  place  is  ■  sadden- 
ing thought.  But  what  gives  solemnity  to  death  as  well  as  life  is  its  moral  aspect, 
its  spiritual  and  Divine  relations.  1.  It  terminaiea  owr  earthly  jyrchation — seven 
onr  immediate  connection  with  the  privileges,  means,  and  opportunities  by  which 
character  is  proved  and  the  son!  prepared  for  another  state.  When  this  step  is 
taken,  all  these  things  belong  to  the  past.  2.  It  ushers  tis  into  the  Divme  presence; 
no  longer  partially  concealed  by  the  veil  of  material  things,  but  fully  revealed  in  light, 
which  reveals  the  moral  attitude  of  every  human  spirit  and  judges  it  "  in  righteous- 
ness." "  After  death  "  (and  following  close  upon  it)  "  the  judgment "  (Heb.  ix.  28). 
"  We  must  all  be  maniifest  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,"  &c.  (2  Cor.  v.  10). 
8.  It  fixes  our  future  destiny,  in  weal  or  woe.     "  What  is  a  man  profited,"  &c. 

II.  The  uncertainty  of  life.  The  step  must  be  taken,  but  when  we  know  not 
That  we  may  be  duly  impressed  by  a  truth  which  all  admit,  but  few  adequately 
realise,  consider — 1.  The  frailty  of  the  body,  and  the  innumerable  dangers  to  which 
it  is  exposed.  "  Between  us  and  hell  or  heaven  there  is  nothing  but  life,  the  most 
fragile  thing  in  existence"  (Pascal).  2.  The  facts  of  daily  wservation.  What 
occurs  to  others  so  often,  so  suddenly  and  unexpectedly,  may  occur  to  ourselves. 
We  have  no  guarantee  that  it  will  not.  "  Man's  uncertain  life  is  like  a  raindrop  on 
the  bough,  amid  ten  thousand  of  its  sparkling  kindred,  and  at  any  moment  it  may 
fall."  3.  The  declarations  of  the  Divine  word.  "  Man  knoweth  not  his  time,"  &c. 
(Eccles.  ix.  12).  "  Ye  know  not  what  shall  be  on  the  morrow.  For  what  is  your 
life?"  Ac.  (James  iv.  14).  Why  should  we  be  left  in  such  uncertainty?  (1)  To 
teach  us  the  sovereignty  of  God  and  our  dependence  upon  him.  (2)  To  accord  with 
our  present  probationary  position,  which  necessitates  the  proper  adjustment  of 
motives  to  our  freedom  and  responsibility.  (3)  To  enable  us  properly  to  perform 
the  ordinary  duties  of  life,  in  connection  with  which  we  are  appointed  to  serve  God 
here  and  prepare  for  his  service  hereafter.  (4)  To  check  presumption  in  devoting 
undue  attention  to  the  affairs  of  this  life  and  neglecting  those  of  the  life  to  come. 
(5)  To  lead  us  not  to  put  the  event  out  of  our  minds  altogether,  but  rather  to  con- 
stant preparation  for  it  and  for  the  life  that  lies  beyond.  "The  last  day  is  kept 
secret  that  every  day  may  be  watched  "  (Augjistine).  "  Take  ye  heed,  watch  and 
pray :  for  ye  know  not  when  the  time  is  "  (Mark  xiii.  38).  "  Be  ye  therefore  nady 
also,"  &c.  (Luke  xiL  40). 

III.  The  necessitt  of  watghfitl  fbefabation.  Seeing  that  at  any  instant  the 
step  may  be  taken,  it  plainly  behoves  us  to  be  always  ready.  1.  By  seeking  and 
maintaining  a  right  state  of  heart  (John  iii.  2,  14).  2.  By  diligent,  faithful,  and 
feisevering  performance  of  duty .  3.  By  constant  and  prayerful  committal  of  our 
toids  into  the  hands  of  God.  So,  whenever  the  step  is  taken,  it  will  be  "  only  a 
step  "  out  of  the  shadows  and  sorrows  of  earth  into  the  glory  and  joy  of  heaven. — D. 

Vers.  11 — 23.  (The  open  cocntbt,  neab  Gibeah.)— j1  covenant  of  friendship. 
"And  Jonathan  made  a  covenant  with  the  house  of  David"(ver.  16).  Tlie  friendship 
of  Jonathan  and  David  was  expressed  and  confirmed  by  a  sacred  covenant  (ch.  xviii. 
3).  The  covenant  now  made  differed  from  the  former.  1.  It  was  made  at  a  time 
of  trial.  Their  frieiidsliip  was  put  to  a  severe  test;  for  it  had  become  clear  to  the 
mind  of  Jonathan  that  David  was  destined  to  be  king  (ver.  13),  as  he  afterwards  stated 
more  fully  (ch.  xxiii.  17).  "  Jonathan  caused  David  to  swear  again"  (ver.  17),  not 
because  he  distrusted  him,  but  "  because  he  loved  him :  for  he  loved  him  as  he  loved 
his  own  soul ; "  and  in  times  of  special  danger  such  repeated  and  solemn  assurances 
may  be  needful  and  beneficial,  2.  It  included  the  obligation  to  show  kindness  to 
the  house  of  Jonathan  as  well  as  himself.     Consider  it  as — 

I.  CoNFiEMED  BY  AN  APPEAL  TO  GoD.  It  Was  customary  in  making  a  covenant 
(contract  or  agreement)  to  take  an  oath  in  which  God  was  appealed  to  as  a  witness 
and  an  avenger  of  its  violation  (Gen.  xxvi.  28 ;  xxxi.  46—53).  Even  when  no 
such  appeal  is  expressly  made  it  should  be  remembered — 1.  That  he  observes  the 
promises  and  engagements  which  men  make  to  one  another,  and  keeps  a  faithful 
record  thereof  (Mai.  iii.  16).  2.  That  he  loves  to  see  truth  and  faithfulness  in 
their  speech  and  conduct  (Deut.  vii.  9  ;  xxxii.  4).  3.  That  he  manifests  his  dis- 
pleasure toward  those  who  neglect  or  violate  their  engagements  (£zek.  xvii.  9).     4 


OH.  xr.  1—33.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  •        385 

That  he  shows  favour  and  affords  help  to  those  who  strive  to  keep  them  faithfully. 
' '  Who  hath  not  lifted  up  his  soul  unto  vanity,  nor  sworn  deceitfully.  He  shall  receive 
the  blessing  from  the  Lord  "  (Ps.  xxiv.  4  ;  xv.  4 ;  Ephes.  iv.  25). 

II.  Deepening  the  sense  of  obligation.  In  some  cases  a  covenant  creates  a 
new  obligation ;  in.  others  (like  that  of  friendship)  it  intensifies  the  force  and  feeling 
of  it — 1.  By  the  solemn  manner  in  which  it  is  made.  3.  By  the  greater  definiteness 
in  which  the  obligation  is  expressed.  3.  By  the  permanent  record  which  is  formed 
of  it  in  the  memory,  often  associated  with  particular  places  and  objects  (Josh.  xxiv. 
87).  4.  And  this  is  important  as  an  incentive  to  faithfulness  in  temptation  arising 
from  self-interest  and  strong  passion  to  set  it  aside.  As  often  as  Jonathan  and  David 
remembered  their  sacred  covenant  they  would  be  impelled  to  ever  higher  love  and 
faithfulness. 

III.  CONTEIBITTING    TO    THE    BENEFIT    OF    BOTH.       "  By   JchOVah,"    &C.    (ver.    13). 

"  And  O  that  thou  wouldst  while  I  live  show  me  kindness,"  &c.  (ver.  14).  Bach 
received  as  well  as  gave  assurances  of  kindness,  which  served — 1.  To  afford  a  claim 
that  might  be  confidently  urged  in  diflSiculty  and  danger  (ver.  8).  3.  To  enrich  the 
soul  with  a  permanent  feeling  of  pure  and  elevating  joy.  "  Very  pleasant  bast  tbou 
been  to  me  "  (3  Sam.  i.  36).  3.  To  preserve  it  from  despondency  in  hours  of  darkness 
and  trouble.  4.  To  increase  its  aspiration  and  endeavour  after  all  that  is  excellent. 
The  continued  loyalty  of  David  to  Saul  and  his  acts  of  kindness  to  him  were  doubtless 
greatly  incited  by  the  love  of  Jonathan ;  and  the  latter  was  not  less  morally 
strengthened  and  blessed  by  the  love  of  David.  "  There  is  no  influence  on  a  feeling 
mind  stronger  than  the  sense  of  being  loved ;  nothing  more  elevating,  more  securing 
to  the  inner  life." 

IV.  Involving  the  welfare  of  others.  "  And  that  thou  wouldst  not  cut  off 
thy  kindness  from  my  house  for  ever,"  &c.  (vers.  15,  38).  ' '  His  request  that  his 
house  may  be  excepted  from  this  judgement  as  executor  of  which  he  regards  David,  is 
founded  on  and  justified  by  his  position  outside  the  circle  of  '  enemies '  (since  he 
recognises  God's  will  concerning  David,  and  bends  to  it  as  David's  friend),  so  that, 
though  a  member  of  Saul's  house,  he  does  not  belong  to  it  as  concerns  the  judgment 
of  extermination  "  (Erdmann).  1.  A  parent  naturally  desires  and  ought  to  seek  the 
welfare  of  his  family.  3.  He  may  by  his  faithful  conduct  do  much  to  promote  it. 
3.  For  the  sake  of  one  many  are  frequently  and  justly  spared  and  blessed.  "  Is  there 
yet  any  that  is  left  of  the  house  of  Saul,  that  I  may  show  him  kindness  for  JonatTian's 
sake  "  (3  Sam.  ix.  1).  4.  The  memory  of  the  good  is  a  perpetual  incitement  to 
goodness. 

Learn — 1.  The  wonderful  condescension  of  God  in  making  with  men  a  friendly 
covenant  (arrangement,  constitution, dispensation),  according  to  which  he  graciously 
assures  them  of  unspeakable  privileges  and  blessings  (Gen.  ix.  14 ;  Jer.  xxxi.  33 ; 
Gal.  iii.  15 — 18).  3.  The  sure  ground  which  is  thereby  afforded  for  confidence  and 
"strong  consolation."  3.  The  necessity  of  observing  the  appointed  conditions 
thereof.  4.  To  look  to  God  for  all  good  through  "  Jesus,  the  Mediator  of  the  new 
covenant "  (Heb.  xii.  34),  and  "  for  Christ's  sake  "  (Ephes.  iv.  33).— D. 

Ver.  3. — Mortal  peril.  Brave  men  have  their  times  of  depression,  and  believing 
men  have  their  fits  of  discouragement.  Of  David's  courage  there  could  be  no  ques- 
tion. He  had  faced  death  without  flinching,  both  in  defence  of  his  flock  from  beasts 
of  prey,  and  for  the  deliverance  of  Israel  from  the  boastful  Philistine.  Yet  he  now 
recoiled,  saying,  "  There  is  but  a  step  between  me  and  death."  He  felt  as  on  the 
edge  of  a  precipice.  One  push,  and  he  was  gone.  We  need  not  wonder  at  this ;  for 
it  is  one  thing  to  meet  an  enemy  in  the  open  field,  another  thing  to  feel  that  one's 
steps  are  dogged  by  treacherous  malice,  and  not  know  but  one  may  be  attacked  in 
his  sleep,  or  struck  from  behind,  or  eotrapped  by  some  cruel  stratagem.  Of  David's 
faith  in  God  there  could  be  just  as  little  question  as  of  his  bravery.  All  the  successes 
he  had  gained  had  been  triumphs  of  faith.  But  temperament  goes  for  something 
too,  and  the  son  of  Jesse  had  the  sensitive  nature  which  goes  with  poetic  genius. 
He  was  capable  of  great  exultation,  but  just  as  capable  of  sudden  discouragement ; 
and  when  he  gave  way  to  a  foreboding,  melancholy  mood,  his  faith  looked  like  un- 
belief.     The  vDung    nd  liealthj' cannot,  should  not,  wish  to  die.      We  can  feel  for 

1  SAM.  "  0  0 


188  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xx.  1—23 

Henry  Eirke  White,  though  hia  tone  was  too  gloomy,  when  he  wrote,  deprecating  Iiia 

•arlyfat* — 

"  It  is  hard 
To  feel  the  hand  of  Death  anest  one's  steps 
Throw  a  chill  blight  o'er  all  one's  budding  hopei, 
And  hurl  one's  soul  untimely  to  the  shades." 

Poets,  both  heathen  and  Christian,  have  often  deplored  the  disease  and  violence 
which  cast  young  lives  headlong  from  the  precipice.  And  we  regard  the  youthful 
David's  recoil  from  the  cruel  death  which  Saul  designed  for  him  as  quite  natural, 
and  in  no  sense  discreditable  to  his  manhood.  But  there  is  more  than  this  in  his 
melancholy. 

I.  The  Old  Testament  wat  of  reoardino  death.  In  the  days  before  Christ, 
dimness  overhung  the  doctrine  of  a  future  existence.  "Life  and  incorruption  "  had 
not  been  brought  to  light.  It  was  therefore  reckoned  a  blessing  to  live  long  in 
Palestine.  It  was  a  sore  calamity  to  die  in  one's  youth.  The  soldiers  of  Israel 
would  encounter  death  in  the  excitement  of  battle ;  and  such  prophets  as  Elijah  and 
Jonah  could  even  wish  for  death  in  a  hurt  and  discouraged  mood  of  mind ;  but,  as  a 
rule,  even  the  most  devout  Hebrews  regarded  death  with  sadness  and  reluctance. 
No  wonder  that  David,  brought  up  in  the  ideas  of  his  own  age,  not  of  ours,  should 
shrink  from  the  cutting  short  of  his  days  by  violence,  just  when  he  had  won  dis- 
tinction, and  begun  to  be  Of  service  to  his  nation.  The  horror  of  it  hung  above  him 
for  many  a  day ;  for  even  after  many  wonderful  escapes  we  hear  him  say,  "  I  shall 
now  perish  one  day  by  the  hand  of  Saul."  This  sadness  or  reluctance  in  view  of  death 
never  left  an  Old  Testament  worthy  like  David  except  in  the  hour  of  battle,  or  under 
some  such  strong  emotion  as  once  made  him  cry,  "  Would  God  I  had  died  for  thee, 
0  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son  I "  At  the  end  of  his  career  he  made  express  mention 
in  his  song  of  thanksgiving  of  his  deliverance  from  the  "  sorrows  "  and  the  "  snares 
of  death  "  (2  Sam.  xxii.).  And  when  we  see  him  in  old  age,  anxiously  nursed  that 
his  days  might  be  prolonged,  we  catch  no  sign  of  a  spirit  longing  to  be  free  and 
assured  of  being  with  the  Lord,  such  as  one  expects  to  find  in  the  latter  days  of 
almost  any  eminent  Christian.  "Now  the  days  of  David  drew  nigh  that  he  should 
die,  and  he  charged  Solomon  his  son,  saying,  I  go  the  way  of  all  the  earth."  Com- 
pare the  language  in  Ps.  xiii.  3 ;  xxx.  9 ;  Ixxxviii.  11 ;  and  that  of  Hezekiah  in 
Isa.  xxxviii.  Contrast  with  this  the  contempt  of  death  which  was  admired  and 
often  exhibited  by  the  heathen.  But  the  Hebrew  feeling  on  the  subject  was  really 
the  more  exalted,  as  having  a  perception  of  the  connection  of  death  with  sin,  and  a 
value  for  communion  with  the  living  God  in  the  land  which  was  his,  and  therefore 
theirs,  of  which  the  heathen  mind  knew  nothing. 

II.  Bbighteb  view  of  death  in  the  New  Testament.  1.  Contrast  with  the 
case  of  David  in  youth  that  of  Stephen  at  Jerusalem,  evidently  young,  or  in  the 
prime  of  life.  His  powers  were  at  the  full,  and  a  distinguished  career  of  usefulness 
among  the  Hellenist  Jews  opened  before  him.  Those  who  entered  into  controversy 
with  him  "  were  not  able  to  resist  the  wisdom  and  the  spirit  by  which  he  spake." 
Suddenly  the  enraged  Jews  seized  him,  and  dragged  him  before  the  Sanhedrim  on 
the  capital  charge  of  blasphemy.  Well  did  Stephen  know  that  there  was  but  a  step 
between  him  and  death;  but  no  melancholy  fell  upon  his  spirit  "AH  that  sat  in 
the  council,  looking  steadfastly  on  him,  saw  his  face  as  it  had  been  the  face  of  an 
angel."  2.  Contrast  with  the  case  of  David  in  old  age  that  of  "  such  an  one  as  Paul 
the  aged,"  and  his  feeling  when  he  was  "  ready  to  be  ofEered,"  and  the  time  of  his 
departure  was  at  hand.  He  too  was  a  man  of  sensitive  temperament,  and  suffered 
keenly  at  times  from  dejection.  He  too  was  careful  not  to  throw  his  life  away. 
But  when  there  seemed  but  a  step  between  him  and  death,  what  an  access  of  light, 
what  an  advance  of  consolation  and  hope,  had  the  servant  of  God  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment over  the  servant  of  God  in  the  Old  I  David  said,  "  I  go  the  way  of  all  the 
earth."  But  Paul,  "We  are  confident,  and  willing  rather  to  be  absent  from  the 
body  and  present  with  the  Lord."  0  happy  ending  of  this  troubled  life  I  0  welcome 
•scape  from  fleshly  impediment,  weariness,  temptation,  insuf&ciency,  and  sorrow  1 

lU.  Ohbibt's  oohtcmplatioh  Of  HiB  OWN  DECEAss.    He  who  is  the  Son  of  David, 


W.ZX.M— a.] 


THB  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUIL. 


887 


and  the  Lord  of  Stephen  and  of  Paul,  saw  in  the  very  prime  of  youthful  manhood 
that  there  was  but  a  step  between  him  and  death,  and  that  too  a  death  of  harsh 
riolenoe  snoh  as  his  ancestor  had  feared.  There  was,  however,  this  difference  between 
"  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  "  and  all  other  men — that  he  knew  when,  where,  and  how  ha 
■honld  die.  It  was  to  be  at  Jerusalem,  and  at  the  time  of  the  feast.  He  foretold 
the  very  day  on  which  he  should  "  be  perfected,"  and  indicated  that  it  would  be  by 
crucifixion  in  saying  that  the  Son  of  man  would  be  "  lifted  up  from  the  earth. ' 
From  such  knowledge  it  is  well  that  we  are  exempt.  To  know  the  place,  time,  and 
manner  of  our  death  would  tempt,  perhaps,  at  first  to  carelessness ;  and  then,  as  the 
date  came  near,  would  put  a  strain  on  our  spirits  very  hard  to  be  home.  Such  a 
strain  was  upon  Christ,  and,  as  the  bitter  death  approached,  his  spirit  was  "  exceeding 
sorrowful."  As  David  had  his  friend  Jonathan  to  show  him  sympathy  and  endeavour 
to  drive  from  his  mind  the  presentiment  of  death,  so  Jesus  Christ  had  his  disciples, 
who,  as  lovers  and  friends,  besought  him  not  to  think  of  dying ;  but  he  could  not 
take  comfort  from  them.  The  cup  which  his  Father  had  g^ven  him  to  drink,  should 
he  not  drink  it  ?  To  him  death  was  gain.  He  finished  all  his  work  and  travail, 
then  left  the  world  and  went  to  the  Father.  "  Father,  into,  thy  hands  I  commit  my 
spirit."  We  have  much  to  learn  from  David,  more  from  Stephen  and  Paul,  most  of 
aU  from  our  Lord  Jesus.  What  If  there  be  but  a  step  between  us  and  death  ?  It  is 
•  step  which  cannot  be  taken  but  as,  and  when,  and  where  our  Lord  appointa. 
"  Lord  Jesus,  into  thy  handa  I  commit  my  spirit  I "  "  Absent  from  the  body,  present 
with  the  Lord."— F. 


BXPOSITION. 


Opbn  HATBxn  OF  Sattl  aoahtst  DAvin 
(vers.  24—84).  Vers.  24—26. — ^The  king  sat 
him  down  to  eat  meat  Hebrew,  "the  king 
eat  down  at  the  bread  to  eat."  Oil  sitting 
at  table  see  ch.  xvl  11.  And  Jonathan 
arose.  When  the  king  had  taken  his  usual 
place,  that  of  honour,  next  the  wall,  and 
therefore  farthest  from  the  door,  Jonathan 
arose  and  took  his  place  on  one  side  of  the 
king,  while  Abner  sat  on  the  other.  David's 
place  below  them  was  left  empty.  The 
omission  of  the  statement  that  Jonathan  sat 
down  makes  the  passage  obscure,  and  the 
versions  bungle  in  rendering  it,  but  there 
can  be  little  doubt  that  these  words  ought 
to  be  supplied.  He  is  not  olean.  Saul 
supposed  that  some  ceremonial  defilement 
(see  Levit.  xv.  2 — 16)  had  befallen  David, 
and  as  the  new  moon  was  a  religious  festival, 
this  would  necessarily  prevent  his  attendance. 

Vers.  27 — 29. — On  the  morrow,  which  was 
the  second  day  of  the  month.  Hebrew, 
"  on  the  morrow  of  the  new  moon,  the 
second  day. "  David's  absence  on  the  second 
day  made  Saul  aware  that  it  was  no  accident, 
and  he  demands  of  Jonathan  the  reason ; 
whereupon  he  gives  the  excuse  previously 
arranged,  adding  that  it  was  David's  brother 
who  had  required  his  attendance.  Ther^ 
Septuagint  has  brothers,  being  ofiianded  at 
the  singular,  because  Jesse  was  still  alive. 
But  as  vie  festival  was  not  confined  to  Jesse's 
household,  his  brother  might  very  properly  be 
the  convener,  without  usurping  his  father's 
place.  Let  me  get  away.  Literally,  "let 
■a  Moapa,"  "let  aa  gat  ofl;"  a  light,  half 


jocose  way  of  speaking  adopted  by  Jonathan, 
as  if  the  matter  were  a  mere  trifle. 

Vers.  30,  31. — Thou  son  of  the  perversa 
rebellions  woman.  Literally,  "thou  son 
of  one  perverse  in  rebellion.  In  the  East 
it  is  the  greatest  possible  insult  to  a  man  to 
caU  his  mother  names ;  but  the  word  rendered 
perverse,  instead  of  being  a  feminine  adjec- 
tive, is  probably  an  abstract  noun,  and  "son 
of  perversity  of  rebellion  "  would  mean  one 
who  was  thoroughly  perverse  in  his  resistance 
to  his  father's  will.  Unto  the  oonfnsion  of 
thy  mother's  nakedness.  /.  «.  thy  mother 
will  feel  ashamed  and  disgraced  at  having 
borne  such  a  son.  He  shall  snrely  die. 
Hebrew,  "  he  is  a  son  of  death,"  son  being 
constantly  used  in  Hebrew  to  express  quali- 
ties, or,  as  here,  the  fate  to  whidi  a  man  Is 
destined. 

Vers.  82— 84.— When  Jonathan  pleaded 
mildly  for  his  friend,  Sanl  did  not  oast,  but 
"brandished"  (see  on  ch.  xviiL  11)  his 
javelin  at  him,  threatening  to  smite  him. 
This  fierce  behaviour  of  his  father  filled 
Jonathan  also  with  anger,  and  he  arose, 
refused  to  partake  of  the  meal,  and  went 
away  in  wrath.  His  indignation  was  roused 
not  merely  at  his  fiither  having  thus  brand- 
ished his  javelin  in  his  face,  for  he  was 
sitting  close  to  Saul,  but  because  he  had 
cast  shameful  aspersions  upon  David  in 
saying  that  he  was  a  rebel,  and  deserved 
death. 

Jonathan's  last  ussima  with  Datid 
(vers.  86—42).  Vers.  86— 88.— The  next 
tuoming  JonatlMB  want  out  late  tha  iMi. 
002 


888 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  XX.  24—42. 


not  at  the  time,  but  "  to  the  place "  ap- 
pointed, taking  with  him  a  little  lad,  as  leas 
likely  to  suspect  a  reason.  Having  shot  at 
the  mark,  he  sends  him  to  pick  up  the  arrows, 
and  as  he  runs  to  do  so  he  shoots  one  beyond 
him,  and,  calling  aloud,  gives  David  the  sign 
that  there  was  no  hope.  To  keep  the  boy's 
attention  engaged  he  gives  him  hurried  com- 
mands —  Make  speed,  haste,  stay  not. 
Instead  of  the  arrows  the  written  text  has 
"Jonathan's  lad  gathered  up  the  arrow," 
i.  e.  that  one  especially  which  Jonathan  had 
shot  beyond  him,  and  to  which  his  rapid 
commands  referred. 

Vers.  40 — 42. — His  artillery.  /.  «.  his 
weapons.  To  get  rid  of  the  boy  Jonathan 
sends  him  home  with  his  bow  and  arrows, 
and  then  David  arose  out  of  a  place  toward 
the  south,  or  "from  the  south  side"  of  the 
stone  Ezei,  and  while  not  forgetting  in  his 
repeated  obeisance  the  honour  due  to  Jona- 


than's dignity,  yet  friendship  prevailed,  and 
they  kissed  one  another  and  wept  sore,  nntil 
David  exceeded,  i.  e.  broke  down,  and  waa 
completely  mastered  by  his  grief.  And  so 
they  parted,  David  to  begin  a  life  of  danger 
and  wandering,  while  Jonathan  returned  to 
the  city  to  be  a  dutiful  son  to  SauL  Phillip- 
son  remarks,  "  The  scenes  in  this  chapter  are 
some  of  the  most  affecting  presented  to  na 
in  history,  whether  in  old  or  modern  times, 
and  we  may  well  wonder  at  the  delicacy  of 
feeling  and  the  gentleness  of  the  sentiments 
which  these  two  men  in  those  old  rough 
times  entertained  for  one  another.  Ko 
ancient  writer  has  set  before  us  so  noble  an 
example  of  a  heart -felt,  unselfish,  and 
thoroughly  human  state  of  feeling,  and  none 
has  described  friendship  with  such  entire 
truth  in  all  its  relations,  and  with  such 
complete  and  profound  Imowledsa  of  the 
human  heart," 


H0MILBTIC8. 

Vers.  24 — 34. — Wasted  injlueneet,  muffled  thmights,  and  conflicting  interext*.  The 
facts  are — 1.  While  David  lies  hidden,  Saul  notices  his  absence  from  the  feast  on 
the  first  day,  and  refers  it  to  some  ceremonial  defilement.  2.  On  the  second  day  he 
calls  Jonathan's  attention  to  the  fact,  and  inquires  the  cause.  3.  On  his  explaining 
the  reason,  Saul,  in  a  fit  of  anger,  accuses  him  of  friendship  with  David,  and  points 
out  the  injury  which  he  thinks  will  arise  therefrom.  4.  On  Jonathan  reasoning 
against  the  command  to  fetch  David  that  he  may  be  slain,  Saul,  in  his  rage,  casts  a 
javelin  at  him.  5.  Jonathan,  indignant  at  the  injustice  and  cruelty  of  his  father, 
leaves  the  court  and  spends  the  day  in  fasting  and  sorrow.  The  chief  interest  of 
this  section  turns  on  the  conduct  of  Jonathan  and  Saul  in  the  absence  of  David.  The 
event  proved  the  sagacity  of  David  in  keeping  at  a  safe  distance  from  his  declared 
enemy.  The  facts  of  this  narrative  may  be  best  dealt  with  as  furnishing  suggestions 
o£  realities  common  even  in  modem  life. 

I.  Thb  commingled  characters  of  lifb.  Here  was  a  festive  board,  a  court 
banquet,  and  a  blending  in  it  of  characters  most  dissimilar.  First  there  was  Saul, 
Bullen,  morose,  charged  to  the  full  with  envy  and  malice,  ready  for  deeds  of  blood, 
and  fearful  of  a  doom  of  which  he  dared  not  speak.  Then  there  was  Jonathan, 
pure,  bright,  the  very  soul  of  chivalry  and  honour,  carrying  on  his  heart  a  tender 
secret,  and  bound  by  holy  bonds  to  the  interests  of  a  coming  king.  By  him  was 
Abner  in  a  seat  of  honour,  just  coming  into  distinction,  a  warrior  destined  to  play 
an  important  part  in  the  future  afEairs  of  Israel.  Others,  not  named,  were  there — 
men  of  influence,  varying  in  temper  and  diversely  influenced  by  the  strange  events 
of  the  age.  And,  in  spirit,  holding  his  right  to  a  vacant  place,  David,  who  in 
sympathy  sustained  the  heart  of  his  beloved  friend  in  face  of  a  perilous  undertaking. 
A  motley  assembly  in  a  moral  point  of  view  I  Representative  of  many  a  banquet 
and  social  gathering  I  Society  is  strangely  formed.  The  necessities  of  life,  sustained 
by  custom,  bring  into  contact  elements  most  dissimilar,  each  being  toned  down  by 
the  presence  of  the  other,  and  the  powers  that  lie  in  the  heart  being  systematically 
repressed  out  of  deference  to  the  proprieties  of  life.  The  contending  forces  of  sin 
and  holiness,  modified  by  diversities  in  education  and  association,  issue  in  shades  of 
character  in  endless  variety.  Take  any  assembly,  around  the  festive  board  or  in  a 
wider  circle  ;  what  paissions,  hopes,  fears,  terrors,  joys,  aspirations,  motives,  designs 
lie  concealed  in  each  breast  1  Each  one  there  is  a  distinct  world  ;  carries  in  himself 
a  special  destiny ;  is  a  sepulchre  of  buried  joys,  or  a  garden  of  germinating  seeds. 
B<^  little  we  know  of  those  sitting  by  our  side  I  What  tragediei  u«  to  be  wrooglit 
X  by  Mme  we  maetl  QLtHh  z.  26;  1  dor.  ii.  11). 


OB.  xz.  U— 41]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUBL.  881 

II.  Wasted  influences.  Saul's  spirit  and  conduct  at  this  time  were  eyidence 
that  all  the  efforts  to  bring  him  to  a  right  state  of  mind  were  in  vain.  During  his 
career  Providence  had  wrought  through  trouble  and  joy,  prophet  and  people,  threat- 
ening and  encouragement,  and  lately  through  the  wise  and  gentle  persuasions  of  his 
eldest  son  and  the  awe-inspiring  presence  of  the  prophetic  company  (ch.  xix.  21 — 
24).  But  it  all  proved  to  be  as  the  "  morning  cloud  and  early  dew."  Indeed, 
the  coarse  language  and  foul  abuse  and  increased  violence  on  this  occasion  remind 
us  of  the  unclean  spirit  returning  with  other  spirits  to  make  the  last  state  worse 
than  the  first  (Matt.  xii.  45).  This  necessarily  raises  the  thought  of  the  extent  and 
lessons  of  the  wasted  influences  of  life.  That  vast  and  varied  influences  are  brought 
to  bear  on  human  beings,  which,  so  far  as  we  can  trace  in  this  life,  do  not  issue  in 
their  legitimate  results  is  obvious.  "  Seed  on  stony  ground  "  is  a  fact  in  the  moral 
as  in  the  physical  world.  "  How  often  would  I  have  gathered  thee  I  "  is  repeated  by 
hundreds  of  parents  and  teachers  after  the  example  of  the  sorrowing  Lord.  The 
bitter  tears  of  broken-hearted  parents  and  the  lamentations  of  our  true  Jeremiahs 
over  degenerate  nationalities  raise  the  question  of  Why  such  wasted  energy  for  good? 
It  does  not,  indeed,  follow  that  all  is  lost  which  seems  to  be  lost  on  the  imme- 
diate object.  The  waste  of  life  which  Butler  refers  to  in  his  '  Analogy '  is,  we  know, 
not  really  such  in  the  economy  of  the  universe.  And  so  even  the  fruitless  expendi- 
ture of  moral  influence  on  our  reckless  souls  is  wrought  up  into  useful  expenditure, 
for  moral  instruction  and  maintenance  of  justice,  in  the  whole  circle  of  moral  exist- 
ence. Our  Saviour's  appeals  issued  in  rejection  by  the  Pharisees,  but  the  two 
together  will  form  an  element  in  the  discipline  and  instruction  of  untold  ages 
which  will  be  highly  useful.  It  suggests  thought  as  to  the  mystery  of  the  human 
will,  and  the  relation  of  present  to  future  existence.  It  suggests  mquiries  for  all 
Christian  woYkers — whether  their  methods  are  wisest,  are  sustained  in  a  right  spirit, 
and  are  sufficiently  varied  in  kind.  It  brings  grave  questions  to  the  conscience  of 
those  who  enjoy  privileges — as  to  what  account  they  will  render,  and  whether  they 
shall  ever  be  more  than  awfnl  monuments  in  the  universe  for  the  warning  of  other 
beings. 

III.  Muffled  thoughts.  "Saul  ijialte  not  anything  that  day:  for  lu  thought" 
(ver.  26).  As  the  monarch  sat  at  the  head  of  his  table  the  guests  saw  his  stately 
form  and  heard  his  voice  when  he  conversed  on  the  ordinary  topics  of  the  day ;  but 
also  "he  thought" — thoughts  of  David,  his  past  honours,  his  possible  futnre,  his 
absence  to-day,  and  his  appearance  on  the  morrow,  and  then  his  speedy  death, 
passed  swifter  than  lightning  through  the  dark  mind,  indicating  their  existence  in 
the  low,  muffled  tones  which  only  the  ear  of  God  could  discern.  Thought  is  con- 
stantly tending  to  expression  in  words,  and  there  are  gradations  in  its  movement. 
From  simple  definiteness  of  existence  up  to  loud  exclamations,  Saul's  thoughts,  like 
muf&ed  bells,  were  ringing  within  in  subdued  tones,  their  language  being  distinct  to 
himself  and  to  God.  It  is  often  forgotten  that  thought  is  language  in  the  world  of 
mind  ;  and  it  is  a  solemn  fact  that  our  real  life  lies  in  the  thoughts  we  allow  to  pass 
through  our  mind.  Many  are  under  the  delusion  that  what  is  said  audibly  and  done 
visibly  constitutes  the  material  of  which  character  is  built  and  on  which  judgment 
will  one  day  be  pronounced.  We  are  spiritual,  invisible  beings.  And  while  thus 
our  thoughts  are  the  real  forms  of  our  life,  it  is  worthy  of  remark  that  not  one 
thousandth  part  of  what  we  think  ever  finds  expression  in  distinct,  audible  tones.  The 
vast  preponderance  of  our  thoughts  beat  in  muffled  tones  because  we  dare  not  or 
cannot  utter  them.  What  God  must  hear  beating  in  the  hearts  of  men  daily  I  It 
w»s  muffled  thought  which  Christ  detected  saying,  "  This  man  blasphemeth  "  (Matt. 
Ix.  3  ;  Luke  vi.  7,  8),  and  which  said,  "  There  is  no  God."  The  same  is  true  of  the 
"  groaning  of  the  prisoner''  which  cometh  up  before  God,  and  the  dumb  prayers  of 
the  children  of  God  all  over  the  earth.     "  Keep  thy  heart  with  all  diligenBe," 

IV.  Conflicting  interests.  Jonathan  appears  to  have  been  an  autnority  with 
his  father  in  all  matters  pertaining  to  the  court  and  government  (vers.  2,  27).  The 
muffled  thoughts  which  all  along  had  muttered  vengeance  against  David  now  found 
audible  and  violent  expression  in  the  abuse  poured  on  Jonathan  and  the  villanoug 
attempt  on  his  life.  He  set  before  Jonathan  as  conflicting  interests,  between  which 
h*  waa  to  maka  a  choice,  his  friendship  tor  David  and  his  succession  to  tha  kingdom 


8M  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  zx.  M— 4S 

If  Jonathan  kept  the  one  he  must  lose  the  other.  Saul  assumed  that  policy  and 
prudence  would  dictate  the  choice  of  the  Buccession,  for,  with  the  swift  logic  of  the 
cruel,  he  wound  up  his  argument  by,  "  Therefore  now  send  and  fetch  him  unto  me,  for 
be  shall  anrely  die  "  (ver.  31).  It  is  easy  to  show  that  Saul's  logic,  like  that  of  all  the 
wicked,  was  nnlty ;  tor  if  David  was  really  the  "  neighbour  "  to  whom  God  had  decreed 
to  give  the  kingdom  (ch.  xv.  28),  no  breaking  of  friendship  would  prevent  his  having 
it ;  and  if  David  was  a  friend  of  Jonathan  be  would  never  rob  him  of  his  right  should 
the  friendship  be  maintained.  Jonathan's  love  and  spiritual  insight^  enabled  him  to 
see  through  the  fallacy  and  to  make  his  choice.  There  are  altemativet  open  to  most 
men  in  Me  course  of  years  which  bring  material  and  spiritual  considerations  into 
sharp  contrast.  Here  it  was  selfish  grasping  at  power  verms  joy  in  God's  purposes 
for  Israel  and  mankind.  Moses  had  to  sajr  whether  the  probability  of  becoming 
prime-minister  of  Egypt  was  more  attractive  than  identifying  himself  with  the 
despised  slaves  in  prosecution  of  a  spiritual  enterprise.  The  same  contrast  arose, 
though  the  choice  was  different,  when  the  young  rich  man  was  required  to  evince  his 
supreme  love  for  God  and  all  that  that  implies  by  giving  up  the  wealth  on  which  his 
heart  was  set  (Matt.  xix.  20 — 22).  The  possession  of  wealth  and  acquisition  of  honour 
in  public  life  are  not  inconsistent  with  true  piety,  but  it  makes  all  the  difference 
when  parents  say  to  young  men,  "  Give  up  your  religion  if  you  are  to  make  your 
way  in  the  world ; "  "  Surrender  the  Greater  than  David,  and  grasp  the  honours  of 
this  life."  Eveiy  one  is  called  on  to  decide  between  Christ  and  the  supremacy  of 
material,  earthly  interests.    In  which  lies  wisdom  is  evident  (Matt.  z.  37 ;  xix.  27 — 29). 

V.  VlBTUE  VICTOBIOTTB.  Jonathan  was  proof  against  parental  influence,  material 
considerations  delusively  presented,  and  even  threatening  of  death.  He  pleaded  for 
right  and  innocence.  He  mourned  the  debasement  of  a  father.  He  was  indignant 
at  the  base  insinuations  against  the  noblest  and  purest  of  men.  He  dared  to  let  the 
court  know  his  preference  for  the  spiritual  over  the  material  (ver.  34).  This  is 
heroism  requiring  far  more  courage  than  to  go  amidst  the  cheers  of  men  and  the 
pageantry  of  war  to  the  cannon's  mouth.  Here  is  the  power  of  faith,  the  sufficiency 
of  God's  grace,  the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world  (Heb.  xi.  32 — 38).  The  world 
is  short-sighted.  Jonathan  now  wears  a  crown  wbicn  will  never  fade  (2  Tim.  iL 
12 ;  iv.  7,  8  ;  Eev.  iii.  21). 

General  lessons: — 1.  Seeing  that  such  varied  characteiB  are  around  us,  let  us  be  in 
every  place  as  the  "  salt  of  the  earth  *  and  "  light  of  the  world."  2.  It  is  our  duty 
to  exercise  the  holiest  influence  and  to  work  unweariedly,  whatever  be  the  issue 
(Eccles.  xi.  6).  3.  We  should  cultivate  such  an  inner  life  that  if  all  our  thoughts 
foimd  audible  expression  we  need  not  be  ashamed  (Ps.  li.  6,  10).  4.  Every  one  is 
tempted  to  reject  Christ,  and  so  every  one  has  to  determine  his  own  destiny. 
6.  Fidelity  in  seasons  of  great  trial  depends  much  «npr«vioasly-cnltivated  friendship 
with  Christ. 

Vers.  S6— 42. — Warning  tn  danger.  The  facts  ar»— 1.  In  accordance  with 
arrangement,  Jonathan,  on  the  next  day,  goes  out  into  the  field,  and,  on  shooting  the 
arrow  beyond  the  lad  with  him,  he  cries  out  the  signal  of  danger.  2.  David  recog- 
nises the  sign,  and  the  lad  is  sent  away  to  the  city.  3.  Thereupon  David  and  Jonathan 
embrace  each  other,  and  take  a  sorrowful  farewell — Jonathan  giving  him  his  benedic- 
tion, and  reminding  him  for  his  comfort  of  the  sacred  covenant  between  them  both. 
A  crisis  had  come  in  the  life  of  David  which  demanded  prompt  action.  He  had  passed 
from  a  quiet  pastoral  occupation  to  the  full  glory  of  a  victor's  triumph,  and  from 
thence  through  the  chequered  scenes  of  pubUo  service  in  the  army  and  the  court. 
Meanwhile  the  hidden  purposes  of  God  were  fast  developing;  and  now  the 
"  anointed "  has  to  take  a  painful  step  in  order  to  insure  the  preservation  of  life 
essential  to  the  realisation  of  the  end  for  which  Samuel  had  chosen  him  in  the  name 
of  God.  The  manner  in  which  Jonathan  performed  his  part  is  a  beautiful  instance 
of  wise  and  faithful  friendship  under  most  perilous  circumstances.     We  see  here — 

L   How  WK  MAT  COME   INTO  CIERUMSTANCE8  OF  OBBAT  DAKOBB  WHICH  AT  ONB  TIMB 

WOULD  NOT  BE  ANTiciFATBD.  The  life  of  the  anointed  of  the  Lord  was  in  real  peril 
by  reason  of  the  fixed  purpose  of  an  enraged  and  envious  king.  No  one  would  have 
■appoMd  ■Boh  a  oondition  of  things  whan  the  roddy  youth  went  forth  to  niAet  the 


Ok.  xz.  24-42.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  891 

giant,  and  subsequently  received  favours  at  the  hand  of  Saul.  But  the  possibilitiei 
of  human  experience  transcend  all  our.  effort  to  foresee.  What  the  web  of  life  will 
embrace  as  the  weaving  goes  on  who  can  tell  ?  It  is  true  one  stage  prepares  the  way 
for  another  according  to  fixed  laws,  but  we  know  not  what  new  external  condition 
a  day  or  an  hour  may  bring  forth  to  modify  an  existing  stage.  Who  less  than  Divine 
could  have  supposed  that  Adam,  pure  and  blessed,  would  soon  be  exposed  to  so  deadly 
■  peril  in  Eden  ?  or  that  he  who  received  the  homage  of  wise  men  and  was  the  subject 
of  angelic  praise  would  be  sought  by  a  murderous  Herod  ?  The  ffreat  lines  of  human 
experience  are  still  the  same.  In  business  affairs  the  once  prosperous  come  sometimes 
into  risks  of  property,  reputation,  and  all  that  is  dear.  By  associations  not  looked  for, 
characters  once  without  suspicion  are  in  danger  of  a  fatal  compromise.  The  tender, 
happy  youth  of  a  pious  home,  encircled  by  all  that  love  can  provide,  is  found  far 
from  home  on  the  verge  of  a  moral  precipice.  No  position  of  privilege  or  service  sets 
us  above  the  possibility  of  grave  dangers.  Even  David,  the  chosen  servant,  was 
nigh  unto  death,  and  the  holy  apostle  was  anxious  lest,  having  preached  to  others,  he 
himself  should  at  last  be  a  "  castaway  "  (1  Cor.  ix.  27). 

II.  Providence  always  pbovides  kindly  wabninqs  of  dangbb  and  incbntivm 
TO  ESCAPB.  In  the  service  of  God  David  came  into  this  great  peril,  but  by  the 
offices  of  friendship  God  mercifully  provided  for  his  need.  The  signal  was  given, 
and  he  recognised  its  meaning.  It  said  to  him,  "  Flee ;  escape."  Perhaps  it  may  be 
safely  said  that  there  is  no  circumstance  of  moral — and  often  of  materials-danger 
into  which  we  may  be  brought  in  the  unfolding  of  events  but  that  God  makes 
known  our  position  and  opens  a  way  of  escape.  .  Even  in  ordinary  affairs  the  voice 
of  a  sober  judgment,  if  not  of  some  personal  friend,  may  warn  the  merchant  of  his 
risks,  and  suggest  a  speedy  retreat  from  entanglements.  Often  a  man,  gradually 
forming  undesirable  associations,  is  warned  by  relatives  and  those  who  love-  him 
best  of  the  peril  of  his  reputation.  The  quondam  youth  of  purity  hears  a  voice  as 
from  a  mother's  heart  saying,  as  he  in  later  years  stands  on  the  brink  of  ruin, 
"  Flee  I  "    Providence  has  many  a  Jonathan  to  shoot  the  arrow  and  cry  "  Beyond." 

III.  It  is  KEASONABLK  THAT   IN  ALL  TIMES  OF  DANGEB  WE  SHOULD  PROMPTLY  AOT 

ON  THE  WABNING  AT  ANY  COST.  In  David's  case  we  see  the  reasonableness  of  his 
noting  the  sign,  acting  on  its  significance,  even  though  in  so  doing  it  cost  him  the 
bitter  pang  of  parting  from  the  dearest  friend  of  his  life,  and  becoming  a  beggar 
mnd  a  fugitive.  Only  thus  could  he  ultimately  fulfil  the  end  of  his  existence.  It 
was  reasonable,  for  Jonathan  knew  the  danger  to  be  real,  and  would  not  deceive.  So 
in  any  case  of  our  peril,  whether  of  health,  business,  reputation,  Christian  profession, 
or  future  salvation,  it  is  important  at  once  to  heed  the  voice  of  warning ;  for  Provi- 
dence never  lies.  It  is  a  fact  that  many  are  ruined  in  spite  of  warning.  The 
reason  is,  they  either  will  not  cultivate  the  habit  of  discerning  the  "  signs  of  the 
times  "  in  moral  and  spiritual  matters  (Matt.  xvi.  3)  ;  or,  discerning  them,  they  fall 
under  the  delusion  that  somehow  they  shall  escape,  even  though  they  remain  as 
they  are ;  or  else  they  refuse  to  believe  the  signs.  Many  reject  the  testimony  of 
the  faithful  Jonathan,  They  prefer  their  own  speculations  to  the  declared  testimony 
of  Christ  (Eev,  i,  18).  Verily  unbelief  is  folly,  and  those  who  pride  themselves  on 
reason  are  most  unreasonable.  It  often  costs  much  to  act  promptly  on  the  voice  of 
warning.  We  may  not  have  to  endure  a  separation  from  a  holy  friend  as  did  David  ; 
but  a  temporary  loss  may  be  sustained  of  serious  character.  The  ruin  threatening 
from  a  man's  entangled  business  affairs  may  be  escaped  by  a  prompt  surrender  of 
luxurious  habits  and  home  comforts.  To  save  reputation  friends  may  have  to  be 
abandoned.  A  soul  can  only  be  saved  from  death  sometimes  by  a  resolute  plucking 
out  of  a  right  eye  (Matt.  v.  29).     Lot  lost  all  in  Sodom  but  saved  himself. 

General  lessons: — 1.  Knowing  the  perilous  possibilities  of  life,  let  us  go  for- 
ward cautiously,  yet  quietly  trusting  in  God.  2.  Whenever  it  is  in  our  power,  let 
ns  prove  ourselves  friends  by  warning  others  of  their  material  or  spiritual  dangers. 
3.  We  should  give  careful  heed  to  the  first  promptings  of  conscience,  remembering 
that  in  moral  questions  the  first  motions  of  conscience  are  safest  for  action.  4.  We 
may  make  a  nseful  study  of  the  partings  of  life — of,  e-  g.,  Lot  and  Abraham,  Mosm 
•ad  Pharaoh,  Paul  and  th&  Ephesians,  Christ  and  his  disoipUa. 


892  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xx.  24-42 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBR 

Vers.  24 — 34.  (Gibeah.) — Anger.  "  Saul's  anger  was  kindled  againat  Jonathan  " 
(ver.  30).  "  And  Jonathan  arose  from  the  table  in  fierce  anger"  (ver.  84).  Angel 
is  not  necessarily  sinful.  "  It  is  in  itself,  and  in  its  original,  no  more  than  indig- 
nation against  injury  and  wickedness  "  (Butler,  on  '  Resentment ').  But  it  is  too 
frequently  sinful  because  of  the  manner  in  which  it  is  indulged.  How  different  was 
the  anger  of  Saul  now  from  what  it  was  on  a  former  occasion  (ch.  zL  6).  Consider 
that— 

I.  It  may  be  nNiNTENTioNALLT  EXCITED  (vers.  24 — 29).  The  reason  which  Jonathan 
gave  why  "  David's  place  was  empty  "  was  doubtless  a  mere  pretext  (ver.  12),  harm- 
less as  he  thought,  and  not  designed  to  provoke  wrath  ;  but  Saul  saw  through  it  at  once, 
and  his  "  anger  was  kindled  against  Jonathan  "  on  account  of  it  and  his  taking  part 
with  one  whom  he  regarded  as  his  enemy.  Care  should  be  exercised,  even  when  no 
harm  is  meant,  to  furnish  no  occasion  for  offence,  especially  in  intercourse  with 
those  who  are  of  an  irritable  and  passionate  temper,  and  to  avoid  "  all  appearance 
(every  kind)  of  evil."  Deception  practised  for  a  good  end  is  not  good,  and  sometimes 
produces  much  mischief. 

II.  It  IS  OFTEN  UNEIGHTEOUSLT  iNDtiLGED  (vers.  30 — 33),  as — 1.  When  it  springs  from 
selfishness  and  pride,  and  is  associated  with  malice  and  revenge.  Saul's  anger  against 
Jonathan  was  the  offspring  of  the  envy  toward  "  the  son  of  Jesse  "  which  slumbered 
in  his  breast,  if  indeed  he  had  not  now  formed  the  deliberate  purpose  of  putting  him 
to  death  at  the  first  opportunity.  It  is  not  said  that  "  the  evil  spirit  from  Jehovah 
came  upon  him  "  again.  Hatred  of  David  had  become  the  pervading  spirit  of  his 
life,  and  it  gave  a  colouring  to  everything.  "  Anger  is  an  agitation  of  the  mind 
that  proceeds  to  the  resolution  of  a  revenge,  the  mind  assenting  to  it "  (Seneca,  on 
'Anger').  2.  When  it  is  felt  without  jrist  or  adequate  cause.  _  The  questions  of 
Jonathan  (ver.  32)  did  not,  any  more  than  the  reason  he  had  previously  given,  justify 
his  father's  wrath,  and  his  jealousy  of  David  was  groundless  and  wicked.  "  Who- 
soever is  angry  with  his  brother  without  a  cause,"  &c.  (Matt.  v.  22).  3.  When  it 
becomes  excessive,  and  ceases  to  be  under  the  control  of  riglit  reason.  "  Be  master  of 
thine  anger."  4.  When  it  issues  in  bitter  words,  and  violent  and  unjust  act*. 
"  Whosoever  hateth  his  brother  is  a  murderer,"  &c.  (1  John  iii.  16).  He  has  within 
him  the  principle  of  murder,  the  germ  from  which  the  outward  act  naturally  grows. 
"  Cease  from  anger  and  forsake  wrath  "  (Ps.  xxxvii.  8).  "  Where  envy  and  strife 
are  there  is  confusion  and  every  evil  work"  (James iii.  16).  "  Sinful  anger  destroys 
our  own  peace  of  mind,  hurts  the  unity  of  spirit  among  brethren,  blocks  up  the  way 
to  the  Divine  throne,  exposes  us  to  danger,  makes  work  for  bitter  repentance,  fires 
the  minds  of  others,  makes  us  unlike  the  meek  and  lowly  Jesns,  causes  us  to  resemble 
madmen  and  devils,  and  is  cruel  and  murderous  "  (Fawcett,  'Essay  on  Anger'). 

III.  It  can  be  unblamablt  entertained  (ver.  34).  It  may  in  certain  circnm- 
stances  be  a  Christian  virtue.  But  in  order  to  this — 1.  It  must  be  directed,  out  of  love 
to  righteousness,  against  the  wrong  which  is  done  or  intended  rather  than  against 
the  wrong-doer,  and  be  associated  with  sorrow  for  him  and  good-will  toward  him. 
"  Resentment  is  not  inconsistent  with  good-will.  These  contrary  passions,  though 
they  may  lessen,  do  not  necessarily  destroy  each  other.  We  may  therefore  love  our 
enemy  and  yet  have  resentment  against  him  for  his  injurious  behaviour  toward  us  " 
(Butler,  on  'Forgiveness  of  Injuries').  "And  when  he  had  looked  round  about  on 
them  with  anger,  being  grieved  lor  the  hardness  of  their  hearts,"  Ac.  (Mark  iii  5). 
2.  It  must  befdtfrom  love  to  otJters  rather  than  ourselves,  especially  to  those  who 
love  God,  and  from  zeal  for  his  honour.  "  He  was  grieved  for  David,  because 
his  father  had  done  him  shame."  3.  It  must  be  kept  under  proper  control.  Jonathan 
did  not  retaliate.  He  "  arose  from  the  table,"  and  went  out ;  to  fast,  not  to  raise  a 
rebellion  against  his  father,  as  Absalom  did  at  a  subsequent  period.  4.  It  must  not 
be  suffered  to  continue  too  long.  "Wise  anger  is  like  fire  from  flint;  there  is  a 
great  ado  to  bring  it  out ;  and  when  it  does  come,  it  is  out  again  immediately  "  (M. 
Henry),  "  Be  ye  angry  and  sin  not ;  let  not  the  sun  go  down  upon  yonr  wrath, 
tMither  give  place  to  the  devil." 


OH.  XX.  S4— 42.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  893 

IV.  It  M178T  BB  mrcEAsiNQLT  onARDBD  AGAINST  snd  doly  BnppreBsed  by  tbe  nse 
of  proper  means,  snch  as  consideration  of  the  efEects  of  sinful  anger  on  others  and 
on  ourselves,  of  the  allowance  which  ought  to  be  made  for  others,  of  our  own  faults, 
and  of  the  patience  and  gentleness  of  Christ ;  the  realisation  of  the  presence  and  love 
of  God ;  the  cultivation  of  the  opposite  principles  of  hnmility,  charity,  and  mMkness ; 
and  continual  prayer  for  the  Holy  Spint — D. 

Vers.  35 — 40.  (The  stone  Ezel.) — An  obedient  lad.  (A  word  to  tho  young.) 
Prince  Jonathan  went  out  into  the  country,  by  the  stone  Ezel,  to  practise  archery  on 
his  famous  bow  (2  Sam.  i.  18,  22),  and  took  with  him  a  lad,  "  a  little  lad  "  (yer,  35), 
to  carry  his  arrows  and  gather  them  up  after  they  had  been  shot  at  the  man.  This 
lad — 1.  Had  learnt  a  great  lesson,  the  first  and  most  important  lesson  of  life — 
obedience.  He  was  a  young  soldier,  and  had  learnt  a  soldier's  chief  duty.  "  Children, 
obey  your  parents  "  (Ephes.  vi.  1).  "  Servants,  obey  your  masters '  (Col.  iii.  22). 
"  Obey  "  your  teachers  (Heb.  xiii.  17).  "  Obey  magistrates  "  (Titus  iii.  1).  2.  ffad 
learnt  hit  lesson  well.  He  did  what  he  was  told  to  do  willingly,  cheerfully,  quickly 
("  make  speed,  haste,  stay  not "),  fully,  "  without  asking  any  questions."  3.  Was  very 
useful  to  his  master.  Though  but  a  little  lad,  he  could  be  of  service  to  a  prince  and 
great  hero.  4.  Did  a  greater  service  than  he  was  aware  of.  He  was  seen  by  David 
&om  his  hiding-place  in  the  lock,  and  was  useful  to  him  as  well  as  to  Jonathan. 
"  And  the  lad  knew  not  anything  "  (ver.  39).  In  doing  our  duty  One  sees  us  whom 
we  see  not,  and  regards  it  as  done  to  him.  6.  Did  not  go  unrewarded.  He  pleased 
his  master,  and  would  be  more  highly  valued  for  this  service  and  promoted  to  a  higher 
position,  for  which  it  helped  to  prepare  him.  6.  Set  a  pattern  of  the  kind  of  service 
we  should  render  to  God.  "We  ought  to  obey  Ood"  (Acts  v.  29)  ani>ove  alL 
"  Speak,  Lord ;  for  thy  servant  heareth." — D. 

Ver.  41.  (The  stone  Ezel.) — The  parting  of  friends.  Friends  sometimes  part 
because  they  cease  to  esteem  each  other.  They  also  sometimes  part  not  in  feeling,  but 
only  in  space ;  not  willingly,  but  under  the  constraint  of  a  higher  necessity ;  and  their 
separation  is  one  of  the  most  painful  trials  of  life.  Such  was  the  parting  of  Jona- 
than and  David.  "  This  is  the  culminating  point  in  the  mutual  relations  of  the  two 
friends  who  furnish  the  eternal  type  of  the  perfection  of  noble  friendship ;  and, 
moreover,  in  these  last  hours  before  their  separation,  all  the  threads  of  their  destinies, 
henceforth  so  widely  difEerent,  are  secretly  woven  together.  It  is  also  at  this  point, 
consequently,  that  the  clearest  anticipation  of  the  whole  subsequent  history  already 
shines  through.  As  Jonathan  here  foresees,  David  afterwards  obtains  the  kingdom ; 
and,  in  accordance  with  his  oath  to  his  friend,  he  afterwards,  when  a  powerful  king, 
always  spares  the  descendants  of  Jonathan,  in  grateful  remembrance  of  his  dearly- 
loved  friend,  and  never  loses  an  opportunity  of  showing  them  kindness  "  (Ewald). 
In  their  parting  we  observe — 

I.  CouETBSY.  David  "  fell  on  his  face  to  the  ground,  and  bowed  himself  three 
times."  He  did  so  not  merely  in  external  and  courtier-like  obeisance  to  the  prince, 
but  also  in  heartfelt  esteem  and  homage  to  the  friend,  who  had  shown  his  fidelity  in 
a  great  crisis,  virtually  renounced  the  prospect  of  a  kingdom  for  his  sake  and  in 
obedience  to  what  he  saw  to  be  the  Divine  purpose,  and  was  worthy  of  the  highest 
honour.  True  courtesy — 1.  Has  its  seat  in  the  heart,  and  expresses  itself  in  appro- 
priate speech  and  conduct  in  intercourse  with  others,  according  to  the  custom  of  the 
time  and  place  and  the  relative  position  they  occupy.  The  outward  bearing,  of  itself, 
is  morally  worthless.  It  may  be  superficial  and  hypocriticul.  Yet "  courtesy  of  feeling 
is  very  much  acquired  and  promoted  by  cultivating  courtesy  of  manner.  Gentleness 
of  manner  has  some  influence  on  gentleness  of  life."  2.  Is  the  opposite  ot  selfishness 
and  pride  (the  chief  causes  of  its  absence)  ;  uiisociableness,  austerity,  and  moroseness ; 
coldness,  reserve,  and  neglect ;  contoinptuous  demeanour,  rudeness,  and  undue  famili- 
arity. And  it  by  no  means  implies  obsequiousness  or  want  of  self-respect.  3.  Con- 
sists  of  humility,  benevolent  regard  for  others,  kindly  consideration  for  their  feelings 
even  in  little  things,  gentleness,  and  frankness.  4.  Is  attended  with  many  advan- 
tages ;  Monnended  by  the  examples  recorded  in  the  word  of  Qod,  and  enjoined  by  iti 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[cH.zz.24— 4& 


precepts  (Gen.  xxiii.  12  ;  Luke  vii.  44 ;  Acts  xxviil.  7 ;  Philemon).    "  Whatsoeyat 

things  are  lovely,"  &o.  (Phil.  iv.  8).     "  Be  courteous  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  8). 

II.  Tenderness.  "  And  they  kissed  one  another,  and  wept  with  one  another^  until 
David  exceeded"  (LXX.,  "wept  one  with  another  with  great  lamentation").  The 
tenderness  of  their  afBection  and  grief  was  "  wonderful.  Something  of  the  same 
tenderness — 1.  Is  commonly  possessed  by  men  of  a  brave  and  noble  type  of  character. 
"  There  is  in  David  (as  there  is  said  to  be  in  all  great  geniuses)  a  femmine  as  well  as 
a  masculine  vein ;  a  passionate  tenderness,  a  keen  sensibility,  a  vast  capacity  of 
sympathy,  sadness,  and  suffering  which  makes  him  truly  a  type  of  the  Man  of  sorrows  " 
(Kingsley).  2.^  Is  revealed  in  them  by  special  evrcumstances,  and  is  in  such  circum- 
Btances  worthy  of  them.  3.  Is  shown  in  sympathy  with  the  trouble  <jf  others,  rather 
than  in  grief  occasioned  by  the  deprivation  of  their  friendship  and  aid.  The  loss 
which  David  and  Jonathan  were  each  about  to  suffer  by  the  separation  was  great ; 
but  they  were  chiefly  affected  by  the  thought  of  the  trouble  which  awaited  each 
other :  the  one  to  become  an  outlaw  and  to  be  pursued  with  relentless  malice  ;  the 
other  to  bear  the  frowns  of  his  royal  father,  and  witness  his  ruinous  career,  without 
any  consolation  but  that  derived  from  the  prospect  of  a  better  time  under  the  rule 
of  his  chosen  friend.  4.  Appears  in  the  restraint  which  is  put  upon  the  indulgence 
of  personal  feeling,  from  concern  for  others'  welfare.  The  interview  might  not  be 
prolonged.  There  was  danger  in  delay.  And  Jonathan  hastened  the  departure  of 
his  friend,  saying,  "Go  in  peace."  Equal  tenderness  appears  in  none  save  those 
whose  hearts  are  softened  and  pervaded  by  Divine  grace  (Acts  xx.  37,  38  ;  xxi.  13), 
or  in  "  the  Friend  of  sinners." 

III.  Piety.  "Go  in  peace,  forasmuch,"  &c.  Their  souls  were  "knit"  to  God 
before  they  were  knit  to  each  other ;  the  one  was  the  cause  of  the  other ;  their 
covenant  was  made  "  in  the  name  of  Jehovah,"  and  he  would  still  be  with  them  when 
they  parted.  The  piety  which  is  possessed  in  common  alleviates  and  sanctifies  the 
grief  occasioned  by  the  separation  of  friends.  It  appears  in — 1.  Tlho  fellowship  which 
is  held  with  the  eternal-  Friend  and  abides  amidst  all  earthly  changes.  2.  Siwmission 
to  his  sovereign  will,  which  appoints  the  lot  of  each  and  all  (Acts  xxi.  13).  3. 
Faith  in  his  overruling  power  and  goodness,  according  to  which  "  all  things  work 
together  for  good" — the  welfare  of  his  people,  the  establishment  of  his  kingdom. 
4.  The  wish  and  prayer  for  his  continued  presence  and  blessing.  In  him  parted 
friends  may  still  meet,  continue  of  "  one  heart  and  one  soul,"  and  obtain  by  their 
prayers  invaluable  benefits  for  one  another. 

IV.  Hopefulness.  They  did  not  part  without  the  hope  of  meeting  again  in  thi* 
life  (which  was  fulfilled — oh.  zxiii.  16),  and  doubtless  also  in  the  eternal  home  to 
which  God  gathers  his  people.  "  Let  it  be  considered  what  a  melancholy  thing  any 
friendship  would  be  that  should  be  destined  to  expire  with  all  its  pleasures  and 
advantages  at  death.  That  is  the  worthy  and  happy  foiendship,  and  that  alone,  where 
the  parties  are  zealously  preparing  and  have  a  good  hope  to  meet  in  a  nobler  scene  " 
(J.  Foster).  The  friendship  which  is  formed  and  cherished  in  God  is  not  dissolved 
by  death,  but  is  renewed  in  "  a  life  beyond  life,"  and  perpetuated  for  ever. 

"  As  for  my  friends,  they  are  not  lost ; 
The  several  vessels  of  thy  fleet, 
Though  parted  now,  by  tempest  toned, 

Shall  safely  in  the  haven  meet."  IX 


EXPOSITION. 
Datid'b  Flioht  to  Nob,  ahd  subskqubntlt  to  thk  Philistinbb  (oh.  zzi.). 


CHAPTER  XXL 

Datib's  flight  to  Nob  (vers.  1 — 9). 
Ver.  1.— Then  came  David  to  Nob.  Nob 
means  a  knoll  or  hill,  and  apparently  was 
situated  a  little  to  the  north  of  Jerusalem  on 
tlM  road  leading  to  Gath.     The  ark  had 


evidently  been  removed  thither  by  Saul 
early  in  his  reign,  after  it  had  remained  for 
twenty  years  iu  the  house  of  Abinndnb  ;  and 
as  eighty-five  priests  wearing  an  epliod  were 
murdered  there  by  Doeg  at  Saul's  command 
(oh.  xxiL  18,  19),  it  is  plain  that  the  wot- 
■hip  of  Jehovah  bad  been  restored  b;  his 


8H.  XXI.  1—16.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEU 


tra 


with  something  of  Its  old  splendonr.  And 
this  agrees  with  Saul's  character.  At  the 
commencement  of  his  reign  we  find  Ahiah 
with  him  as  high  priest,  and  even  when  he 
fell  his  excuse  was  the  necessity  for  perform- 
ing the  public  rites  of  religion  (ch.  iv.  15). 
But  with  him  the  king's  will  was  first,  the 
will  of  Jehovah  second ;  and  while  he  restores 
God's  public  worship  as  part  of  the  glory  of 
his  reign,  he  ruthlessly  puts  the  priests  with 
their  wives  and  families  to  death  when  he 
supposes  that  they  have  given  aid  to  his 
enemy.  Ahimelech  was  afraid  at  the  meet- 
ing of  David.  More  literally,  "went trembling 
to  meet  David."  Abiah,  described  as  high 
priest  in  ch.  xiv.  3,  was  either  dead  or,  more 
probably,  was  a  younger  brother,  who,  while 
Ahimelech  remained  with  the  ark,  acted  as 
high  priest  at  the  camp  for  Saul,  especially 
in  consulting  God  for  him  by  means  of  the 
ephod  with  the  breastplate.  Why  art  thou 
alone?  Nevertheless,  in  Mark  ii.  26  our 
Lord  speaks  of  those  "who  were  with  David," 
and  the  "young  men"  are  mentioned  in 
vers.  4,  5..  While  David  went  alone  to 
consult  Ahimelech,  that  his  visit  might  be 
kept  quite  secret,  he  had  taken  a  few  of 
his  servants  with  him,  and  had  left  them 
somewhere  in  the  neighbourhood,  or  even, 
more  probably,  had  instructed  some  one  to 
meet  him  with  such  men  as  he  could  collect. 
The  arrival  of  the  king's  son-in-law  without 
an  escort  would  naturally  strike  the  high 
priest  as  strange,  and  therefore  as  alarming. 

Ver.  2. — The  king  hath  commanded  me  a 
business.  This  pretence  of  a  private  com- 
mission from  the  king  was  a  mere  invention, 
but  his  "appointing  his  servants  to  meet 
him  at  such  and  such  a  place  "  was  probably 
the  exact  truth.  After  parting  with  Jona- 
than, David  probably  did  not  venture  to 
show  himself  at  home,  but,  while  Saul  still 
supposed  him  to  be  at  Bethlehem,  gave  orders 
to  some  trusty  officer  to  gather  together  a 
few  of  his  most  faithful  men,  and  await  him 
with  them  at  some  fit  place.  MeanwhUo 
alone  he  sets  out  on  his  flight,  and,  having 
as  yet  no  settled  plan,  goes  to  Kob,  because 
it  was  out  of  the  way  of  the  road  to  Bethle- 
hem, whither  Saul  would  send  to  arrest  him. 
Naturally  such  a  visit  would  seom  strange 
to  Ahimelech ;  but  David  needed  food  and 
arms,  and  probably  counsel ;  and  but  for 
the  chance  of  the  presence  of  Doeg,  no  harm 
might  have  ensued.  As  it  was,  this  visit  of 
David  completed  the  ruin  of  Eli's  house. 

Vers.  3,  4. — What  is  under  thine  handt 
This  does  not  mean  that  Ahimelech  was 
himself  carrying  the  shewbread  out  of  the 
tabernacle,  but  simply,  "  What  hast  thou  ? " 
The  sense  of  the  whole  verse  is,  "Now,  there- 
fore, what  hast  thou  at  hand  1  Give  me  five 
loaves,  or  whatever  there  may  be."  Ahime- 
lach  answers,  "  There  ia  no  common  bread  at 


hand."  I  hart  no  ordinary  food ;  then  ii 
onljy  ballowed  bread,  that  is,  the  shewbread, 
which,  after  remaining  in  Jahovah'i  presenco 
from  sabbath  to  sabbath,  was  then  to  bo 
eaten  by  the  priests  in  the  holy  place  (Levit. 
xxiv.  8,  9),  As  Ahimelech  conld  not  venturo 
to  refuse  David's  request,  he  asks  if  his  at- 
tendants are  at  least  ceremonially  clean,  u 
in  that  case  the  urgency  of  the  king's  busi- 
ness might  excuse  the  breach  of  the  letter  of 
the  commandment.  Our  Lord  in  Matt  xii 
3  cites  this  as  a  case  in  which  the  inward 
spirit  of  the  law  was  kept,  and  the  violation 
of  its  literal  precept  thereby  justified. 

Vers.  5,  8. — About  these  three  days  sinco 
I  came  out  This  exactly  agrees  with  tho 
time  during  which  David  had  lain  concealed 
(ch.  XX.  24,  27,  85),  and  explains  the  hunger 
nnder  which  he  was  suSering,  as  he  had  no 
doubt  taken  with  him  only  food  sufficient 
for  his  immediate  wants.  He  wishes,  how- 
ever, the  high  priest  to  believe  that  he  had 
been  engaged  with  his  men  during  this  time 
on  public  business,  whereas  they  had  been 
at  home,  and  some  of  them  possibly  were 
unclean.  The  whole  chapter  sets  David 
before  us  in  a  veiy  humiliating  light  Just 
as  some  books  of  Homer  are  styled  "the 
prowess  "  of  some  hero,  so  this  chapter  might 
be  called  David's  degradation.  The  deter- 
mined hatred  of  Saul  seems  to  have  thrown 
him  off  his  balance,  and  it  was  not  till  he 
got  among  the  hills  of  Judah,  wherein  was 
the  cave  of  AduUam,  that  he  recovered  his 
serenity.  The  vessels  of  the  young  men. 
Their  scrips,  in  which  they  would  carry  the 
bread,  and  their  baggage  generally.  The 
bread  is  in  a  manner  common,  &c.  Tho 
word  bread  is  supplied  by  the  translators, 
to  give  some  sense  to  this  most  difficult 
passage.  Literally  translated,  the  two  last 
clauses  are,  "And  the  way  is  profane, 
although  it  be  sanctified  to-day  in  the  vessel. " 
Among  the  numerous  interpretations  of  these 
words  the  following  seems  the  best:  "And 
though  our  journey  be  not  connected  with 
a  religious  object,  yet  it  (the  bread)  will  be 
kept  holy  in  the  vessel  (in  which  it  will  be 
carried). '  There  is  no  difficulty  in  supplying 
bread  in  the  last  clause,  as  the  shewbread 
was  the  subject  of  the  conversation,  and 
a  nominative  is  constantly  supplied  by  the 
mind  from  the  principal  matter  that  ia 
occupying  the  thoughts  of  the  speakers. 
David's  argument,  therefore,  is  that  both  his 
attendants  and  their  wallets  were  free  from 
legal  defilement,  and  that  though  their 
expedition  was  on  some  secular  business,  yet 
that  at  all  events  the  bread  would  be  secure 
from  pollution.  The  shewbread  that  was 
taken  from  before  Jehovah.  The  Talmud 
('Menaoh.,'  92,  2)  points  out  that  this  bread 
WHS  not  newly  taken  out  of  the  sauetuaiy 
but,  as  the  last  clause  shows,  had  boan  i*i 


THE  XIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  zxi.  1 — 1£. 


morad  on  aom«  prevloiu  isj.  As  after  a 
ireak*!  ezposaTe  it  yraa  stale  and  diy,  the 
priests,  we  a;^  told,  ate  but  little  of  it,  and 
the  rest  was  left  (see  Talmnd,  '  Tract.  Yom. ,' 
89,  1).  It  also  points  oat  that,  had  such 
Tiolations  of  the  Levitical  law  been  common, 
io  much  importance  wonld  not  hare  been 
attached  to  this  incident. 

Ver.  7. — David's  visit  to  Nob  had  pro- 
bably been  dictated  simply  by  a  desire  to 
get  food  while  a  few  attendants  were  being 
collected  for  him,  and  under  ordinary  cir- 
cumstances would  have  remained  unknown 
to  Saul.  Unfortunately  there  chanced  to  be 
a  person  present  there  who  informed  the 
king  of  it,  and  brought  a  second  terrible 
catastrophe  upon  the  house  of  Eli  (see  on 
ch.  ii.  33) ;  by  working  too  upon  his  jealousy 
he  caused  Saul  to  commit  a  crime  which 
sets  him  before  us  as  a  hateful  and  remorse- 
less tyrant.  This  man  was  Soeg,  an  Edomite, 
who  had,  it  seems,  long  been  in  Saul's  service, 
as  he  was  his  chief  herdsman.  According 
to  the  Septuagint  he  had  charge  of  the  king's 
mules,  but  the  other  versions  agree  with  the 
Hebrew.  As  herds  would  form  the  main 
part  of  Sanl's  wealth,  his  chief  herdsman 
would  be  a  person  of  importance.  He  was 
detained  before  Jehovah.  /.  e.  shut  up  in 
close  seclusion  within  the  precincts  of  the 
tabernacle,  either  for  some  vow,  or  for  purifi- 
cation, or  perhaps  as  suspected  of  leprosy 
(Levit.  ziii.  4),  or,  as  some  think,  as  a 
proselyte.  Ephrem  Syrus  thinks  he  had 
committed  some  trespass,  and  was  detained 
till'  he  had  offered  the  appointed  sacrifice. 
David  at  once  felt  that  Doeg's  presence  boded 
much  ill  (ch.  xxii.  22),  and  it  probably  was 
the  cause  of  his  taking  the  rash  resolution 
to  flee  for  refuge  to  Gath. 

Vers.  8,  9. — Is  there  not  here  under  thine 
hand  spear  or  sword  1  The  sight  of  Doeg 
made  David  feel  how  helpless  he  was  in  case 
of  attack,  and  he  excuses  his  request  for 
weapons  by  saying  that  he  had  left  home 
unarmed  because  of  the  urgency  of  the  king's 
business.  The  whole  matter  must  have 
seemed  very  suspicious  to  Ahimelech,  but  he 
was  powerless,  and  answers  that  the  only 
weapon  in  the  sanctuary  was  David's  own 
votive  offering,  the  sword  of  Goliath,  care- 
fully deposited  in  a  place  of  honour  behind 
the  ephod  with  the  Urim  and  Thummim, 
and  wrapped  in  a  cloth  for  its  protection. 
As  the  word  is  used  in  Isa.  ix.  6  of  militai-y 
attire,  it  may  mean  Goliath's  war-mantle, 
hut  more  probably  it  was  a  covering  to 
preserve  it  from  rust  and  damp.  In  ch. 
xvii  54  it  is  said  that  Goliath's  armour  be- 
came David's  private  property,  and  nothing 
could  be  more  natural  than  that  he  should 
thus  lay  up  the  sword  in  the  tabernacle,  as 
a  thank  offering  to  God.  He  now  takes  it 
with  olcaanre,  saying,  There  is  none  like 


that ;  for  it  wa«  a  memorial  of  his  greate«t 
achievement,  and  might  be  the  presnste  ct 
good  fortune  again. 

David  seeks  rbfitqe  with  tkk  kinu 
OF  Gath  (vers.  10—15).  Ver.  10.— Bavid 
arose  and  fled  that  day.  The  presence  oj 
Doeg  at  Nob  was  a  most  untoward  cironm. 
stance  ;  and  though  David  could  never  hava 
anticipated  that  Saul  would  visit  upon  the 
priests  the  unwitting  assistance  they  had 
giren  him  with  such  barbarous  ferocity,  y^t 
he  must  have  felt  sure  that  an  acfive  pursuit 
would  be  at  once  instituted  against  himself. 
He  therefore  took  a  most  unwise  and  pre- 
cipitate step,  but  one  which  clearly  showi 
the  greatness  of  the  danger  to  which  he  wai 
exposed.  For  he  flees  to  Achish,  king  of 
Gath,  the  first  town  upon  the  Philistine 
border,  at  the  mouth  of  the  valley  of  Elah 
(see  on  ch.  xviL  3).  Achish  is  called  Abime- 
lech  in  the  title  of  Ps.  xxxiv.,  written  by 
David  in  grateful  commemoration  of  his 
escape,  that  being  the  official  title  of  the 
kings  of  Gath  handed  down  through  many 
successive  centuries  (see  Gen.  xxvi.  1).  It 
has  been  objected  that  nothing  could  be  more 
improbable  than  that  David,  the  conr[ueror 
of  Goliath,  should  seek  refuge  with  a  Philis- 
tine lord,  and  that  this  is  nothing  more 
than  a  popular  tale,  which  has  grown  out  of 
the  real  fact  recorded  in  ch.  xxvii.  But 
when  men  are  in  desperate  straits  they  take 
wild  resolutions,  and  this  meeting  with 
Doeg,  just  after  he  had  broken  down  with 
grief  (ch.  XX.  41),  evidently  put  David  to 
his  wits'  end.  As,  moreover,  Saul  was  dege- 
nerating into  a  cruel  tyrant,  desertions  may 
have  become  not  uncommon,  and  though 
only  three  or  four  years  can  have  elapsed 
since  the  battle  of  Elah,  as  David  was  only 
about  twenty-four  years  of  age  at  Saul's 
death,  yet  the  change  from  a  boyish  stripling 
to  a  bearded  man  was  enough  to  make  it 
possible  that  David  might  not  be  recognised. 
As  for  Goliath's  sword,  we  have  seen  that  it 
was  not  remarkable  for  its  size,  and  was 
probably  of  the  ordinary  pattern  imported 
from  Greece.  Even  if  recognised,  Achish 
miglit  welcome  him  as  a  deserter  from  Saul, 
the  great  enemy  of  the  Philistines  ;  for  as  a 
deserter  never  received  pardon  or  mercy,  he 
must  now  use  his  prowess  to  the  very  utmost 
against  Saul.  Finally,  the  historical  truth  ol 
the  narrative  is  vouched  for  by  Ps.  xxxiv., 
and  the  details  are  all  different  from  those  in 
eh.  xxvii.  David  there  is  a  powerful  chief- 
tain with  a  large  following  of  trained  soldiers, 
and  feels  so  secure  that  he  takes  his  wives 
with  him  ;  he  asks  for  some  place  in  which 
to  reside,  and  occupies  himself  in  continual 
forays.  Here  he  is  in  the  utmost  distress, 
has  no  trained  band  of  soldiers,  and  goes 
wcU-nigh  mad  with  mental  anguish.  And 
this  is  in  exact  keeping  with  that  extrems 


OH.  XXI.  1 — 16.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


S97 


eicitement  to  which  David  waa  a  prey  in  his 
last  interview  with  Jonathan  (ch.  xx.  41) ; 
and  only  in  his  first  grief  at  Saul's  cruel 
hittemess  would  his  mind  have  been  ao 
affected,  and  his  conduct  so  lash. 

Ver.  11. — David  the  king  of  the  land. 
The  servants  of  Achish  use  the  title  of  kmg 
in  a  very  general  way.  Thus  Achish,  though 
really  a  seren  (see  on  ch.  v.  11),  is  called 
king  of  Gath  ;  and  they  meant  nothing  more 
as  regards  David  than  that  he  was  Israel's 
great  man,  though  in  accepting  Goliath's 
challenge  he  had  undertaken  what  in  old 
time  was  regarded  as  the  king's  especial 
duty.  Did  they  not  sing  one  to  another  of 
him  in  danoesi  The  Hebrew  method  of 
singing  was  by  choruses,  who  sang  and 
danced  in  turns  to  the  music  of  their  tam- 
bours (see  on  ch.  xviiL  7).  David  evidently 
had  hoped  not  to  be  recognised,  but  to  be 
admitted  to  serve  as  a  soldier,  or  in  some 
other  capacity,  without  many  questions  being 
asked.  As  we  find  an  Edomite  in  Saul's 
service,  Cushites,  Maachathites,  and  other 
foreigners  in  the  employment  of  David,  there 
was  probably  much  of  this  desertion  of  one 
service  for  another,  especially  as  kings  in 
those  days  had  absolute  authority  and  their 
displeasure  was  death. 

V  er.  13.  —  He  changed  his  behayionr. 
The  same  word  is  used  in  the  title  of  Ps. 
xxxiv.  Literally  it  means  "  his  taste,"  and, 
like  the  Latin  word  sapientia,  is  derived  from 
the  action  of  the  palate,  and  so  from  the  faculty 
of  discriminating  flavours  it  came  to  signify 
the  power  of  discrimination  generally.  Thus 
"  to  change  his  taste"  means  to  act  as  if  he 
had  lost  liie  power  of  distinguishing  between 


objects.  Feigned  himself  mad.  Literally, 
"he  roamed  hither  and  thither"  restlessly 
and  in  terror.  In  their  hands.  I.  e.  before 
them,  in  their  presence.  Scrabbled  on  the 
doors  of  the  gate.  The  Vulgate  and  Septua- 
gint  read  drummed  upon  them.  Literally 
the  verb  means  "  to  make  the  mark  of  a 
Tau,"  the  last  letter  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet, 
and  which  anciently  was  in  the  form  of  a 
cross.  The  gate,  on  the  leaves  of  which 
David  scrawled,  was  probably  that  of  the 
court  or  waiting-room,  in  which  the  servants 
of  Achish  passed  their  time  when  in  attend- 
ance upon  him.  Possibly  David  had  wit- 
nessed these  symptoms  of  madness  in  Saul's 
case  during  his  fits  of  insanity.  The  idea  of 
some  of  the  older  commentators,  that  David 
really  for  a  time  went  out  of  his  mind,  is 
opposed  to  the  general  sense  of  the  narrative. 
Vers.  14,  15. — The  man  is  mad.  Achish 
supposes  that  David's  madness  was  real,  and 
"drove  him  away"  (Ps.  xxxiv.,  title).  Here 
we  have  only  his  contemptuous  words, 
declaring  that  he  had  madmen  enough  of 
his  own,  and  needed  no  more.  As  madmen 
were  looked  upon  in  old  time  as  possessed 
by  the  Deity,  and  therefore  as  persons  who 
must  not  be  interfered  with,  they  probably 
presumed,  upon  the  liberty  granted  •  them, 
and  gave  much  annoyance.  In  my  presence. 
Kather,  "against  me."  Achish  feared  per- 
sonal injury.  Shall  this  fellow  come  into 
my  house?  A  strong  negative  taking  the 
form  of  a  question.  It  means,  David  shall 
not  enter  into  my  service  (comp.  Ps.  xxxiv., 
title).  The  whole  psalm  bears  witness  to 
the  deep  perturbation  of  David's  spirit,  and 
helps  to  explain  his  strange  conduct 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  1 — 7. —  Weahnesi  in  embarrassment.  The  facta  are — 1.  Arriving  at  Nob, 
David  quiets  the  suspiciona  of  Ahimelech  by  stating  that  he  was  on  the  king's  secret 
business.  2.  On  this  ground  he  asks  for  and  obtains  hallowed  bread  to  appease  hia 
hunger,  and  the  sword  of  Goliath.  3.  Doeg  the  Edomite,  being  detained  there  that 
day,  is  observant  of  David'a  proceedinga.  Hitherto  David  had  held  position  as  an 
oflficer  in  Saul's  household  or  in  the  army,  and  therefore,  despite  Saul's  private 
jealousy,  had  a  right  to  the  respect  and  protection  of  every  man.  Henceforth  loyalty 
to  Saul  meant  death  to  David.  Therefore  the  paternal  home  at  Bethlehem  was  out 
of  the  question,  and  there  were  reasons  for  not  compromising  Samuel  with  any 
appearance  of  open  revolt.  To  a  devout  mind  it  was  natural  under  these  circum- 
stances to  flee  to  the  sanctuary,  and  there  seek  solace  and  aid.  The  narrative  relates 
how  good  and  evil  were  blended  in  the  conduct  of  the  man  of  God  at  this  critical 
juncture,  and  it  suggests  for  consideration  several  important  truths. 

I,  The  higbbb  laws  of  life.  David  desired  the  shewbread  to  appease  hia 
hniiger,  and  the  priest  in  charge  at  first  objected  to  the  request  on  the  plea  that  it 
was  contrary  to  the  ceremonial  law  to  gfive  it  to  him.  The  fact  that  David,  a  devout 
and  reasonable  man,  ventured  to  ask  for  it,  combined  with  his  argument  on  the 
priest's  own  ceremonial  principles  (ver.  5),  shows  that  he  perceived  the  existence  of 
a  law  which  rose  above  the  ceremonial.  Some  would  perhaps  regard  David's  action 
as  typical  of  the  prerogatives  of  the  real  King:  and  Priest  of  Zion,  and  even  intep- 
pnt  hia  aUtament  about  the  "  king's  business '  as  a  spiritual  enigma,  pointing  to  th* 


398  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xxi.  1—16. 

"  Father's  business  "  which  Christ  was  commissioned  to  accomplish  (Luke  ii.  49 ; 
John  xvii.  4 — 9).  But,  at  all  events,  it  is  certain  that  our  Saviour  regarded  David's 
request  and  the  response  of  the  priest  as  indicative  of  the  subordination  of  a  lower 
to  a  higher  law  (Mark  ii.  24—28).  To  save  and  sustain  the  life  of  a  man,  though  a 
fugitive,  was  more  important  than  the  observance  of  a  ritual.  This  subordination  of 
law  runs  through  all  things,  till  we  come  up  to  the  highest — that  of  supreme  love  of 
God.  Health,  and  even  life,  may  liave  to  be  set  aside  for  the  assertion  of  a  moral 
principle.  Hence  the  paradox  (Matt.  x.  39).  Class  distinctions,  official  relations, 
domestic  claims,  and  private  rights  may  be,  in  seasons  of  extreme  national  peril, 
entirely  ignored  for  the  maintenance  of  public  safety.  On  this  principle  it  is  that 
attention  to  the  afEairs  of  this  life,  though  right  and  good,  is  to  yield  to  the  higher 
obligation  of  regard  to  eternal  things  ;  and  deference  to  self — one  of  the  most 
important  of  laws — must  give  way  when  Christ  claims  submission  to  his  yoke,  the 
submission  of  love.  Thus  it  could  be  shown  how  entirely  in  harmony  with  the 
scientific  principle  of  interaction  and  subordination  of  laws  is  the  cardinal  teaching 
of  the  gospel. 

II.  Weakness  in  embarrassment.  The  embarrassment  of  David  was  great,  and 
not  unlike  what  many  fall  into  when  called  to  high  service  for  God.  He  was 
evidently  under  the  impression  that  he  was  being  led  by  God  to  some  service  for 
Israel  not  yet  explicitly  revealed  (cf.  ch.  xvi.  13;  xvii.  26,  45;  xix.  18 — 24;  xi. 
13 — 15).  At  the  same  time  he  had  neither  the  will  nor  the  thought  to  rise  in  revolt, 
nor  would  Samuel  or  Jesse  encourage  it;  yet,  without  home,  friend,  or  covering, 
whither  could  he  flee,  and  what  do  ?  To  aid  him  would  be  deemed  by  the  enraged 
king  as  treason.  Under  these  circumstances,  as  a  devout  man,  he  naturally  fled 
from  his  hiding-place  to  the  sanctuary  at  Nob.  But  the  considerations  which  hin- 
dered him  from  compromising  Samuel,  Jesse,  and  Jonathan  also  operated  with  him 
to  save  Ahimelech  from  the  cruel  suspicion  of  Saul.  Hence,  for  covering  the  priest 
as  well  as  for  saving  life,  he  fabricated  the  falsehood.  1.  Godls  service  and  approval 
afford  us  no  exemption  from  embarrassment.  No  man  was  ever  more  truly  called  to 
service  and  more  distinctly  approved  than  was  David,  and  it  is  difficult  to  find  in 
history  a  case  of  more  undeserved  and  painful  embarrassment.  The  Psalms,  espe- 
cially vii.,x.,  xiii.,  XXXV.,  lii.,liv.,  reveal  how  keenly  he  felt  his  position.  Those  who 
think  that  the  service  of  God  is  free  from  cares  and  trials  know  little  of  history  and 
life.  The  Apostle  Paul  had  his  full  share,  though  chief  of  apostles  (2  Cor.  xi.  23 — 
28).  The  purifying  fires  easily  enkindle  in  this  world.  There  are  materials  for  them 
in  domestic  afEairs,  in  business,  in  the  developments  of  private  experience.  2.  The 
causes  of  weakness  in  embarrassment  are  qften  traceable.  If  we  fall,  as  did  David, 
It  is  because  of  either — (1)  Partial  consideration  of  the  facts  of  our  position.  We 
may  dwell  too  much  on  the  difficulties,  too  little  on  the  Unseen  Hand.  Peter  looked 
kt  the  waves,  and  not  at  Christ,  and  then  began  to  sink.  "  Man  does  not  live  by  bread 
alone  "  (Deut.  viii.  3).  (2)  Physical  exhaustion  conduces  to  this  partial  considera- 
tion, and  also  renders  tlie  action  of  the  mind  less  steady.  David  was  suffering  men- 
tally by  the  recent  suspense,  parting  from  his  friend,  and  long  abstinence  from  food. 
The  inception  of  many  a  sin  takes  place  when  the  flesh  is  literally  weak.  Our 
Saviour  recognises  this  (Matt.  xxvi.  40,  42).  3.  Education  mxiy  have  impaired  our 
moral  perception  in  reference  to  some  actions.  Custom  does  in  one  age  tolerate  what 
in  another  is  abominated.  Good  men  have  bought  and  sold  slaves.  In  David's  time 
the  tongue  that  lied  for  bread  may  have  committed  only  a  venial  offence.  4.  There 
may  be  too  much  inventiveness  in  seeking  an  outlet  from  embarrassment.  It  is  pos- 
sible to  think  and  scheme  too  much,  not  leaving  to  God  that  which  in  our  desperate 
need  always  belongs  to  him.  In  this  state  of  mind  evil  suggestions  are  sure  to 
arise,  and  they  lay  hold  of  the  spirit  just  in  proportion  as,  in  extreme  self-reliance, 
w«  lose  trust  in  God.  Our  Saviour  seems  to  have  this  in  view  in  Matt.  vi.  26 — 34. 
6.  It  is  possible  that  amidst  the  pressure  of  life  we  do  not  keep  near  enough  to  God. 
Possibly  David  had  been  too  hurried  ana  worried  by  the  purely  human  aspect  of 
affairs  to  have  strengthened  his  faith  by  fellowship  with  God.  The  soul,  as  in  the 
case  of  Peter,  is  weak  if  it  fasts  too  long,  as  is  the  body  when  bread  fails. 

III.  Thk  pbxsbncb  ov  an  ukfriendly  eye.  Doeg  the  Edomite  was  present,  and 
David's  condnct  was  noted.    Little  sympathy  had  this  proselyte  with  the  lofty  aspira- 


OH.  XII.  1—16  ]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  39» 

tions  of  the  "  anointed ;  "  great  his  pleasure  in  revealing  to  Saul  anything  gratify- 
ing to  his  wicked  malice.  The  lesson  is  ohvious.  The  servants  of  God  live  in  the 
midst  of  a  "  perverse  generation,"  and  any  inconsistencies  in  their  conduct  are  sure  to 
be  used  against  them.  Some  men  take  unusual  delight  in  detecting  the  frailties  of 
professing  Christians,  as  though  these  were  an  excuse  for  their  own  habits.  Deeds 
wliicli  attract  no  attention  in  other  men  become  conspicuous  in  Christians,  because 
of  the  utter  contrast  with  their  holy  profession  (1  Tim.  vi.  1 ;  Titus  ii.  4 — 8). 

IV.  A  PARALLEL  AND  A  CONTRAST.  There  is  a  singular  parallel  in  many  of  the 
circumstances  of  David's  life  at  this  period  and  those  of  our  Saviour's.  David,  the 
anointed,  was  destined  to  work  out  a  great  issue  for  Israel,  but  for  years  carried  the 
secret  in  his  own  breast,  and  was  now  despised,  persecuted,  unsustained  openly  by 
any  in  authority,  without  food,  shelter,  and  visible  means  pf  defence,  and,  moreover, 
exposed  to  strong  temptations  arising  out  of  his  sorrows.  And  so  the  "  Anointed  of 
the  Lord,"  later  on,  kept  for  a  long  while  the  purpose  of  his  life  in  his  own  heart,  and 
only  by  degrees  unfolded  it  to  men.  He  also  was  despised  and  rejected  of  men  ;  un- 
recognised by  the  authorities ;  cruelly  persecuted,  being  charged  with  motives  and 
intentions  most  base  ;  not  knowing  "  where  to  lay  his  head ;  "  without  means  of ' 
defence  against  physical  injury ;  and  not  imacquainted  with  hunger  and  weariness. 
No  wonder  if  the  Psalms  which  assert  the  "  righteousness  "  of  David  (Acts  ii.  29—31  ; 
2  Pet.  i.  21)  shadow  forth  the  "  righteousness  "  of  the  "  Holy  One  "  (Acts  ii.  27)  and 
his  more  glorious  triumph.  But  the  contrast  is  manifest.  David  in  poverty  and 
distress  trusts  in  God,  but  not  perfectly.  He  proves  his  frailty  in  common  with  all 
others.  He  knows  the  shame  and  bitterness  of  sin.  Not  so  the  Christ.  He  would 
have  no  recourse  to  expedients  for  obtaining  bread  or  relief  from  apprehension 
( Matt,  iv,  2 — 4 ;  xxvi.  38,  39,  60).  "  Of  the  people  there  was  none  with  him. "  "  He 
.trod  the  winepress  alone."  But  in  all  things  he  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and 
separate  from  sinners."  In  the  deepest  sense,  therefore,  do  we  see  the  appropriate- 
ness of  the  reference  of  the  Psalms  to  him  in  all  ascriptions  of  right  and  dominion 
by  virtue  of  purity  and  righteousness  (Ps.  xxiv.  3 — 10).  Not  in  David,  but  in  Christ 
is  the  solution  of  the  grandest  language  of  the  Psalms.  How  impossible  of  solution 
are  the  problems  when  men  eliminate  the  inspiration  of  the  Holy  Ghost  from  the 
Old  Testament  I 

General  lessons: — 1.  We  should  be  careful  to  avoid  such  a  rigid  adherence  to 
useful  and  approved  ordinances  and  arrangements  as  might  deprive  the  poor  and 
needy  of  spiritual  nourishment.  This  danger  attends  some  Church  regulations.  2. 
It  should  be  laid  down  as  a  rigid  rule  that  no  embarrassment,  no  perils  from  men, 
should  ever  justify  even  the  thought  of  deception  or  wrong.  Such  a  principle 
engrained  into  the  soul  will  be  a  "  breastplate  of  righteousness."  3.  The  prime  con- 
sideration in  times  of  peril  is  to  commit  our  way  to  God,  and  be  willing  if  need  be  to 
suffer  and  die.  4.  We  are  justly  indebted  even  to  the  failures  of  good  men  ;  for, 
out  of  the  bitter  review  of  their  sins,  they  have  borne  testimony  to  the  value  of 
righteousness  and  the  blessedness  of  trusting  in  God.  Hence  many  of  the  Psalms. 
6.  We  should  guard  against  partiality  in  judging  of  the  weakness  of  good  men ;  for 
an  occasional  falsehood  may  be  shocking  to  a  man  who  thinks  little  of  his  own 
habit  of  backbiting  or  self-righteous  censoriousness.  6.  It  requires  many  righteous 
deeds  to  remove  the  bad  impression  created  on  unfriendly  observers  by  one  indis- 
cretion. 

Vers.  10 — 15. — Vhcertam  light.  The  facts  are — 1.  In  continued  fear  of  Saul, 
David  flees  to  the  king  of  Gath.  2.  Being  recognised  as  the  conqueror  of  Goliath, 
he  fears  the  consequences.  3.  To  escape  vengeance  he  feigns  madness.  4.  Achish 
the  king  thereupon  refuses  to  have  him  in  his  service.  There  is  no  evidence  that 
David  received  any  Divine  direction  through  the  high  priest,  but  the  reverse  (ch.  ixii. 
16).  He  appears  to  have  been  left  to  the  exercise  of  his  own  judgment  as  to  a 
future  place  of  refuge.  To  be  alone,  unable  to  remain  in  one's  own  land,  a  hunted 
fugitive,  on  religious  principle  averse  to  resistance  by  sword  or  concerted  revolt 
(oh.  xxiv.  6),  with  no  guide  but  such  as  the  judgment  unhinged  by  conflicting  thoughts 
could  afford — this  was  certainly  being  "  desolate"  and  "  aEBioted."  The  result  was 
a  determination  to  seek  shelter  among  the  enemies  of  his  God  and  countiy,  a  step 


400  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMDEL.  [«ih.  xxi.  1—16 

most  perilous,  and  of  very  doubtful  character,  and  which  involved  farther  reoonrs* 
to  a  most  humiliating  expedient. 

I.  Theee  abb  times  when  God'b  servants  are  apparently  left  to  their  owh 
USB  OF  PEEVions  TEACHING,  which  they  find  difBcult  to  apply  to  new  and  dangerous 
circumstances.  David  was  placed  in  great  peril,"with  no  other  guidance  than  what 
his  own  spirit  might  gather  from  a  consideration  of  his  calling  by  Samuel,  and  the 
general  signs  of  God's  past  favour.  There  is,  as  a  rule,  a  difBculty  to  the  inexperienced 
in  applying  general  principles  to  novel  conditions ;  and  under  the  physical  and  mental 
exhaustion  of  this  crisis  David  found  it  hard  to  extract  from  the  past  sufiScient  light 
to  guide  his  present  steps.  He  walked  in  comparative  darkness.  "  Thou  hast  laid 
me  in  the  lowest  pit,  in  darkness,  in  the  deeps"  (Ps.  Ixxxviii.  6).  The  supposition 
that  it  is  reserved  only  to  the  deliberately  wicked  to  walk  in  darkness  is  not  correct. 
The  present  life  of  the  righteous  in  a  sinful  world  is  one  of  discipline,  in  which  they 
both  reap  some  of  the  fruits  of  former  imperfections  and  become  trained  to  higher 
service.  Our  Christian  course  is  a  campaign  in  which  dark  nights  of  watching  and 
groping  and  trembling  are  to  be  expected  as  well  as  bright  days  of  onslaught  and 
victory.  The  degree  of  clearness  in  which  the  pillar  of  fire  and  cloud  may  stand 
before  us  may  be  affected  by  our  disordered  vision — the  result  of  imperfect  health, 
or  distraction,  or  sheer  exhaustion.  The  disciples  of  Christ,  during  those  dark  and 
dreadful  hours  of  his  passion  and  death,  were  left  to  the  guidance  and  cheer  of  such 
of  the  trliths  as  he  had  taught  them  m  the  days  of  prosperity  as  their  judgment 
might  deem  appropriate  to  their  present  need.  To  the  young  man  from  home,  tossed 
and  torn  by  the  adversities  of  life,  miable  to  find  means  of  sustenance,  and  destitute 
of  friends,  there  is  left  the  lessons  of  his  childhood  and  such  truth  as  may  have  been 
gathered  from  a  brief  experience  of  life.  In  his  agitation  he  sees  no  clear  light.  A 
"horror  of  great  darkness  "  comes  over  the  soul,  and  the  servant  of  God  asks  why 
his  God  is  so  "  far  from  helping  "  him  (Ps.  xxii.  1). 

II.  The  servants  of  God,  acting  on  their  own  judgment  at  such  times,  mat 

COMMIT  themselves  TO  INCREASING  DANGERS  AND  HUMILIATING  DEVICES.      Exercising 

his  judgment  both  on  his  present  circumstances  and  his  past  experience  of  God's 
dealings  with  him,  David  thought  he  saw  amidst  the  gloom  a  hand  pointing  to  Gath 
as  a  place  of  refuge.  No  voice  from  heaven  said,  "  Go  not  thither,'  and  no  light  led 
elsewhere.  Men  would  say  he  did  the  best  under  the  circumstances,  and  in  all  sin- 
cerity of  purpose.  Nevertheless,  the  step  was  a  false  one,  apart  from  his  motive, 
both  in  itself  and  in  its  results.  For  it  was  shocking  for  a  pious  Hebrew — ^the 
assertor  of  the  "name  of  the  Lord  "  (ch.  xvii.  45),  and  the  victor  of  Elah — to  enter 
the  abode  and  seek  the  service  of  the  "  uncircumcised  Philistine,"  and  the  event 
proved  that  safety  was  not  secured,  but  was  so  imperilled  as  to  suggest  the  adoption 
of  a  most  humiliating  expedient.  Oh,  the  bitter  anguish  of  those  who,  having  lived 
in  the  light  of  God's  countenance,  find  themselves  sinking  deeper  and  deeper  into 
helplessness  and  sorrow  1  Thus  may  it  be  vnth  us  all  in  our  "  dark  and  cloudy  day." 
Every  new  step  we  take  only  makes  our  path  more  painful,  and  taxes  more  severely 
our  ingenuity.  Peter's  "  following  afar  off-"  led  him  amidst  scofiBng  men  and 
women,  and  their  words  (oh.  xxi.  11 ;  of.  Matt.  xxvi.  68,  69 — 75)  made  a  demand 
on  his  ingenuity  more  serious  in  its  success  than  David's  feigned  madness.  And 
this  has  been  the  experience  of  multitudes.  There  are  tao  great  dangers  of  the 
"  hour  of  darkness  "  which  David's  experience  indicates.  1.  T/ie  danger  of  causing 
scandal  among  the  enemies  of  religion.  If  the  servants  of  Achish  inspected  David 
of  the  low  cunning  (ver.  11)  which  seeks  to  slay  by  stealth  j  then  his  brave,  chival- 
rous character  as  a  defender  of  the  honour  of  Jehovah's  name  (ch.  xvii.  45)  is  gone ; 
and  if  they  regard  him  as  a  fugitive  fleeing  from  his  king  and  country,  then  he 
reveals  to  the  "  uncircumcised  "  the  woes  and  troubles  of  the  people  of  God.  It  is 
a  sacred  duty  in  all  our  times  of  adversity  to  avoid  whatever  would  cause  irreligious 
men  to  think  that  we  can  do  their  base  deeds,  and  not  to  expose  to  the  eye  of  the 
unsympathetic  the  internal  sorrows  of  the  Church  of  God.  2.  The  danger  o^  ap- 
pearing to  be  what  we  are  not.  It  may  have  been  a  harmless  and  successful  device 
to  simulate  madness ;  but  self-respect  was  gone,  and  a  "  more  excellent  way  "  of 
escape  might  have  been  sought  of  God.  'This  is  the  great  peril  of  us  all  both  in 
prosperity  and  adversity.     'The  guise  under.which  the  simulation  appeam  is  varied 


OB.  xn.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  401 

Aa  appearance  of  wealth  coven  real  poverty ;  a  geniality  of  manner  is  adopted  wLen 
real  aversion  lies  in  the  heart ;  a  pretence  of  ill-health  secures  escape  from  obliga- 
tions ;  ambiguous  words  and  evasions  are  employed  to  suggest  our  ignorance  of 
matters  when  we  know  them  well.  To  be  real,  to  be  known  to  be  just  what  we  aie, 
18  the  only  safe  and  wise  course  for  a  true  Christian. 

III.  The  moral  value  of  these  seasons  oi'  darkness  cannot  be  appreciated 
AT  the  time.  David  was  doubtless  confounded  at  the  providence  that  snould  hare 
him  •'  anointed  "  to  a  special  service  and  yet  allow  him  to  be  hunted  as  an  outcast. 
He  saw  not  the  good  of  being  bereft  of  friend  and  counsellor.  But  God  deals  with 
his  servants  in  view  of  their  actual  need  and  the  future  service  they  are  to  render. 
Unchecked  prosperity  might  have  been  the  greatest  curse  to  such  a  young  man.  We 
do  not  know  what  subtle  dangers  were  lurking  in  his  heart,  and  how  necessary  it  was 
to  cause  him  to  feel  his  utter  helplessness  when  left  to  himself.  Facts  prove  that 
out  of  this  bitter  experience  he  rose  a  more  devout,  and  humble,  and  trustful  man, 
and  was  thereby  enabled  to  be  a  better  king,  and  to  enrich  the  world  for  ever  with 
psalms  expressive  of  the  deepest  experience  of  the  human  soul.  Time  it  essential  to 
the  interpretation  of  the  ways  of  God.  The  cruel  wrongs  of  Joseph  and  the  anguish 
of  Jacob  proved  among  the  good  things  of  life.  The  forty  years'  trial  in  the  desert 
was  a  blessing  to  Israel.  "  No  chastening  for  the  present  seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but 
grievous ; "  but  history  proves  how  blessed  it  is.  The  absolute  trust  expressed  in  the 
Psalms  could  only  have  been  Stated  by  one  whu  had  been  very  poor,  desolate,  and 
afflicted.  Even  the  life  of  the  Apostle  Peter  was  the  better  for  the  bitterness  and 
shame  of  his  deed.  Many  on  earth  can  say  that  they  are  grateful  for  their  adversi- 
ties, for  through  them  they  have  got  nearer  to  God,  have  found  Christ's  love  more 
precious,  and  have  set  their  affections  more  intently  on  things  unseen  and  eternal. 
Who  can  adequately  praise  the  unsearchable  wisdom  and  love  that  can  thus  turn  our 
darkness  into  light,  and  convert  our  sorrows  into  joys,  and  even  build  up  holy 
characters  out  of  the  ruins  of  our  own  actions  and  follies  ?  (Bom.  xi.  36 — 39). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.! — 8.  (Nob.) — Deceit.  1.  As  in  the  outward  life,  so  in  the  inward  experience 
of  men  great  exaltation  is  often  followed  by  great  depression.  Whilst  David  was 
with  Samuel  and  the  prophets  his  faith  in  God  appears  to  have  been  strong,  and  it 
was  justified  by  the  extraordinary  manner  in  which  he  was  preserved.  But  soon 
afterwards  (some  events  which  are  not  recorded  having  taken  place  in  the  interval) 
he  was  in  mortal  fear  for  his  life,  and  resorted  to  an  unworthy  pretext  in  order  to 
obtain  an  assurance  of  safety,  and  now  took  another  false  step.  "  There  seems 
ground  for  suspecting  that  from  the  time  of  his  parting  with  Jonathan — if  not, 
indeed,  from  the  time  of  his  leaving  Naioth — David  had  lost  some  of  his  trust  in 
God  "  (Kitto).  2.  The  intention  to  deceive  constitutes  the  essence  of  lying.  Truth 
is  the  representation  of  things  as  they  are,  and  it  may  be  departed  irom  in  many 
ways  without  such  an  intention.  .  But  veracity  is  always  obligatory.  Even  if  inten- 
iional  deception  be  ever  justifiable,  as  some  have  supposed,  it  clearly  was  not  in 
the  case  of  David.  The  sacred  historian  records  the  fact  without  approval,  and 
without  comment,  except  as  the  mention  of  its  disastrous  consequences  may  be  so 
regarded  (ch.  xxii.  2).  "  Whoso  thinketh  that  there  is  any  kind  of  lie  which  is  not 
sin  deceiveth  himself"  (Augustine).  3.  The  amount  of  guilt  involved  in  lying 
depends  upon  its  circumstances,  nature,  and  motives.  The  forms  which  it  assumes 
are  endlessly  varied  (direct,  equivocation,  suppression  of  truth,  for  advantage,  pious 
frauds,  malicious,  &c.)  ;  but  that  which  is  marked  by  hatred  and  malice  is  the  most 
reprehensible.  This  element  was  absent  from  the  deception  practised  by  David. 
The  age  in  which  he  lived,  too,  was  one  io  which  a  "  lie  of  necessity  "  was  deemed 
comparatively  venial ;  and  it  was  borne  with,  though  not  approved,  by  the  "  God 
of  truth  "  until  men  should  be  trained  to  a  higher  moral  state.  Concerning  deceit 
observe  that — 

I.  It  is  usually  nsaBD  by  special  inducements  ;  such  as — 1.  The  pressure  of 
eircumstanees.    When  David  presented  himself  alone  before  the  high  priest  at  the 
commencement  of  the  sabbath  (the  evening  of  Friday)  he  was  pressed  by  hunger 
laui.  OD 


40*  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxi.  1— 1& 

and  fear,  and  thereby  tempted  to  invent  a  falsehood.  If  he  had  eteadfastly  get  his 
face  against  the  temptation  his  need  would  probably  have  been  met  in  some  other 
way.  There  is,  strictly  speaking,  no  such  thing  as  a  lie  of  necessity.  A  man  may 
die  of  necessity,  but  not  lie.  2.  The  promise  of  advantage.  He  thought  that  no 
harm  could  possibly  come  of  his  deceit.  But  now  little  do  men  know,  when  they 
enter  upon  n  false  way,  to  what  end  it  may  lead  !  3.  The  possession  of  a  natural 
tendency  or  susceptibility  to  such  a  temptation.  There  was  in  him  (notwithstanding 
he  abhorred  lying  from  his  heart)  "  a  natural  disposition  which  rendered  him 
peculiarly  open  to  this  temptation :  a  quick,  impulsive  genius  fertile  in  conceiving, 
and  a  versatile  cleverness  skilful  in  colouring  things  different  from  the  actual  fact. 
And  does  it  not  read  a  most  striking  lesson  to  those  who  are  in  any  way  similarly 
constituted  ?  "  (J.  Wright, « David,  King  of  Israel '). 

"  Ever  to  the  truth 
Which  but  the  semblance  of  a  falsehood  wears 
A  man,  if  possible,  should  bar  his  lip. 
Since,  although  blameless,  he  incurs  reproach  "  (DanteX 

II.  It  is  always  deservinq  op  bteonq  reprobation,  inasmuch  as — 1.  It  is  a 
violation  of  the  bond  by  which  society  is  held  together.  Without  confidence  in  each 
other's  truthfulness  men  could  not  live  together  in  social  union.  It  is  a  sin  against 
the  justice  and  the  love  which  we  owe  to  our  neighbour.  What  the  apostle  says 
with  reference  to  the  Christian  community  applies  to  all :  "  Wherefore  putting  away 
lying,"  &c. :  "  for  we  are  members  one  of  another  "  (Ephes.  iv.  25).  2.  It  is  contrary 
to  the  dictates  of  an  enlightened  conscience.  3.  It  is  prohibited  and  condemned  by 
the  word  of  truth.  "  Ye  shall  not  lie  one  to  another  "  (Levit.  xix.  11).  "  Keep  thy 
tongue  from  evil,  and  thy  lips  from  speaking  guile  "  (Ps.  xxiv.  13 ;  cziz.  29 ;  Prov. 
xii.  22 ;  Col.  iii.  9  ;  Eev.  xxi.  8).  "  Lying  is  a  base,  unworthy  vice ;  a  vice  that  one 
of  the  ancients  portrays  in  the  most  odious  colours,  when  he  says  that  'it  is  to 
manifest  a  contempt  of  God,  and  withal  a  fear  of  man.'  It  is  not  possible  more 
excellently  to  represent  the  horror,  baseness,  and  irregularity  of  it;  for  what  can  a 
man  imagine  more  hateful  and  contemptible  than  to  be  a  coward  toward  men  and 
valiant  against  his  Maker?  "  (Montaigne). 

III.  It  is  often  detected  by  onexpeoted  means  (ver.  8).  Little  did  David  think 
of  seeing  Doeg  the  Edomite  detained  (literally,  shut  up)  in  the  tabernacle,  to  witness 
his  deception  with  quick  eyes  and  ears,  and  ready  to  reveal  it  with  a  tongue  "  like  a 
sharp  razor,  working  deceitfully  "  (Ps.  Hi.  2).  But — 1.  However  cautious  men  may 
be  in  practising  deceit,  they  can  never  calculate  upon  all  the  means  by  which  it  may 
be  discovered.  "  A  bird  of  the  air  shall  carry  the  voice,  and  that  which  hath  wings 
shall  tell  the  matter "  (Eccles.  x.  20).  2.  Even  its  temporary  success  often  leads  to 
inquiry  and  discovery  (ch.  xxii.  6).  3.  God,  before  whom  "all  things  are  naked 
and  open,"  causes  the  whole  course  of  things  to  work  together  for  its  exposure  (2 
Sam.  xii.  12),  in  order  to  teach  men  to  avoid  "  the  way  of  lying,"  and  "  speak  the 
truth  in  their  heart."  It  was  through  the  operation  of  his  providence  that  Doeg  was 
there  that  day.  Human  history  and  individual  life  afford  innumerable  instances  of 
the  ozposure  of  deceit  in  unexpected  ways  (Eccles.  xii.  14). 

"  Lie  not ;  but  let  thy  heart  be  true  to  God, 
Thy  tongue  to  it,  thy  actions  to  them  both. 
Dare  to  be  true  1    Nothing  can  need  a  lie  ; 
The  fault  that  needs  it  most  grows  two  thereby  "  (Herbert). 

IV.  It  invamablt  pboduceb  pernioious  consequences.  1.  In  those  who  deceive 
• — by  their  moral  deterioration,  encouragement  in  deception  when  they  are  success- 
ful, and  filling  them  sooner  or  later  with  bitter  regret  (ch.  xxii.  22).  2.  In  those 
who  are  deceived,  to  an  extent  which  cannot  be  anticipated.  3.  In  other  men,  by 
lessening  their  confidence  in  one  another,  and  giving  "  occasion  to  the  enemies  of  the 
Lord  to  blaspheme  "  (2  Sam.  xii.  14). 

Learn  —  1.  That  we  may  not  "do  evil  that  good  may  come."  2.  To  judge 
charitably  of  others,  inasmuch  as  we  know  not  the  strength  of  their  temptations. 


OH.  Ht  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  408 

8.  To  watch  against  the  least  approach  to  deception  in  ourselves.    4.  To  leek  pc*- 
aervation  from  it  by  firmly  trusting  in  God. — D. 

Ver.  2.  (Nob.) — The  tins  of  good  men.  Some  of  the  most  eminent  servants  of 
God  mentioned  in  the  Bible  fell  into  grievous  sins.  This  has  often  been  to  some  a 
ground  of  objection  to  the  Bible,  and  to  others  a  subject  of  perplexity.  But  there  is 
little  reason  for  either.     Consider  it  in  relation  to — 

I.  The  truth  of  Scriptueb.  If  men  had  been  described  therein  as  wholly  free 
from  sin  there  would  have  been  much  more  reason  for  doubt  or  perplexity  concern- 
ing its  truth  than  now  exists;  for  its  representation  of  them — 1.  Proves  the  im- 
partiality of  the  writers,  who  record  the  failings  of  good  men  as  well  as  their 
excellencies,  concealing  nothing.  It  shows  that  the  sacred  writers  were  influenced 
by  the  highest  principles,  and  even  guided  by  a  higher  wisdom  than  their  own.  2. 
Accords  with  the  results  of  observation  and  experience,  which  teach  that  men  are 
sinful,  that  those  who  are  unquestionably  good  men  are  liable  to  fall,  and  that  the 
most  eminently  pious  are  not  perfect.  Much  of  the  Bible  is  chiefly  a  faithful  picture 
of  human  nature,  which  (both  without  and  under  the  power  of  Divine  grace)  is 
essentially  the  same  in  all  ages.  3.  Confirms  the  doctrines  it  contains  :  such  as  that 
man  is  fallen,  sinful,  and  helpless ;  that  his  elevation,  righteousness,  and  strength 
are  of  God ;  that  he  can  attain  these  blessings  only  through  faith  and  prayer  and 
conflict ;  that  he  can  continue  to  possess  them  only  by  the  same  means ;  and  that 
when  he  ceases  to  rely  on  Divine  strength  he  utterly  fails. 

II.  The  character  of  God.  They  were  accepted  and  blessed  by  him  notwith- 
standing their  sins.  Is  he,  therefore,  unholy,  unjust,  or  partial  ?  Let  it  be  remem- 
bered— 1.  That  their  sins  were  not  sanctioned  by  him.  2.  That  they  were  forbidden 
by  him.  3.  That  they  were  punished  by  him.  4.  That  they  were  forgiven  only 
when  repented  of.  5.  That  they  were  in  some  cases  mercifully  borne  with  for  a 
time  because  of  the  good  which  he  saw  in  liis  servants,  and  in  order  to  the  ultimate 
removal  of  the  evil.  6.  That  if  such  endurance  of  some  things  in  them  appears 
strange  to  us,  under  the  higher  light  and  grace  vouchsafed,  there  are  probably  some 
tilings  in  ourselves,  the  evil  of  which  we  scarcely  perceive,  but  which  will  appear 
hereafter  in  a  different  light  to  others.  7.  That  the  principle  on  which  God  deals 
with  the  individual  and  the  race  is  that  of  a  gradual  education,  the  aim  of  which  is 
that  we  should  be  "  holy  as  he  is  holy." 

III.  The  worth  of  such  men.  If  they  had  continued  in  conscious  and  persistent 
transgression  they  could  not  have  been  held  in  honour  or  regarded  as  really  good 
(1  John  iii.  6) ;  but  though  their  sins  may  not  be  excused,  their  names  are  worthy 
of  being  had  in  everlasting  remembrance,  because  of — 1.  The  surpassing  virtues 
which  distinguished  their  character.  2.  The  main  current  of  their  hfe — so  contrary 
to  isolated  instances  of  transgression.  3.  Their  deep  sorrowfor  sin,  their  lofty 
aspirations  after  holiness,  and  their  sure  progress  toward_  perfection. 

IV.  The  effect  on  others.  This  has  doubtless  been  injurious  in  some  directions. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  has  been,  as  it  must  be  when  the  subject  is  rightly  viewed, 
beneficial  in — 1.  Making  others  more  watchful  against  falhng.  If  such  eminent 
servants  of  God  fell,  much  more  may  we.  "Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth," 
&c.  2.  Preventing  despair  when  they  have  fallen.  If  those  who  .fell  could  be 
restored,  so  can  we.  3.  Teaching  them  to  look  to  Jesus  Christ  as  the  one  perfect 
example,  the  only  propitiation  for  our  sins,  the  all-sufBcient  source  of  "wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption."  "Nothing  can  be  an  excuse  or 
apology  for  sin ;  yet  by  God's  mercy  it  may  be  turned  to  account,  and  made  to  pro- 
duce the  opposite  to  itself.  To  some  men's  errors  the  world  has  been  indebted  for 
their  richest  lessons  and  ripest  fruit.  .  .  .  "To  the  lamentable  lapse,  the  penitence 
and  the  punishment  of  David,  we  owe  some  of  the  most  subduing,  the  most  spiritually 
instructive  and  consolatory  of  his  psalms — psalms  that  have  taught  despair  to  trust, 
and  have  turned  the  heart  of  flint  into  a  fountain  of  tears  "  (Binney). — D. 

Vers.  3 — 6.  (Nob.)— ^Ae  letter  and  the  spirit.  "  So  the  priest  gave  him  hallowed 
bread"  (ver.  6).  More  than  half  a  century  had  elapsed  sinob  the  destruction  of 
Sbiloh.    The  remaining  members  of  the  family  of  Eli  had  greatly  increased,  so  that 

dd2 


404  THE  FIBST  BOOS  OF  SAMUKL.  [OH.  ZU  1— IC 

eighC^-five  priests  now  dwelt  at  Nob,  where  the  tabernacle  (and  possibly  the  ark-> 
ch.  Tii.  1)  had  been  placed.  But  the  condition  of  the  priesthood  was  very  different 
from  what  it  once  was.  The  spiritual  power  of  the  nation  lay  in  the  "  company  of 
the  prophets;"  and  Saul,  rejected  of  God  and  ruling  according  to  his  own  will, 
"  asBumed  the  power  of  giving  the  high  priest  orders  at  all  times  through  his  mes- 
sengers (ch.  xxi.  2) ;  so  far  had  the  theocracy  sunk  from  that  state  in  which  the 
people  used  to  stand  before  the  tabernacle  to  receive  the  sole  behests  of  Jehovah 
their  King,  through  the  prophet  and  priest  "  (Smith,  '  0.  T.  History ').  Neverthe- 
less Ahimelech  (Ahiah,  ch.  xiv.  36)  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  high  character 
(ch.  xxii.  14,  16);  and  when  David,  in  his  necessity,  requested  "five  loaves,"  he 
gave  them  to  him  from  the  shewbread  which  had  just  been  removed  from  the  holy 
place.  He  may  have  been  influenced  by  sympathy  with  David's  character  and 
position  (of  which  he  could  not  fail  to  know  something),  as  well  as  by  compassion 
:or  his  need  and  by  loyalty  to  the  king,  or  by  the  advice  of  Abiathar  (his  son  and  suc- 
jessor,  afterwards  friend  and  companion  of  David — ch.  xxii.  20 — 23  ;  1  Kings  iL  26 ; 
ind  removed  from  the  priesthood  by  Solomon,  giving  place  to  Zadok,  of  the  elder 
branch  of  the  Aaronic  family).  The  shewbread  (literally,  "  bread  of  the  presence  ") 
"  set  forth  Israel's  permanent  consecration  in  obedience  and  in  producing  the  fmit 
of  good  works  "  (see  Fairbaim,  '  Typology,'  ii.  324),  and  was  permitted  to  be  eaten 
only  by  the  priests  (Levit.  xxiv.  9) ;  but  he  departed,  with  some  reserve  (ver.  4), 
from  the  strict  letter  in  observance  of  the  spirit  of  the  law.  And  our  Lord  "  selected 
this  act  of  Ahimelech  as  the  one  incident  in  David's  life  on  which  to  bestow  his 
especial  commendation,  because  it  contained — however  tremulously  and  guardedly 
expressed — the  great  evangelical  truth  that  the  ceremonial  law,  however  rigid,  must 
give  way  before  the  claims  of  suffering  humanity  "  (Stanley).     Observe  that — 

I.  The  letter  is  distinct  from  thb  spirit.  To  the  former  belong  particular 
customs,  maxims,  rules,  rites,  and  ceremonies ;  to  the  latter,  general  principles,  and 
essential  moral  and  spiritual  obligations.  As  a  simple  illustration — Christ  said  to  his 
disciples,  "  Ye  also  ought  to  wash  one  another's  feet "  (here  is  the  rule)  ;  "  Love  one 
another  "  (here  is  the  principle).  1.  The  letter  rests  upon  the  spirit  as  its  foundation. 
The  whole  Mosaic  law,  as  law  (moral,  ceremonial,  political),  was  li  "  letter "  based 
upon  great  principles,  springing  directly  out  of  the  relation  of  God  to  men — granite 
foundations  on  which  more  recent  strata  rest,  and  which  often  crop  through  them 
into  distinct  view  (Levit.  xviii.  18;  Deut.  vi.  6).  "There  is  a  'letter'  and  'spirit' 
in  everything.  Every  statement,  every  law,  every  institution  is  the  form  of  an 
essence,  the  body  of  a  soul,  the  instrument  of  a  power.  These  two  things  are  quite 
distinct^ — ^they  may  be  quite  different "  (A.  J.  Morris,  '  Christ  the  Spirit  of  Christi- 
anity').  2.  The  letter  is  a  means  to  an  end,  the  spirit  is  the  end  itself.  The  shew- 
bread was  set  apart  for  a  particular  purpose,  and  permitted  to  be  eaten  only  by  the 
priests,  in  order  to  represent  and  promote  the  consecration,  good  works,  and  true 
welfare  of  the  whole  people.  So  "  the  sabbath  was  made  for  man  "  (Mark  ii,  27). 
3.  The  letter  is  restncted  in  its  application  to  certain  persons,  places,  and  times ; 
the  spirit  is  universal  and  abiding.  4.  The  letter  (as  such)  is  in  its  requirement 
outward,  formal,  mechanical,  and  in  its  effect  conservative,  constraining,  and  pre- 
paratory ;  the  spirit  necessarily  demands  thoughtfulness,  affection,  moral  choice, 
and  is  productive  of  liberty,  energy,  perfection.  "  The  words  that  I  speak  unto  you, 
they  are  spirit  and  they  are  life  "  (John  vi.  63). 

II.  The  letter  mat  be  contrart  to  the  spirit.  It  is  not  essentially  so ;  it  is 
not  always  so  when  men  imagine  it  to  he,  as,  e.  g.,  when  it  is  a  restraint  only  upon 
their  seliish  convenience  and  sinful  propensities.  The  fact  that  it  is  such  a  restraint 
shows  that  they  still  need  the  discipline  of  the  law  and  the  letter.  If  they  were  truly 
spiritual  and  free  it  would  not  he  felt.  But  generally — 1.  When  it  is  applied  to  easet 
not  contemplated  hy  it, — to  inappropriate  times  and  circumstances, — and  whei  it  hin- 
ders rather  than  promotes  its  chief  end.  2.  More  particularly  when  it  preventa  the 
meethig  of  the  real  and  urgent  necessities  of  men,  and  the  accomplishment  of  their 
true  welfare — the  satisfaction  of  hunger,  the  removal  of  sickness,  the  preservation  of 
life,  the  salvation  of  the  soul  (Matt.  xii.  1,  12).  On  this  principle  David  "  entered 
into  the  house  of  God,  and  did  eat  the  shewbread,"  &c.  3.  When  it  is  opposed  to 
the  proper  exercise  of  benevolence.    On  this  principle  Ahimelech  gave  him  the  bread, 


OH.  XXI..  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  40f 

>nd  our  Lord  acted  (Luke  vi.  10).  "I  desired  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice"  (Hosea 
Vi.  6).  4.  When  it  hinders  the  highest  service  of  God.  In  all  such  instances  the 
strict  observance  of  the  letter  "  works  mischief  and  misery,  and  not  only  kills,  but 
kills  the  spirit  itself  from  which  it  came"  (2  Cor.  iii.  6). 

III.  The  LEiTBB  MUST  BE  SUBORDINATED  TO  THE  SPIRIT.  It  should  not  be  despised 
or  arbitrarily  set  aside;  but  the  lower  obligation  (in  so  far  as  the  "letter"  is 
obligatory)  ought  to  be  secondary  and  subservient,  and  give  place  to  the  higher. 
And  we  learn  that — 1.  In  the  order  of  God's  dealings  with  men  it  was  necessary 
that  the  dispensation  of  the  letter  should  be  superseded  by  that  of  the  spirit.  This 
incident  afEords  a  glimpse  of  their  predominant  elements.  "  The  law  was  like  a  book 
of  first  lessons — lessons  for  children.  Christianity  is  like  a  hook  for  men."  2.  In 
the  Christian  dispensation  what  is  ceremonial,  regulative,  temporary  (however  im- 
portant) must  be  deemed  of  less  consequence  than  what  is  moral,  essential,  enduring ; 
and  devotion  to  the  former  should  be  surpassed  by  devotion  to  the  latter.  Unduly 
to  exalt  external  rites  or  special  forms  of  worship  is  to  return  to  the  bondage  of  the 
letter  ;  whilst  zealously  to  contend  about  them  without  brotherly  love  and  charity  is 
to  lose  the  substance  for  the  sake  of  shadows.  "  Redeemed  and  sanctified  man  stands 
no  longer  under  the  disciplinary  form  of  the  law,  but  stands  above  and  controls  the 
form  of  the  requirement "  (Erdmann).  He  is  a  king  and  priest.  "  Pure  religion  " 
(literally,  outward  ceremonial  service),  &c.  (James  i.  27),     It  is  charity  and  purity, 

3.  In  the  individual  life — renewed  and  sanctified — the  chief  endeavour  should  evaf 
be  to  "  live  in  the  spirit,"  and  exhibit  "  charity  out  of  a  pure  heart "  (1  Tim.  L  6). 

• "  I'm  apt  to  think  the  man 
That  could  surround  the  sum  of  things,  and  spy 
The  heart  of  God  and  secrets  of  his  empire, 
Would  speak  but  love ;  with  him  the  bright  result 
Would  change  the  hue  of  intermediate  scenea 
And  make  one  thing  of  all  theology." 

4.  In  everything  Christ  mmt  be  regarded  as  supreme,  the  perfect  embodiment  and 
only  source  of  the  spirit,  Redeemer,  Lord,  "  all  and  in  all "  (Col.  iii.  11 :  2  Cor.  iiL 
17,  18).— D. 

Vers.  8 — 10.  (Nob.) — The  sword  of  Goliath.  "There  is  none  like  that;  give  it 
me  "  (ver.  9).  When  David  slew  Goliath  "  he  put  his  armour  in  his  tent "  ("  the 
ancient  word  for  dwelling").  But  he  appears  to  have  afterwards  deposited  his 
sword  in  the  tabernacle  at  Nob  as  a  sacred  relic,  dedicatory  offering,  memorial,  and 
sign ;  and  on  seeking  for  means  of  defence  during  his  flight  "  from  the  face  of  Saul " 
(ver.  10)  it  was  still  there,  carefully  "  wrapped  in  a  cloth  behind  the  ephod,"  and 
was  handed  over  to  him  by  the  priest.  It  was  of  special  significance  for  him,  and 
(as  other  memorials  often  do  to  others)  it  must  have  spoken  to  him  with  an  almoet 
oracular  voice  in  the  way  of — 

I.  Remembrance  of  the  help  of  God ;  afforded — 1.  In  the  gaining  of  a  notable 
victory  over  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  and  his  people.  2.  At  a  time  of  imminent 
peril  and  utmost  extremity.  3.  Through  faith  "  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts." 
David's  deliverance,  as  he  then  acknowledged,  was  accomplished  not  by  the  sling 
and  stone,  nor  yet  by  the  sword,  but  by  the  Lord  on  whom  he  relied ;  and  he  much 
needed  to  be  reminded  of  it  now. 

II.  Encoubaqement  to  trust  in  God.  1.  In  his  service,  in  conflict  with  his 
enemies  and  obedience  to  his  directions,  the  Lord  is  with  his  servants.  They  are  not 
"  alone  "  (ver.  1),  but  he  is  on  their  side  (Ps.  cxviii.  6).  2.  In  the  greatest  extremity, 
when  ordinary  means  seem  unavailing,  he  is  able  to  deliver  them  by  those  which  are 
•xtraordinary.  3.  The  confidence  which  they  place  in  him  he  never  disappoints. 
"Fear  not."     "  It  is  better  to  trust  in  the  Lord  than  to  put  confidence  in  princes." 

III.  Warning  against  confidence  in  man.  Overwhelmed  with  fear,  he  was  about 
to  take  the  daring  step  of  leaving  his  people  and  seeking  shelter  with  the  Philistines, 
and  eagerly  grasped  the  weapon  as  an  omen  of  the  success  of  his  scheme,  but  if 
he  had  reflected  it  would  surely  have  taught  him  that — 1.  There  is  no  safety  for  • 
servant  of  God  in  dependence  uoon  or  in  alliance  with  his  enemies.     None  mijght 


4M  THE  FIBS!  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  foH.  rri.  1— 1« 

be  like  "  the  sword  of  Goliath  "  when  used  in  "  Uie  Lord's  battles,"  but  in  no  other. 
S.  His  own  wisdom  and  strength  avail  nothing  "  without  the  Lord."  And  he 
was  now  evidently  venturing  on  an  erroneous  and  presumptuous  course,  in  which 
he  had  no  assurance  of  Divine  guidance  and  help.  3.  The  weapon  which  has  been 
powerful  by  faith  is  powerless  without  it,  and  may  even  be  turned  against  him  who 
employs  it.  Ancient  memorials,  institutions,  methods  are  valueless  apart  from  the 
spirit  which  they  represent.  It  is  probable  that  David  was  discovered  in  the  native 
place  of  Ooliath  by  the  sword  he  bore ;  and  the  next  thing  we  hear  is  that  he  and 
the  renowned  weapon  he  so  highly  prized  were  in  the  hands  of  the  Philistines. — D. 

Vers.  10 — 16.  (Gath.J — The  fear  of  man.  "  And  David  laid  up  these  words  in  his 
heart,  and  was  sore  afraid  "  (ver.  12).  The  fear  of  man  is  not  always  sinful.  As  in 
certain  cases,  and  within  certain  limits,  the  approbation  of  others  is  a  natural  and 
proper  object  of  desire,  so  the  disapprobation  of  others  is  a  like  object  of  dread  ;  and 
it  often  restrains  from  temptation  and  impels  to  virtuous  conduct.  But  it  is  sinf al 
when  it  exists  where  it  ought  not,  or  in  an  undue  measure  ;  when  it  hinders  us  from 
doing  right  lest  we  should  incur  their  displeasure,  or  incites  us  to  do  wrong  in  order 
to  avoid  it.  Such  fear  has  often  possessed  the  servants  of  God  (Gen.  xii.  12  ;  Exod. 
XXX.  11,  22;  1  Sam.  xvi.  2;  Matt.  xxvi.  72).  It  was  felt  by  David  when  he  fled 
from  Saul ;  and  still  more  when  recognised  by  the  servants  of  Achish,  king  of  Gath, 
and  brought  before  him.  To  avoid  what  appeared  to  him  inevitable  death  he 
feigned  madness,  and  his  dissimulation  (though  no  more  reprehensible  than  the 
stratagems  which  many  others  have  devised  in  great  straits)  was  unworthy  of  his 
high  character.     Notice — 

I.  Its  pbincipal  causes.  1.  Diatnttt  of  Divine  protection,  which  be  had  already 
exhibited.  If  he  had  not,  to  some  extent,  "  cast  away  his  confidence,"  he  would 
hardly  have  come  to  Gath  at  all ;  for  God  could  assuredly  protect  him  in  his  own 
land.  And  now,  deprived  of  "  the  shield  of  faith,"  he  became  victim  to  a  fear  as 
great  as  the  courage  he  had  formerly  displayed.  2.  The  failure  of  worldly  policy, 
which,  through  lack  of  faith,  he  had  adopted.  Like  Peter,  he  went  whither  he  was 
not  called  to  go ;  and  when  his  folly  and  presumption  were  suddenly  revealed  he 
was  overwhelmed  with  dismay.  His  failure  was,  in  its  ultimate  result,  good ;  for, 
although  he  had  no  intention  of  turning  his  sword  against  his  people,  it  prevented 
further  entanglements  arising  out  of  his  relation  with  his  enemies,  humbled  him,  and 
constrained  him  to  cry  to  God  for  deliverance.  It  is  better  for  a  good  man  to  be 
driven  forth  from  the  wicked  in  contempt  than  to  be  retained  amongst  &em  in  honour. 
3.  The  presence  of  personal  danger ;  doubtless  great,  but  exaggerated,  as  it  always 
is,  by  fear.  "He  that  seeketh  his  life  shall  lose  it."  How  common  is  the  fear  of 
man,  arising  from  similar  causes,  in  social,  political,  and  religious  life  I 

II.  Its  injurious  influence  (ver.  13).  The  intercourse  of  David  with  Saul  may 
possibly  have  suggested  the  device;  which,  moreover,  was  not  an  inappropriate 
expression  of  his  inward  agitation  and  misery.  Fear — 1.  FUh  the  mind  with  dis- 
tracting anxiety  and  distress.  He  whose  faith  fails  is  no  longer  himself.  He  is 
driven  hither  and  tljitber,  like  a  ship  upon  the  open  sea  (Luke  xii.  29).  2.  Incites 
to  the  adoption  of  deceitful  expedients.  "  The  fear  of  man  bringeth  a  snare  "  (Prov. 
xxix.  25).  3.  Exposes  to  ignominious  contempt  (ver.  15).  "Signally  did  David 
show  on  this  occasion  that  he  possessed  two  of  the  powers  most  essential  to  genius 
— powers  without  which  he  could  never  have  become  the  great  poet  he  was — the 
power  of  observation  and  the  power  of  imitation.  He  must  previously  have  noticed 
with  artistic  accuracy  all  the  disgusting  details  of  madness ;  and  now  he  is  able  to 
reproduce  tliem  with  a  startling  fidelity.  And  in  the  possession  of  these  powers  we 
may,  I  think,  find  not  an  excuse  for,  but  certainly  an  explanation  of,  that  tendency 
to  deceit,  which  otherwise  it  would  be  hard  to  account  for  in  so  holy  a  person. 
When  a  man  finds  it  an  easy  and  pleasurable  exercise  of  ability  to  throw  himsRif 
into  existences  alien  to  his  own,  he  is  tempted  to  a  course  of  unreality  and  conse- 
quent untruthfulness  which  can  hardly  be  conceived  by  a  more  self -bound  natura 
But  if  genius  has  its  greater  temptations,  it  also  has  greater  strength  to  resist  them. 
And  the  more  godlike  a  genius  is,  the  more  unworthy  and  humiliating  are  its 
lapses.     What  more  debasing  sight  can  be  imagined  than  that  which  David  presented 


OH.  XXI.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  407 

in  the  king's  palace  at  Gath  I  Fingers  which  have  struck  the  celestial  lyre  now 
■cribble  on  the  doors  of  the  gate.  From  Ups  which  have  poured  forth  divinest  song 
now  drops  the  slaver  of  madness.  The  soul  which  has  delighted  in  communion  with 
God  now  emulates  the  riot  of  a  fiend.  And  all  this  not  brought  on  by  the  stroke  of 
Heaven,  which  awes  us  while  it  saddens,  but  devised  by  a  faithless  craft "  (J. 
Wright). 

III.  Its  effbctdal  eemoval  by — 1.  The  overruling  goodness  of  God,  which  often 
delivers  his  servants  from  the  snares  they  have  made  for  themselves,  and  sometimes 
mercifully  controls  their  devices  to  that  end ;  and  (as  we  learn  from  the  psalms 
which  refer  to  the  event)  in  connection  with — 2.  Earnest  prayer  fw  his  help,  and — 
3.  Restored  confidence  in  his  presence  and  favour.    Faith  is  the  antidote  of  fear. 

"  The  following  is  an  approximation  to  the  chronological  order  of  the  eight  psalms 
which  are  assigned  by  their  inscriptions  to  the  time  of  David's  persecution  by  Saul : 
vii.  (Cush),  lix.,  Ivi.,  xxxiv.,  lii.,  Ivii.,  cxlii.,  liv."  (Delitzsoh).  See  also  the  inscription* 
of  Ps.  Ixiii.  and  xviii.     Ps.  lvl,  '  The  prayer  of  a  fugitive'  (see  inaoription)  :— 

"  Be  gracious  unto  me,  O  God.  .  .  . 
In  the  day  that  I  fear,  in  thee  do  I  pnt  my  trust, 
In  God  do  I  praise  his  word. 
In  God  have  I  put  my  trust ;  I  do  not  fear. 

What  can  fleah  do  unto  me  % "  (vera.  1,  4,  9,  13^ 

Pb.  xsxit.,  '  Thanksgiving  for  deliverance  *  (see  inscription) : — 

"  I  will  bleas  Jehovah  at  all  times.  .  .  . 
I  sought  Jehovah,  and  he  answered  me, 
And  out  of  all  my  fears  did  he  deliver  me. 
This  afflicted  one  cried,  and  Jehovah  heard. 
And  saved  him  out  of  all  his  troubles"  (vers.  1,  8,  7, 12 — IflV 

"When  David  sang  these  two  songs  God's  grace  had  already  dried  his  tears. 
Their  fundamental  tone  is  thanksgiving  for  favour  and  deliverance.  But  he  who 
has  an  eye,  therefore,  will  observe  that  they  are  still  wet  with  tears,  and  cannot  fail 
to  see  in  the  singer's  outpourings  of  heart  the  sorrowfulest  recollections  of  former 
sins  and  errors  "  (Krummacher). — D. 

Ver.  6. — The  letter  of  the  law  violated.  How  did  David,  being  neither  priest  nor 
Levite,  venture  to  eat  the  presence-bread  from  the  sanctuary  ?  How  did  Ahimelech 
venture  to  give  it  to  him  ? 

I.  Therb  was  the  plea  of  necessity.  An  ox  or  an  ass  which  had  fallen  into 
a  pit  might  be  lifted  out  on  the  sabbath,  notwithstanding  the  commandment  to  do 
no  manner  of  work  on  the  seventh  day.  The  need  of  the  poor  animal,  and  the  mercy 
due  to  it  in  its  mishap,  were  justification  enough  for  a  breach  of  the  letter  of  the 
law.  When  the  disciples  of  Christ,  walking  with  him  along  the  edge  of  a  cornfield, 
pulled  some  ears  to  relieve  their  hunger,  they  were  blameless,  for  what  they  did  was 
expressly  permitted  by  the  Mosaic  law  (Deut.  xxiii.  26).  But  they  did  it  on  the 
sabbath,  and  this  the  Pharisees  challenged  as  unlawful.  The  Lord  Jesus,  however, 
held  it  quite  lawful.  It  was  necessary  that  his  followers  should  relieve  their  hunger 
and  recruit  their  strength,  and  the  greater  object  must  be  put  above  the  less.  "  The 
sabbath  was  made  for  man,  and  not  man  for  the  sabbath."  Our  Lord  brought  out  this 
truth  into  stronger  relief  than  any  other  Jewish  teacher  had  done  ;  but  it  was  rot  new 
doctrine.  We  see  that  while  the  Mosaic  ritual  was  in  the  full  force  of  its  obliga- 
tion the  priest  at  Nob  felt  warranted  to  suspertd  one  of  its  most  minute  regulations 
in  order  to  relieve  pressing  human  want.  Perhaps  the  tendency  in  modem  Churches 
is  to  take  too  much  liberty  with  rules  and  ordinances  of  religion  under  pleas  of 
necessity  which  are  little  more  than  pleas  of  convenience  or  self-will.  _  But  there  is 
a  golden  mean  between  rigidity  and  laxity ;  and  it  must  be  left  to  the  judgment  and 
conscience  of  those  who  fear  the  Lord  to  determine  for  their  own  guidance  what  does 
or  does  not  constitute  a  sufficient  ground  for  setting  aside  regulations  or  restrictions 
which  are  ordinarily  entitled  to  respect.  Yet  it  is  only  the_ letter  of  the  law,  or  the 
minutiae  of  religious  observance,  that  may  be  thus  dealt  with.  There  are  supreme 
obligations  which  not  even  a  question  of  life  and  death  may  overrule.     Kehemiah 


408  THE  PIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xxi.  1— li, 

would  not  flee  into  the  temple  to  save  his  life  when  hie  duty  was  to  build  up  Jeru- 
salem. Shadrach,  Meshach,  and  Abednego  would  not  worship  the  golden  image  at 
Babylon  to  save  their  bodies  from  the  furnace  j  nor  would  Daniel  desist  from  prayer 
to  Jehovah  to  escape  the  lions'  den.  Paul  insisted  on  his  right  of  protection  as  a 
Eoman  citizen,  but  he  would  not  for  a  moment  compromise  or  conceal  the  gospel  to 
evade  persecution.  No  bonds  or  aflflictions  moved  him ;  neither  did  he  count  his  life 
dear  to  himself,  so  that  he  might  finish  his  course  with  joy.  It  is  true  that  not  all 
the  followers  of  Christ  have  had  such  fortitude.  In  days  of  persecution  some 
faltered  and  apostatised,  excusing  themselves  under  a  plea  of  necessity.  They  could 
not  suffer ;  they  dared  not  to  die.  But  the  noble  army  of  martyrs  consists  of  those 
who  felt  it  the  supreme  necessity  to  be  true  to  conscience,  to  the  truth  of  the 
gospel,  and  the  Christ  of  God.  Not  everything,  then,  must  yield  to  necessity.  David 
thought  his  hunger  a  sufficient  warrant  for  taking  from  the  priest's  hand  the  sacred 
bread  ;  but  when  Goliath  blasphemed  the  God  of  Israel  and  defied  his  army,  David 
had  shown  that  his  own  life  was  not  so  dear  to  him  as  the  glory  of  God  and  the 
honour  and  safety  of  his  people. 

II.  There  was  a  profound  insight  into  the  true  meaning  of  priesthood  in 
Israel.  No  doubt  the  priests  formed  a  hereditary  order,  wearing  a  distinctive  dress, 
and  having  special  provision  made  by  statute  for  their  position  and  maintenance. 
But  they  were  never  intended  to  be  a  caste  of  holy  intercessors  standing  between 
God  and  an  unholy  nation.  Neither  they  nor  the  Levites,  their  assistants,  were 
isolated  from  the  common  life  of  their  countrymen,  as  by  separate  charter  of  privilege 
or  vows  of  celibacy.  They  were  just  the  concentrated  expression  of  the  truth  that 
all  Israel  was  called  to  be  "  a  kingdom  of  priests  and  a  holy  nation."  The  rule  was 
that  the  priests  only  should  eat  the  bread  which  was  withdrawn  weekly  from  the 
table  in  the  sanctuary ;  but  it  was  no  breach  of  the  essence  and  spirit  of  the  law  if  other 
Israelites,  faithful  to  God,  should  on  an  emergency  eat  of  this  bread.  David  was  as 
truly  a  servant  of  Jehovah  as  Ahimelech.  Though  all  the  Lord's  people  never  were 
prophets,  they  always  were,  and  now  are,  priests.  Knowing  this,  David  took  and 
ate ;  not  at  all  in  a  wilful  mood,  like  Esau  in  his  ravenous  hunger  eating  Jacob's 
pottage,  but  with  reverential  feeling  and  a  good  conscience,  under  sanction  of  the 
fact  that  he  was  one  of  a  priestly  nation,  and  with  confidence  that  God  would  not 
condemn  him  for  exceeding  in  such  a  strait  the  letter  of  the  law,  so  long  as  he 
honoured  and  obeyed  its  spirit.  The  leaders  and  rulers  of  the  Church,  according  to 
the  New  Testament,  are  not  sacerdoU  invested  with  a  mystic  sanctity  and  intrusted 
with  a  religious  monopoly.  They  are  simply  the  intensified  expression  of  the  holy 
calling  of  all  the  members  of  Christ,  all  the  children  of  God.  All  these  have  a  right 
to  worship  in  the  holiest ;  and  as  all  of  them  may  offer  spiritual  sacrifices,  so  all 
may  "  eat  of  the  holy  things."  Order,  indeed,  is  needful  in  the  Church,  and  no  man 
may  assume  a  leading  place  or  charge  therein  until  duly  called  and  appointed  to  the 
same.  If  David  had  for  a  light  cause,  or  frequently,  taken  the  presence-bread,  it 
would  have  been  a  sign  of  irreverence  or  arrogance.  And  in  like  manner  if  a 
Christian  not  intrusted  with  o£Sce  in  any  constituted  Church  pushes  forward  when 
there  is  no  emergency,  and  assumes  to  lead  the  Divine  service,  or  to  appoint  or  con- 
duct the  observance  of  the  Lord's  Supper,  he  steps  out  of  his  place,  and  may  be 
designated  "  unruly."  But  there  are  places  and  occasions  which  do  not  admit  of  the 
usual  regulations  being  observed  ;  and  in  such  cases  a  private  or  unofficial  Christiar. 
may  take  upon  himself  any  religious  function  rather  than  that  any  soul  should  sufEer 
damage,  and  this  under  the  general  principle  that  all  Christians  form  a  "royal 
priesthood."  The  teaching  of  this  passage  is  against  religious  pedantry  and  ecclesi- 
astical hantewr.  Count  form  subordinate  to  life.  Value  order,  and  reverence 
ordinances  that  are  really  of  God.  Play  no  "  fantastic  tricks  "  with  sacred  things 
"  before  high  heaven ; "  but  do  not  reduce  religion  to  a  question  of  meats  and  drinks, 
and  do  not  count  any  one  a  serious  offender  who  in  a  strait  has  violated  prescription 
or  usage.  One  who  breaks  the  letter  of  the  law  may  keep  the  law  itself  better  than 
another  who  knows  nothing  but  the  letter.  We  are  called  to  liberty ;  not  licence, 
indeed,  but  order  and  liberty.  If  we  are  true  to  God  and  to  our  consciences  we  need 
not  dread  that,  for  a  formality  or  an  informality,  Christ  will  cast  us  off.  The  Son 
of  man  is  Lord  of  the  sabbath  and  of  the  table,  "  Minister  of  the  sanctuary  and 


OH.  XXI.  1—16.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  4M 

the  true  tabernacle,"  Lord  of  all  the  ordinances  that  are  binding  on  his  followers. 
And  there  is  a  freedom — not  from  order,  but  in  God's  order — with  which  the  Son  of 
man,  being  Son  of  God,  has  made  his  people  free, — F. 

Vers.  8 — 16.— 77ie  hero  unheroie.     1.   A  weapon  was  given  to  David  at  Nob 

TEAT  SHOULD  HAVE  STIRRED  ALL  THE  HEROIC  ELEUENT  IN  BIH  AND  BE8T0BBD  HIS 

FALTERING  FAITH.  Had  he  forgotten  that  the  sword  of  Goliath  was  in  custody  of 
the  priests  ?  Or  did  he  remember  it,  and  was  it  for  a  sight  and  a  grasp  of  this 
mighty  weapon  that  he  longed  ?  Who  can  tell  ?  The  priest  reminded  him  of  the 
day  when,  with  that  very  sword,  he  beheaded  the  prostrate  giant  in  the  valley  of 
Blah.  The  words  must  have  sent  a  thrill  through  David's  heart,  and  touched  some 
chord  of  shame.  Why  was  he  now  so  much  afraid  ?  Why  could  he  not  trust  the 
Lord  who  had  saved  him  in  that  dreadful  combat  to  protect  him  now  ?  He  was  all 
eagerness  to  have  the  sword  in  his  hand  again — "  There  is  none  like  it;  give  it  me." 
It  may  have  been  too  ponderous  for  a  man  of  ordinary  size  and  strength  to  wield  with 
any  freedom,  but  its  associations  and  memories  made  it  more  to  David  than  many 
weapons  of  war.  He  ought  to  have  been  of  good  cheer  when  in  one  day  he  got  both 
bread  and  sword  out  of  the  sanctuary.  Is  not  this  suggestive  of  a  way  of  help  and 
encouragement  for  all  who  know  the  Lord  ?  In  new  emergencies  let  them  recall  past 
deliverances.  As  Matthew  Henry  says,  "experiences  are  great  encouragements." 
The  God  who  helped  us  in  some  past  time  of  need  is  able  to  help  us  again.  The 
g^ace  which  gained  one  victory  is  strong  enough  to  gain  another.     But — 

II.  Recollection  without  active  faith  avails  little.  The  courage  which  mnit 
have  leaped  up  in  David's  breast  at  the  sight  and  touch  of  Goliath^s  sword  soon 
ebbed  away.  His  mood  of  despondency  returned  as  he  neared  the  frontier,  and  he 
relapsed  into  shifts  unworth;  both  of  his  past  and  of  his  future.  It  must  be  owned 
that  his  position  was  very  critical.  To  cross  the  western  frontier  was  to  expose  him- 
self to  suspicion  and  obloquy  in  Israel,  and  to  run  great  risk  of  his  life  among  the 
Philistines.  He  was  between  two  fires :  enraged  Saul  behind  him,  and  before  him 
the  king  of  Gath,  who  might  very  probably  avenge  upon  him  the  humiliation  and 
death  of  the  great  champion  of  Gath,  Gohatb.  When  the  latter  of  these  risks 
actually  threatened  him,  David,  always  quick  to  scent  danger,  perceived  his  extreme 
predicament ;  and,  equally  quick  in  suggestion  and  resource,  fell  on  an  ingenious  plan 
to  save  his  life.  It  was  not  dignified — it  was  not  worthy  of  a  devout  and  upright 
man ;  but  it  was  clever  and  successful.  David  had  often  seen  Saul  in  his  frenzy,  and 
knew  how  to  counterfeit  the  symptoms.  So  he  feigned  insanity,  and  was  allowed  to 
leave  the  Philistine  town  unmolested,  and  to  escape  to  his  native  land.  (Illustrate 
from  the  stories  of  Ulysses  and  of  Lucius  Junius  Brutus.)  What  may  pass  without 
censure  in  heathen  Greeks  and  Romans  may  not  so  pass  in  a  Hebrew  like  David,  who 
knew  the  true  God  ;  and  though  we  should  not  judge  severely  the  action  of  a  man 
under  imminent  mortal  peril,  we  are  disappointed  to  see  the  son  of  Jesse  betake 
himself  to  stratagem  and  deceit.  We  are  vexed  to  find  the  hero  uiiheroic,  the  saint 
unsaintly.     But — 

III.  All  the  while  there  was  a  deep  vein  of  devout  feeling  in  David's 
MIND.  Two  of  his  psalms  are  said  to  refer  to  this  time  of  trouble  at  Gath.  The  first 
of  these  is  the  thirty-fourth.  It  makes  no  definite  allusion  to  the  events  related 
here,  but  we  see  no  reason  to  disregard  the  old  tradition  embodied  in  its  title,  which 
refers  its  origin  to  the  time  of  David's  narrow  escape  from  the  Philistines.  Not  that 
he  composed  it  on  the  spur  of  the  moment,  for  the  elaborate  acrostic  structure  of  the 
ode  forbids  that  supposition.  But  the  sweet  singer,  recalling  his  escape,  recalled  the 
devout  feeling  which  it  awakened.  He  did  not  introduce  into  his  song  any  of  the 
actual  incidents  at  Gath.  for  he  must  have  felt  that,  so  far  as  his  own  behaviour  was 
concerned,  the  incidents  were  not  worthy  of  celebration  ;  but  he  recorded  his  experi- 
ence of  Divine  succour  for  the  consolation  of  others  in  their  extremity,  ending  with 
"  Jehovah  redeemeth  the  soul  of  his  servants :  and  none  of  them  that  trust  in  him 
shall  be  desolate."  The  other  psalm  to  which  we  allude  is  the  fifty-sixth.  This, 
too,  is  ascribed  to  "  David  when  the  Philistines  laid  hold  on  him  in  Gath."  It  vividly 
describes  his  condition  and  his  alarm,  and  tells  where  his  hope  of  deliverance  really 
Ugr.    God  knew  his  wanderings  and  regarded  his  tears ;  and  thoughts  of  God  were 


410 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  ixii.  1 — 2S, 


in  David's  heart  even  when  he  was  playing  the  part  of  a  maniac  to  delude  the  Philis- 
tines. "  In  God  I  put  my  trust :  1  am  not  afraid  :  what  can  man  do  unto  me  ?  "  Ws 
do  not  palliate  anything  in  David's  conduct  at  Nob  or  at  G.itli  that  was  unbecoming 
a  servant  of  God.  We  must  go  to  the  great  Son  of  David  to  learn  a  faultless 
morality,  so  that  no  guile  may  proceed  out  of  our  mouths,  and  we  may  use  no  pre- 
texts to  gain  our  objects,  but  count  the  keeping  of  a  good  conscience  superior  to  all 
considerations  of  comfort  and  even  of  life,  and  have  no  fear  of  them  who  can  kill 
the  body,  "but  are  not  able  to  kill  the  soul."  But  the  Psalms  come  in  well  to  prevent 
our  doing  David  any  injustice.  All  through  this  painful  passage  of  his  life — in  his 
flight,  his  grief,  his  mortal  peril — his  heart  was  crying  out  for  God.  So  he  was  saved 
out  of  the  hands  of  enemies.  Goliath  could  not  hurt  him,  nor  Saul,  nor  Achish 
either.  Not  that  God  sanctioned  any  shift  or  subterfuge ;  but  God  heard,  bim,  and 
saved  him  ont  of  all  his  distresses. — F. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


COMMBNCBMENT  OF  DAVID's  LIFB  AS  AN 

OUTLAW.  Ver.  1. — The  cave  Adnllam.  Ac- 
cording to  Josephua  this  was  situated  near  a 
city  of  the  same  name  ('Ant.,'  vi.  12,  3), 
which  formed  one  of  a  group  of  fifteen  in  the 
Shephelah  (see  on  ch.  xvii.  1),  and  its  site 
has  now  been  recovered  by  Mr.  Conder  (see 
'Tent  Work,'  ii.  156-160).  "The  great 
valley,"  he  says,  "of  Elah,  which  forms  the 
highway  from  Philistia  to  Hebron,  runs 
down  northwards  past  Keilah  and  Hareth, 
dividing  the  low  hills  of  the  Shephelah  from 
the  rocky  mountains  of  Judah.  Eight  miles 
from  the  valley  head  stands  Shochoh,  .  .  . 
and  two  and  a  half  miles  south  of  this  is  a 
very  large  and  ancient  terebinth."  This 
standi  on  "the  west  side  of  the  vale,  just 
where  a  small  tributary  ravine  joins  the 
main  valley  ;  and  on  the  south  of  this  ravine 
is  a  high  rounded  hill,  almost  isolated  by 
valleys,  and  covered  with  ruins,  a  natural 
fortress,"  the  site  of  the  city  Adullam. 
David's  cave,  he  considers,  would  not  be  one 
of  the  larger  caverns,  as  these  are  seldom 
used  for  habitations  ;  but  "  the  sides  of  the 
tributary  valley  are  lined  with  rows  of  caves, 
and  these  we  found  inhabited,  and  full  of 
flocks  and  herds  ;  but  still  more  interesting 
was  the  discovery  of  a  separate  cave  on  the 
hill  itself,  a  low,  smoke-blackened  burrow, 
which  was  the  home  of  a  single  family.  We 
could  not  but  suppose,  as  we  entered  this 
gloomy  abode,  that  our  feet  were  standing  in 
the  very  footprints  of  the  shepherd  king, 
who  here,  encamped  between  the  Philistines 
and  the  Jews,  covered  the  line  of  advance 
on  the  cornfields  of  Keilah,  and  was  but 
three  miles  distant  from  the  thickets  of 
Hareth."  After  describing  the  fine  view 
from  this  hill,  which  is  about  500  feet  high, 
he  adds,  "  There  is  ample  room  to  have 
accommodated  David's  400  men  in  the 
caves,  and  they  are,  as  we  have  seen,  still 
(■habited."     Thua  then  David's  cave  was 


one  of  many  in  the  Terebinth  valley  and 
the  ravine  opening  into  it,  and  was  not  far 
from  Gath,  though  over  the  border.  Here 
his  brethren  and  all  his  father's  house 
joined  him  through  fear  of  Saul.  Among 
these  would  he  Joab,  Abishai,  and  Asahel, 
his  cousins ;  and  we  learn  how  great  was  the 
love  and  enthusiasm  which  David  was  able 
to  inspire  among  them  from  the  feat  of  the 
three  heroes,  of  whom  Abishai  was  one,  who, 
while  he  was  in  the  cave  of  Adullam,  and  a 
garrison  of  the  Philistines  at  Bethlehem, 
broke  through  them  to  bring  David  water 
from  the  well  there  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  13—17). 
As  Bethlehem  was  thus  held  by  the  Philis- 
tines, there  was  double  reason  for  the  flight 
of  Jesse's  family ;  and  it  is  a  proof  how 
thoroughly  Saul's  government  had  broken 
down  that,  while  Samuel  could  maintain 
a  ^on  at  Beersheba  as  judge  (ch.  viii  2), 
Saul  was  unable  to  defend  places  so  mndb 
more  distant  from  the  Philistine  border. 

Ver.  2. — Every  one  that  was  in  distress, 
...  in  debt,  or  discontented  (Hebrew,  bitter 
of  soul),  gathered  themselves  unto  him. 
Had  Saul's  government  been  just  and  up- 
right David  would  have  had  no  followers ; 
but  he  never  rose  above  the  level  of  a  soldier, 
had  developed  all  that  arbitrariness  which 
military  command  fosters  in  self-willed  minds, 
and  seems  entirely  unaware  of  its  being  his 
duty  to  attend  to  the  righteous  administration 
of  the  law.  The  Israelites  had  in  him  the 
very  king  they  had  desu-ed,  but  they  found 
that  a  brave  general  might  at  home  be  a 
ruthless  tyrant.  Debt  was  one  of  the  worst 
evils  of  ancient  times.  The  rate  of  usury 
was  so  exorbitant  that  a  loan  was  sure  t» 
end  in  utter  ruin,  and  not  only  the  debtor, 
but  his  children  might  be  made  slaves  to 
repay  the  debt  (2  Kings  iv.  1).  It  was  one 
of  the  first  duties  of  an  upright  governor  to 
enforce  the  Mosaic  law  against  usury  (Levit 
XXV.  86) ;  but  all  such  cares  Saul  despised, 
and  there  were  probably  many  in  the  land 
Impoverished  by  Saul's  own  exactions  and 


OH.  xxn.  1 — 23.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


411 


favonritism  (ver.  7),  and  made  bitter  of  sonl 
by  his  cruelty  and  iajustice.  All  such  were  glad 
to  join  in  what  seemed  to  them  the  banner  of 
revolt.  Afterwards  at  Ziklag  David  was  joined 
by  nobler  followers  (see  on  en.  xxvii.  6).  With 
David  we  may  compare  Jephthah's  case  in 
the  old  days  of  anarchy  (Judges  xi.  3 — 6), 
and  note  that  bad  government  leads  to  law- 
lessness just  as  surely  as  no  government. 

Vers.  8,  4. — David  went  thence  to  Mizpeh 
of  ffloab.  The  position  of  this  place  is  un- 
known, but  as  the  word  means  a  watch-tower, 
it  was  no  doUbt  some  beacon-hill  in  the 
highlands  of  Moab  on  the  east  of  the  Dead 
Sea,  and  probably  in  the  mountains  of 
Abarim  or  Pisgah.  Here  David  placed  his 
father  and  mother  under  the  care  of  the 
king  of  Moab.  They  had  fled  from  Beth- 
lehem under  the  combined  fear  of  Saul  and 
the  Philistines,  but  were  too  old  to  bear  the 
fatigues  of  David's  life.  He  therefore  asks 
for  a  refuge  for  them  with  the  king  of  Moab, 
probably  on  the  ground  that  Jesse's  grand- 
mother, Ruth,  was  a  Moabitess.  But  as 
Saul  had  waged  war  on  Moab  (ch.  xiv.  47), 
the  king  was  probably  glad  to  help  one  who 
would  keep  Saul  employed  at  home.  The 
language  of  David  is  remarkable,  and  is 
literally,  "  Let,  I  pray,  my  father  and  my 
mother  come  forth  with  you  "  (pi. ) ;  but  no 
better  interpretation  has  been  suggested 
than  that  in  the  A.  V.  ;  "  Let  them  come 
forth,  i,  e.  from  the  hold  in  Mizpeh,  to  be 
or  dwell  with  you."  While  David  was  in 
the  hold.  Not  merely  that  in  the  land  of 
Moab,  but  up  to  the  time  when  David  was 
settled  in  Hebron.  During  all  this  period 
David  was  wandering  from  one  natural 
fortress  to  another.  Till  I  know  what  God 
will  do  for  (or  to)  me.  These  words  show 
that  David  had  recovered  his  composure,  and 
was  willing  calmly  to  leave  everything  to  the 
wise  disposal  of  God. 

Ver.  6.— The  prophet  Gad.  This  sudden 
appearance  of  the  prophet  suggests  Stahelin's 
q^uestion,  How  came  he  among  such  people  ? 
But,  in  the  first  place,  David's  followers 
were  not  all  of  the  sort  described  in  ver.  2  ; 
and,  next,  this  must  be  regarded  as  a  declar- 
ation of  the  prophetic  order  in  his  favour. 
As  we  have  a  summary  of  David's  proceed- 
ings in  ver.  4,  extending  over  some  time, 
during  which  the  massacre  of  the  priests  at 
Kob  took  place,  we  may  well  suppose  that  Saul 
had  alienated  from  him  the  minds  of  all  re- 
ligious people,  and  that  Gad,  probably  by 
Samuel's  command,  came  to  be  David's  coun- 
sellor. The  advice  he  gives  is  most  important 
— Abide  not  in  the  hold.  /.  e.  do  not  remain 
in  the  land  of  Moab.  Had  David  done  so  he 
probably  would  never  have  become  king.  By 
remaining  in  Judah,  and  protecting  the  people 
from  the  Philistines,  which  Saul  could  no 
longer  do,  David  grew  in  reputation  and 


power,  and  from  the  list  of  those  who  Joined 
him  at  Ziklag  (1  Chron.  xii  1—22)  it  is  evi- 
dent not  only  that  such  was  the  case,  but  that 
there  was  a  strong  enthusiasm  for  him  through- 
out not  merely  Judah,  but  all  IsraeL  In  the 
happier  times  which  followed  Gad  became 
David's  seer  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  11),  was  God's  mes- 
senger to  punish  David  for  numbering  the 
people  (ihid.  ver.  13),  and  finally  wrote  a  his- 
tory of  his  life  (1  Chron.  xxix.  29).  As  he  thus 
survived  David,  he  must  have  been  a  young 
man  when  he  joined  him,  and  possibly  had 
been  a  companion  of  David  in  the  prophetic 
schools  at  Naioth  in  Ramah.  The  forest  of 
Hareth.  Or,  rather,  Hereth.  "  This  lay  on 
the  edge  of  the  mountain-chain  (of  Hebron), 
where  Kharas  now  stands,  surrounded  by 
the '  thickets  which  properly  represent  the 
Hebrew  ymr,  a  word  wrongly  supposed  to 
mean  a  woodland  of  timber  trees  "  (Conder, 
'Tent  Work,'  iL  88).  Yar  is  translated  forest 
here.  Hereth  was  about  three  miles  from 
Adullam  (see  on  ver.  1). 

Massaoee  of  the  peibsts  at  Nob  (vers. 
6—19).  Ver.  6.— When  Saul  heard  that 
David  was  disoovered.  Hebrew,  "waa 
known."  The  meaning  is  easy  enough, 
though  rendered  obscure  by  the  involved 
translation  of  the  A.  V. ,  and  is  as  follows : 
When  Saul  heard  that  there  was  information 
concerning  David  and  his  men,  he  held  a 
solemn  council,  in  which  we  see  how  simple 
was  the  dignity  of  his  court,  but  how  great  the 
ferocity  to  which  he  was  now  a  prey.  There  is 
no  parenthesis,  but  the  account  of  Saul  taking 
his  seat,  surrounded  by  his  officers,  follows 
directly  upon  the  narration  of  the  fact  that 
news  of  David  had  reached  him,  and  should 
be  translated  thus:  "And  Saul  takes  his 
seat  in  Gibeah  under  the  tamarisk  tree  on 
the  height,  holding  his  javelin  (as  a  sceptre) 
in  his  hand,  and  all  his  officers  stand  in 
order  by  him."  For  Saul's  fondness  for 
trees  see  ch.  xiv.  2 ;  but  at  a  time  when 
there  were  no  large  buildings  a  branching 
tree  formed  a  fit  place  for  a  numerous  meet- 
ing. A  tree.  Really  a  tamarisk  tree,  which 
"sometimes  reaches  such  a  size  as  to  aiford 
dense  shade.  ...  It  is  a  very  graceful  tree, 
with  long  feathery  branches  and  tufts,  closely 
clad  with  the  minutest  of  leaves,  and  sur- 
mounted in  spring  with  spikes  of  beautiful 
pink  blossom"  (Tristram,  'Nat  Hist,  of 
Bible,'  p.  357).  It  grows  abundantly  on 
the  seashore  of  England,  but  requires  a 
warmer  climate  to  develope  into  a  tree.  In 
Spain  beautiful  specimens  may  be  seen,  as  for 
instance  at  Pampeluna.  In  Eamah.  Condez 
(Handbook)  thinks  that  Gibeah  was  the 
name  of  a  district,  which  included  Bamah ; 
others  take  the  word  in  its  original  significa- 
tion, and  render  ' '  on  the  height."  Standing. 
The  word  means  that  they  took  each  their 
proper  posts  around  him  (see  on  ch.  z.  23 ;  xii 


411 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[ok.  xxii.  1— SS. 


7,  19 ;  xtU.  16).  Saul  was  holding  a  formal 
eomt,  to  decide  what  steps  shonld  be  taken 
now  that  David  had  openly  revolted  from  him. 

Vers.  7,  8. — Te  Benjamites.  Saul  had 
evidently  failed  in  blending  the  twelve  tribes 
into  one  nation.  He  had  begnn  well,  and 
his  great  feat  of  delivering  Jabesh  GUead 
by  summoning  the  militia  of  all  Israel  to- 
gether must  have  given  them  something  of 
a  corporate  feeling,  and  taught  them  their 
power  when  united.  Yet  now  we  find  him 
isolated,  and  this  address  to  his  officers 
seems  to  show  that  he  had  aggrandised  his 
own  tribe  at  the  expense  of  the  rest.  More- 
over, he  appeals  to  the  worst  passions  of 
these  men,  and  asks  whether  they  can  esroect 
David  to  continue  this  favouritism,  which 
had  given  them  riches  and  all  posts  of 
power.  And  then  he  turns  upon  them,  and 
fiercely  accuses  them  of  banding  together 
in  a  conspiracy  against  him,  to  conceal  from 
him  the  private  understanding  which  existed 
between  his  own  son  and  his  enemy.  Hath 
made  a  league.  Hebrew,  "hath  cut."  This 
use  of  the  formal  phrase  formaking  a  covenant 
seems  to  show  that  Saul  was  at  length  aware 
of  the  solemn  bond  of  friendship  entered  into 
by  Jonathan  with  David.  To  lie  in  wait. 
1*0  Saul's  mind,  diseased  with  that  suspicion 
which  is  the  scourge  of  tyrants,  David  is 
secretly  plotting  his  murder.  As  at  this  day. 
I.e.»M  to-day  is  manifest  (see  ver.  13). 

Yen.  9,  10. — ^Doeg  the  Xdomite,  vriieh 
was  set  over  the  servants  of  Sanl.  This 
translation  is  entirely  wrong,  nor  wonid 
Saul's  Benjamites  have  endured  to  have  an 
Edomite  set  over  them.  The  verb  is  that 
used  in  ver.  6,  and  refers  simply  to  Doeg's 
place  in  the  circle  of  attendants  standing 
round  Saul.  The  words  mean,  "Doeg  the 
Edomite,  who  stood  there  with  the  servants 
of  SauL"  As  chief  herdsman  he  was  present 
as  a  person  of  some  importance,  but  far  below 
"  the  captains  of  thousands  and  the  captains 
of  hundreds."  I  saw  the  son  of  Jesse,  &c. 
As  Saul  was  in  a  dangerous  state  of  excite- 
ment, bordering  on  insanity,  Doeg's  state- 
ment was  probably  made  with  the  evU  intent 
of  turning  the  king's  suspicions  from  the 
courtiers  to  the  priests.  His  assertion  that 
the  high  priest  enquired  of  Jehovah  for 
David  was  possibly  true  (see  on  ver.  15). 

Vers.  11 — 13.  —  All  his  father's  house. 
Doeg's  suggestion  that  the  priests  were 
David's  allies  at  once  arouses  all  Saul's  worst 
passions.  As  if  he  had  determined  from  the 
first  upon  the  massacre  of  the  whole  body, 
he  sends  not  merely  for  Ahimelech,  but 
for  every  priest  at  Nob.  Shortly  afterwards 
they  arrived,  foi  Nob  was  close  to  Gibeah, 
and  Saul  himself  arraigns  them  before  the 
court  for  treason,  and  recapitulates  the  three 
points  mentioned  by  Doeg  as  conclusive 
{Hoofs  of  their  gnUt. 


Yen.  14 — 16. — Ahimalach't  answers  an 
those  of  an  Innocent  man  who  had  supposed 
that  what  he  did  was  a  matter  of  course. 
But  his  enumeration  of  David's  privileges  of 
rank  and  station  probably  only  embittered 
the  king.  In  his  eyes  David  was  of  all 
Saul's  officers  the  most  faithful,  both  trusty 
and  trusted  (see  on  eh.  ii  35).  He  was, 
moreover,  the  king'i  son-in-law;  but  the 
next  words,  he  goeth  at  thy  bidding,  more 
probably  mean,  "has  admission  to  thy 
audience,"  i  &  is  thy  privy  councillor,  with 
the  right  of  entering  unbidden  the  royal 
presence  (comp.  2  Sam.  zxiii  23,  margin ;  1 
Chron.  xi.  2S).  Sid  I  then  begin  to  enquire 
of  Ood  for  him  t  Though  the  meaning  of 
these  words  is  disputed,  yet  there  seems  no 
sufficient  reason  for  taking  them  in  any  other 
than  their  natural  sense.  It  was  probably 
usual  to  consult  God  by  the  Urim  and 
Thummim  on  all  matters  of  importance,  and 
David,  as  a  high  officer  of  Saul's  court,  must 
often  have  done  so  before  starting  on  such 
expeditions  as  are  referred  to  in  ch.  xviii.  13. 
But  the  Bible  is  singularly  reticent  in  snch 
matters,  and  it  is  only  incidentally  that  we 
learn  how  fully  the  Mosaic  law  entered  into 
the  daily  life  of  the  people.  But  for  this 
frightful  crime  we  should  not  even  have 
known  that  Saul  had  brought  the  ark  into 
his  own  neighbourhood,  and  restored  the 
services  of  the  sanctuary.  But  just  as  he 
took  care  to  have  Ahiah  in  attendance  upon 
him  in  war,  so  we  cannot  doubt  but  that  his 
main  object  in  placing  the  priests  at  Nob 
was  to  have  the  benefit  of  the  Divine  counsel 
in  his  wars.  It  would  be  quite  unreasonable 
to  suppose  that  such  consultations  recj^uired 
the  king's  personal  attendance.  Thy  servant 
knew  nothing  of  all  this,  less  or  more. 
Whatever  Ahimelech  had  done  had  been  in 
perfect  good  faith,  and  though  David's  con- 
duct must  have  seemed  to  him  subpicious, 
yet  there  was  nothing  that  would  have  justi- 
fied him  in  acting  diJFerently.  Nevertheless, 
in  spite  of  his  transparent  innocence,  Saul 
orders  the  slaughter  not  only  of  God's  high 
priest,  but  of  the  whole  body  of  the  priest- 
hood whom  he  had  placed  at  Nob,  and  now 
had  summoned  for  this  ferocious  purpose  into 
his  presence. 

Vers.  17— 19.— Footmon.  Hebrew,  "run- 
ners." They  were  the  men  who  ran  by  the 
side  of  the  king's  horse  or  chariot  as  his 
escort  (see  on  ch.  viii.  11).  In  constant 
training,  they  were  capable  of  maintaining  a 
great  speed  for  a  very  long  time.  Here  they 
were  present  at  the  king's  council  as  his  body- 
guard, but  when  commanded  to  commit  this 
horrid  deed  not  one  of  them  stirred  from  his 
place.  Saul  might  have  seen  by  this  that  he 
was  alienating  the  hearts  of  all  right-minded 
men  from  him;  but,  unabashed,  he  next  orders 
Doeg  to  slay  the  priests,  and  he,  aided  pro- 


m.  xxn.  1—23.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


41A 


bably  by  his  servants,  slew  in  that  day  fonr- 
aeore  and  five  persons  that  did  wear  a  linen 
ephod.  The  fact  that  they  were  thus  clad  in 
their  official  dress  added  not  to  the  wicked- 
ness, but  to  the  impiety  of  this  revolting  act. 
And,  not  satisfied  with  thus  wreaking  his 
rage  on  innocent  men,  he  next  destroyed  the 
city  of  the  priests,  barbarously  massacring 
their  whole  families,  both  men  and  women, 
children  and  sucklings,  and  even  their  oxen, 
asses,  and  sheep,  as  if  Kob  was  a  city  placed 
under  the  ban.  It  is  a  deed  in  strange  contrast 
with  the  pretended  mercy  that  spared  Agag 
and  the  best  of  the  Amalekite  spoil  on  the 
pretext  of  religion.  Only  once  before  had  so 
terrible  a  calamity  befallen  the  descendants 
of  Aaron,  and  that  was  when  the  Philistines 
destroyed  Shiloh.  But  they  were  enemies, 
and  provoked  by  the  people  bringing  the  ark 
to  the  battle,  and  even  then  women  and  chil- 
dren escaped.  It  was  left  to  the  anointed 
king,  who  had  himself  settled  the  priests  at 
Nob  and  restored  Jehovah's  worship  there, 
to  perpetrate  an  act  unparalleled  in  Jewish 
history  for  its  barbarity.  Nor  was  it  an  act  of 
barbarity  only,  but  also  of  insane  and  wanton 
stupidity.  The  heart  of  every  thoughtful 
person  must  now  have  turned  away  in  horror 
from  the  king  whom  they  had  desired  ;  and 
no  wonder  that  when,  two  or  three  years 
aftewards,  war  came  Saul  found  himself  a 
king  without  an  army,  and  fell  into  that  deep, 
despondent  melancholy  which  drove  him,  m 
need  of  some  human  sympathy,  to  seek  it 
from  a  reputed  witch. 
Escape  or  Abiatkab  to  Datid  {rtm.  20 — 


23).  Vers.  20— 23.— Abiathar  eaoapcd.  Pro- 
bably he  was  left  in  charge  of  the  sanctuary 
when  Ahimelech  and  the  rest  were  summoned 
into  the  king's  presence,  and  on  news  being 
brought  of  Saul's  violence,  at  once  made  his 
escape.  Naturally,  as  representing  a  family 
who,  though  originally  Saul's  friends,  had 
suffered  so  much  for  David,  he  was  kindly 
received,  and  a  friendship  commenced  which 
lasted  all  David's  life  ;  but,  taking  at  last 
Adonijah's  side,  he  was  deprived  by  Solomon 
of  the  high  priesthood,  and  sent  into  hon- 
ourable banishment  at  Anathoth  (1  Kings  ii 
26).  On  hearing  of  the  terrible  tragedy  from 
which  Abiathar  had  escaped,  David,  with 
characteristic  tenderness  of  conscience,  accnsei 
himself  of  being  the  cause  of  all  this  blood- 
shed. Perhaps  he  felt  that  when  he  saw 
Doeg  at  Nob  he  ought  at  once  to  have  gone 
away,  without  implicating  Ahimelech  in  his 
cause ;  but  he  couhl  never  have  imagined  that 
Saul  would  have  treated  innocent  men  so 
barbarously,  and  may  have  supposed  that 
their  sacred  character  as  well  as  their  gailt- 
lessness  would  have  secured  them  from  more 
than  temporary  displeasnre.  David  now 
warmly  promises  Abiathar  safety  and  friend- 
ship, and  possibly  the  inversion  of  the  na- 
tural order,  he  that  seeketh  my  life  seeketh 
thy  life  (where  the  my  and  thy  are  transposed 
by  the  Septuagint  in  one  of  its  usual  im- 
provements of  the  Hebrew  text),  is  meant  to 
express  this  entire  oneness  and  close  union 
henceforward  of  the  two  friends.  As  to  the 
question  when  and  where  Abiathar  joined 
David,  see  on  ch.  xziii  & 


HOMILETICS. 

Veri.  1 — 8. — Difficult  circumstances.  The  facts  are — 1.  David,  escaping  from 
Gath,  takes  refuge  in  the  cave  of  Adullam.  2.  Here  he  is  joined  by  hi«  kindred  and 
a  miscellaneous  band  of  men,  over  whom  he  exercises  authority  as  captain.  3. 
Anxious  for  the  comfort  of  his  father  and  mother,  he  desires  and  obtains  of  the  king 
of  Moab  permission  for  them  to  dvirell  at  Mizpeh.  4.  On  being  advised  by  the  prophet 
Gad,  he  returns  to  Judah.  This  section  covers  the  conduct  of  David  up  to  the  point 
when  the  "  walking  in  darkness "  terminated  in  a  merciful  Divine_  intervention. 
Four  leading  characters  are  here  set  before  us :  David,  his  adherents,  his  parents,  and 
the  seer ;  and  the  teaching  of  the  passage  may  be  arranged  by  making  each  of  these 
in  succession  the  prominent  figure. 

I.  Peudence  in  uifficultt.  The  line  of  action  taken  by  David  after  his  escape 
from  the  dangers  of  Gath  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  prudence,  when  regard  is  had 
to  the  utterly  hopeless  condition  to  which  he  was  apparently  reduced,  and  that  no 
light  was  afforded  him  from  any  prophetic  source.  Lonely  and  hunted,  he  sought  an 
impregnable  cave  for  shelter,  abstaining  from  any  publicity  to  attract  men  into  revolt 
against  Saul.  Being,  apart  from  his  choice,  surrounded  by  men  who  for  various 
private  reasons  were  in  sympathy  with  him,  he  simply  organised  them  for  defence  in 
case  of  need.  Knowing  the  peril  of  parents  advancing  in  years,  he  sought  out  a 
place  of  safety  where  they  would  be  free  from  possibility  of  annoyance.  To  secure 
this,  and  also  to  betake  himself  as  far  as  possible  from  collision  with  Saul,  ho  availed 
himself  of  the  advantage  of  a  kinship  through  Ruth,  and  yet,  after  having  made  the 
tie«t  di«position  of  affairs  his  judgment  could  suggest,  he  at  once  yielded  to  the 


♦14  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [OH.  xm.  l-«8i 

•nperior  wisdom  of  the  prophet  of  God.  In  all  this  we  get  trace*  of  the  qnalitiea 
which  subsequently  made  David  a  wise  king.  Herein  are  Una  qf  conduct  worthy 
of  our  imitation  amidst  the  perplexities  which  sometimes  fall  to  onr  lot  in  private, 
domestic,  and-public  life.  Amidst  the  fears  and  gloom  of  our  position  let  ns  cherish 
that  faith  in  God's  purpose  concerning  us  which,  in  spite  of  fears  and  sorrows,  under- 
lies all  David's  procedure  (Ps.  vii.,  xxiv.),  and  then  exercise  our  best  judgment  on 
the  avoidance  of  evil,  the  discharge  of  daily  duty,  and  the  measures  most  conducive 
to  the  end  in  view.  To  avoid  all  occasions  of  annoyance,  to  avail  ourselves  of  such 
aid  as  Providence  may  bring  to  us,  to  lay  hold  of  and  control  any  unsatisfactory 
surroundings  so  as  to  divest  them  of  possible  mischief  and  convert  them  into  useful 
agents,  to  see  to  it  that  others  shall  not  if  possible  come  to  grief  by  being  associated 
with  onr  movements,  to  go  on  steadily  awaiting  God's  time  for  action,  and  to  welcome 
any  clear  intimations  of  his  will,  however  contrary  to  our  own  arrangements — this 
will  prove  our  wisdom. 

II.  Unsatisfactobt  adhebents.  The  men  who  flocked  to  David  were  of  miscel- 
laneous characters,  and  were  swayed  by  diverse  motives ;  not  such  perhaps  as  David 
would  have  chosen.  The  manifestly  unjust  treatment  of  the  young  deliverer  of 
Israel,  and  the  increasingly  irritable  and  impulsive  temper  of  the  king,  accompanied 
with  misgovemment  in  matters  of  detail,  could  not  but  make  brave  and  chivalrous 
men  "  discontented ; "  and  it  was  no  wonder  if  at  such  a  time  many  were  brought  to 
poverty.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  many  of  them  did  not  enter  into  the  lofty 
spiritual  aims  of  David,  and,  in  so  far  as  their  principles  were  not  identical  with  his, 
they  were  a  questionable  support.  Yet  the  fact  is  instructive.  Persons  of  high 
character  and  lofty  aims  exercise  an  attractive  influence  over  many  who  cannot  enter 
fully  into  their  conceptions.  The  assertors  of  great  principles  do  sometimes  find 
adherents  very  inferior  to  themselves.  The  adherents  of  a  just  cause  are  not  always 
to  be  credited  with  an  intelligent  appreciation  of  its  nature.  It  is  therefore  wrong 
to  judge  leaders  of  important  movements  by  the  crude  notions  and  imperfect  character 
of  their  followers.  In  the  case  of  our  Saviour  it  was  the  force  of  his  personal 
character  that  drew  disciples  of  diverse  tastes  and  degrees  of  intelligence  around 
him.  But  just  as  David  disciplined  and  educated  his  followers  till  they  became 
valiant,  loyal  men  in  the  kingdom  (1  Chron.  xi.),  so  Christ  in  due  time  endowed  his 
disciples  with  power  to  enter  into  the  spirit  of  his  mission.  Neither  in  the  Church 
nor  in  social  and  political  afEaira  can  we  dispense  with  men  who,  though  drawn  to 
leaders,  are  not  yet  in  perfect  harmony  of  intelligence  and  character. 

III.  Filial  piety.  Amidst  the  gravest  anxieties  of  his  life  David  manifested 
concern  for  the  welfare  of  his  parents.  Indeed  all  his  private  and  public  movements 
for  a  time  seem  to  have  been  subordinated  to  securing  their  freedom  from  danger 
and  distress.  If  ever  a  man  could  plead  inability  he  could  just  then.  This  tender- 
ness of  character  is  very  prominent  in  his  entire  life.  Filial  piety  is  strongly  enjoined 
in  the  Bible.  The  "  commandment  with  promise  "  relates  to  duty  to  parents.  Our 
Saviour's  example  is  conspicuous  (Luke  ii.  50 — 62 ;  John  xix.  26,  27).  It  is  impos- 
sible to  lay  claim  to  religion  without  this  love,  care,  tender  interest,  self-denial,  and 
reverence  for  parents  (Ephes.  vi.  1 — 3).  There  are  manifold  ways  in  which  it  may  be 
displayed :  by  sympathy  in  sorrow  and  sickness,  by  reverence  and  afEection  in  health, 
by  deference  to  their  wishes  whenever  consistent  with  holiness  and  right,  by  fore- 
casting their  needs  and  providing  for  them,  by  insuring  support  and  comfort  in  old 
age,  and  by  the  cherished  love  which  ever  causes  them  to  thank  God  for  the  gift  of 
children. 

IV.  QppoETUNE  cotTNSEL.  During  the  long  season  of  darkness  David  had  groped 
his  way  from  place  to  place,  exercising  his  judgment,  and  doubtless  lifting  up  his 
heart  for  more  light.  He  stumbled  at  Nob  ;  he  fell  into  a  net  at  Gath  ;  he  showed 
prudence  at  Adullam  ;  and  now  in  the  land  of  Moab,  where  perhaps  he  mourned  in 
being  so  far  from  the  sanctuary  of  God,  he  is  remembered  on  high,  and  the  prophet 
Gad  brings  to  him  the  first  Divine  and  official  communication  he,  as  far  as  we  can 
learn,  ever  received.  This  circumstance  was  full  of  meaning.  The  prophetic  order 
was  recognising  him.  The  dayspring  had  come.  Henceforth  he  was  to  be  instructed 
more  openly  in  the  way  in  which  he  should  go  (vera.  20 — 23  ;  ch.  xxiii.  2).  TlierP 
it,  also,  a  limit  to  our  seasons  of  darkness.     We  have  not  a  prophet  Gad ;  out  when 


CH,  xxiL  1—23.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  41f 

patience  has  had  her  "perfect  work,"  and  discipline  lias  brought  us  nearer  to  Gh>d,  a 
"  more  sure  word  of  prophecy,"  which  "  shineth  as  a  light  in  a  dark  place,"  will  make 
clear  to  us  the  perfect  will  of  God.  Like  as  Christ  found  an  end  to  the  "  hour  of 
darkness,"  bo  all  who  share  in  his  sorrows  will  find  darkness  made  light  before  them. 
The  resurrection  morn  was  an  end  to  the  gloom  and  uncertainty  of  the  apostles. 
Many  an  anxious  soul,  troubled  with  dark  doubts  and  on  the  borders  of  despair,  has 
found  at  last  a  light  which  has  turned  doubt  into  confidence  and  made  the  path  of 
submission  to  Christ  the  path  of  joy.  "  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless,  but  will 
come  unto  you." 

General  lessons : — 1.  We  should  not  despise  or  discourage  persons  seeking  to  be 
identified  with  a  good  cause  on  account  of  their  inferiority  to  those  who  lead.  2. 
There  may  be  many  waiting  for  action  if  men  of  energy  and  attractiveness  would 
afford  them  facility.  3.  Tlie  experience  of  the  Church  in  all  ages  justifies  faith  in 
the  guidance  of  God  when  we  have  work  to  do  for  him. 

Vers.  6 — 16. — Resistance  to  GocTs  purposes.  The  facts  are — 1.  Saul,  hearing  at 
Gibeah  of  David's  movements,  makes  an  appeal  to  his  Benjaniite  attendants.  2.  lie 
insinuates  the  existence  of  secret  designs  against  himself,  connivance  at  David's 
supposed  purpose,  and  lack  of  pity  for  his  condition.  3.  Tlierenpon  Doeg  the  Gdomite 
relates  what  he  saw  at  Nob,  and  makes  the  statement  that  the  high  priest  inquired  of 
the  Lord  for  David.  4.  Saul  sends  for  Ahimelech  and  charges  him  with  conspiracy. 
5.  Notwithstanding  the  high  priest's  denial  of  the  charge,  and  his  conviction  of  David's 
innocence,'Saul  condemns  him  and  his  house  to  death.  The  conduct  of  Saul  is  increas- 
ingly devoid  of  reason,  and  this  gradual  failure  of  intelligence  has  its  root  in  moral 
decay.  The  key  to  his  infatuation  is  to  be  found  in  the  obstinate  impenitence  of  his 
heart  in  relation  to  the  sins  of  his  probationary  career,  and  the  consequent  fight  of 
his  entire  nature  against  the  settled  purposes  of  God  (ch.  xi.  24,  25 ;  xii.  24, 25 ;  xiiL 
11 — 14;  XV.  26—29).  The  events  recorded  in  the  section  before  us  reveal  a  more 
fatal  advance  in  this  course  of  mental  and  moral  degeneration. 

I.  Resistance  to  God's  ptjbposes  forces  on  increased  dangers.  Had  Saul  with 
penitent  spirit  bowed  to  the  will  of  God,  as  expressed  in  ch.  xv.  26 — 29,  and  at  once 
retired  into  private  life,  the  rest  of  his  days  might  have  been  at  least  devout  and 
quiet.  But,  persisting  in  rebellion,  he  soon  saw  in  the  innocent  son  of  Jesse  a  personal 
enemy.  And  the  resistance  to  God's  purposes  which  induced  personal  envy  and  ill- 
will  prompted  also  to  open  deeds  of  violence,  and  these  deeds,  designed  by  the  per- 
verted judgment  to  negative  the  Divine  decree  (ch.  xv.  26 — 29),  had  the  triple  effect 
of  cementing  the  bond  between  David  and  Jonathan,  of  developing  the  sympathy  of 
the  prophets  and  of  all  just  men  with  the  persecuted  one,  and  of  making  David  the 
leader  of  a  band  of  400  men.  Thus  tlie  very  devices  of  a  guilty,  hardened  heart 
to  prevent  the  fulfilment  of  the  purposes  of  God  were  conducive  to  a  reverse 
issue.  Saul's  dangers  multiplied  just  as  he  sought  their  removal.  The  only  safe 
course  for  guilty  men,  guilty  Churches  and  nations,  is  to  how  at  once  before  God,  and 
place  themselves  unreservedly  at  his  mercy.  The  laws  of  providence  are  in  incessant 
movement  toward  the  realisation  of  God's  purpose  against  sin.  Every  effort  to  set 
them  aside,  or  to  avoid  their  inevitable  issue,  only  tends  to  multiply  the  agencies 
by  which  they  at  last  shall  be  vindicated.  The  man  who,  having  committed  secret 
sin,  seeks,  in  the  exercise  of  an  impenitent  spirit,  to  cover  it  up,  or  brave  it  out, 
creates  by  every  thought  of  his  mind  a  new  cord  by  which  he  is  bound  fast  to  Ida 
fate.  Nations  that  seek  to  ward  off  the  judgments  due  to  past  sins  by  guilty  acts 
for  strengthening  their  position  in  the  world,  rather  than  by  sincere  repentance  and 
newness  of  life,  are  only  heaping  up  wrath  for  the  day  of  wrath.  Penitence,  sub- 
mission, righteousness,  these  are  the  "  way  everlasting."  Practical  godliness  is  the 
soundest  philosophy  for  individuals  and  communities. 

II.  It  induces  a  state  of  mind  which  creates  great  fears  out  of  slight  cir- 
cumstances. Three  circumstances  were  the  occasion  of  much  fear  to  Saul — the 
existence  of  David,  his  friendship  with  Jonathan,  and  his  holding  a  cavewith  400 
men.  External  events  are  to  us  what  the  medium  through  which  we  view  thorn 
makes  them  appear  to  be,  and  this  medium  is  often  the  creation  of  our  moral  nature. 
With  all  his  daring  resistance  to  the  purposes  of  God,  Saul  could  not  lose  th« 


41«  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxu.  1—23. 

conicionsness  that  he  was  a  gniltyman,  that  the  judgment  pronounced  was  just,  aud 
that,  in  spite  of  all  wishes,  hopes,  and  efforts  to  the  contrary,  the  dreaded  doom 
would  come.  In  such  a  state  of  mind  he  saw  messengers  of  justice  and  supplanters 
of  his  position  where  others  saw  only  blessings  to  Israel.  A  prudent  act  for  purposes 
of  self-defence  against  cruel  persecution  became  to  him  a  formidable  attack  on  his 
throne.  The  secrets  of  a  holy  friendship  were  the  plottings  of  unfaithful  men,  and 
the  want  of  sympathy  on  the  part  of  upright  men  with  his  malicious  designs  against 
an  honourable  man  and  public  benefactor,  he  construed  into  conspiracy  against  him- 
self. This  tendency  of  the  mind  to  clothe  all  things  with  it*  own,  moral  colowring  t« 
universal.  As  the  holy  and  the  wise  see  occasions  for  joy  and  confidence  in  every- 
thing except  the  sins  of  men  and  their  natural  effects,  so  the  guilty  and  foolish  see 
occasions  for  trouble  and  fear  in  what  to  others  is  the  expression  of  goodness  and 
of  righteousness.  It  is  a  slight  circumstance  for  a  policeman  to  walk  the  street,  but 
there  are  men  who  quail  at  the  sight.  The  bare  mention  of  a  name  or  incidental 
reference  to  a  transaction  will  cause  agitation  in  the  minds  of  evil-doers.  The 
appearance  among  men  of  the  holy  Saviour  caused  trembling  in  the  heart  of  the 
guilty  Herod  (Matt.  ii.  3 ;  xiv.  1 — 3).  A  man  like  Saul  carries  within  him  all  the 
elements  of  a  hell.  Small  things  become  instruments  of  self-inflicted  torture.  In 
such  a  moral  mood  a  man  becomes  an  Ishmaelite  indeed  by  reason  of  the  quickness  . 
of  his  fears  and  the  strength  of  his  suspicions.  If,  beyond  this  life,  this  state  of 
mind  is  intensified  in  the  wicked  by  the  complete  dominion  of  sin  and  absence  of 
present  mitigations,  it  is  not  difScult  to  conceive  the  imperfection  of  language  to 
indicate  the  future  of  the  lost. 

III.  It  prompts  to  new  expedients  fob  belief  fbom  self-created  difficulties. 
The  circumstances  which  caused  fear  to  Saul  were  the  product  of  his  transgression  ; 
for  had  he  not  disobeyed  there  would  have  been  no  need  for  a  David  to  be  brought 
out  from  the  sheepfold  as  a  conqueror  of  Goliath  and  chosen  supplanter  of  his  line, 
and  hence  no  suspicious  friendship  and  no  cave  of  Adullam ;  but  now  that  the  fears 
bred  of  these  circumstances  were  heavily  upon  him,  the  old  resistance  to  God  mani- 
fests itself  in  fresh  contrivances  to  extricate  himself  from  trouble.  He  addresses  the 
leading  men  of  Benjamin,  seeking  for  loyal  support.  He  works  on  the  feeling  of 
clanship.  He  appeals  to  their  lust  for  promotion  and  wealth.  He  claims  their  pity 
in  his  sorrows,  and  suggests  that  they,  as  loyal  men,  should  avoid  the  suspicion  of  con- 
niving at  a  conspiracy  between  his  son  and  the  son  of  Jesse.  There  is  here  a  strange 
blending  of  hardihood  and  cowardice,  defiance  of  God's  will  and  sense  of  weakness, 
distrust  of  his  friends  and  hope  of  assistance  from  them — a  fair  index  of  the  mental 
confusion  out  of  which  spring  all  devices  for  warding  ofE  the  certain  doom  which 
the  guilty  conscience  sees  to  be  approaching.  Generally  very  much  energy  and  skill 
are  gpent  by  men  in  seeking  to  avert  the  necessary  consequences  of  tlieir  past  lives.  No 
mental  operation  is  more  universal  than  that  which  associates  evil  consequences, 
remote  or  near,  with  wrong-doing.  But  a  guilty  man's  repugnance  to  suffering,  com- 
bined with  a  deteimined  spirit  of  rebellion  against  the  moral  order,  induces  an  inces- 
sant strain  of  energy  and  skill  to  evade  the  inevitable.  It  is  possible  for  men  to 
look  on  Saul's  appeals  to  Benjaraites,  and  his  stratagems  for  nullifying  the  words  of 
Samuel  (ch.  xv.  28,  29),  as  vain  and  foolish  as  would  be  an  attempt  to  prevent  the 
action  of  the  law  of  gravity,  while  in  their  own  sphere  they  may  be  pursuing  a  similar 
course..  All  who  live  in  hopes  of  a  future  blessedness  while  not  laying  a  foundation 
for  it  in  purity  of  nature  and  personal  fellowship  with  Christ  are  practically  like 
Saul ;  for  no  law  is  more  unchangeable  than  that  the  pure  in  heart  alone  can  see 
God.  History  relates  how  men  of  abandoned  lives  have,  in  later  years,  under  a  dread 
of  future  consequences,  become  precise  in  formal  acts  of  worship,  and  bountiful  in 
use  of  wealth,  without  the  slightest  perception  of  the  need  of  a  radical  love  of 
holiness,  hoping  by  such  external  means  to  break  open  the  door  that  bars  the  entrance 
into  the  kingdom  of  God  of  whatever  defileth.  A  salvation  from  uneasiness  and 
pain  men  are  eager  for,  not  a  salvation  which  consists  in  holiness  of  nature  and  joy 
in  God. 

IV.  It  is  subb  to  find  some  abettors  of  its  strife  with  God.  It  is  probable 
that  the  more  sober  of  the  Benjamites  had  begun  to  distrust  their  king,  and  although 
they  may  not  have  known  all  his  dread  secret  (ch.  xv.  28,  29),  they  could  not  bat 


OK.  Tzn.  1— 8S.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  41T 

■M  that  he  had  lost  the  moral  support  of  Samuel,  and  was  bent  on  a  reckless  course  ia 
hunting  the  life  of  David.  But  one  man  was  ready  to  strengthen  bis  bate  and  urge 
him  on  in  the  fatal  conflict.  Doeg  the  Edomite,  a  man  of  low  spiritual  tastes,  an 
alien  to  Israel,  maliciously  added  fuel  to  the  raging  evils  of  the  unhappy  king. 
There  are  several  suggestive  items  in  this  brief  account  of  the  dark  deed  of 
Doeg.  1.  He  was  twt  a  true  Israelite.  By  education,  habit,  and  taste  he  could  not 
have  sympathy  with  the  lofty,  Messianic  aims  of  a  David  or  a  Samuel.  He  is  the  type 
of  a  formal  professor,  who  bears  the  name,  but  has  none  of  the  spirit,  of  the  true 
religion.  2.  He  hnd  material  interest!  at  stake  in  the  continued  reign  of  Saul  (ch. 
xxi.  7 ;  xxii.  9).  The  psalm  supposed  to  refer  to  him  represents  him  as  bent  on  the 
acquisition  of  wealth  (Ps.  lii.).  He  is  the  ideal  of  a  man  whose  main  thought  is 
business,  and  who  therefore  forms  a  judgment  of  religious,  social,  and  political  claims 
according  to  their  presumed  bearing  on  worldly  advancement.  3.  He  was  cruellff 
eool  in  hix  plans  and  conduct.  _  The  simulated  tone  of  ingenuousness  in  his  reference 
to  what  he  nad  seen  at  Nob,  his  abstention  from  personal  invective,  and  the  matter- 
of-fact  way  in  which  he  welded  his  lie  about  the  priest  inquiring  of  the  Lord  for 
David  with  the  other  part  of  the  story,  reveal  a  cruelly  cool  scheme  for  destroying 
one  whose  pure  life  and  lofty  aspirations  must  have  mirrored  too  painfully  his  own 
vileness.  The  readiness  with  which  he  could  subsequently  shed  the  blood  of  God's 
priests  fully  bears  out  all  the  severe  language  of  Ps.  lii.  He  reminds  us  of  the 
many  vile  men  who,  under  cloak  of  attachment  to  a  religion  too  pure  for  them, 
pursue  this  cruel  course,  seeking  to  heap  up  treasure  by  any  means,  and  ready  by 
word  or  deed  to  blight  fair  reputations  and  pander  to  the  passions  of  the  powerful. 
It  only  requires  a  little  knowledge  of  the  facts  of  David's  life  to  enable  every  just 
and  pure  mind  to  sympathise  with  his  strong  denunciation  of  such  men  (Ps.  zxsv. 
4 — 9  ;  lii.  2 — 5  ;  Ivii.  4 ;  Iviii.  4 — IIV  There  are  affinities  of  evil.  Sauls  yearn  for 
Doegs,  and  Doegs  are  ever  ready  to  blend  interest  with  the  Sauls.  Satan  is  not  the 
only  one  lying  in  wait  to  destroy  the  poor  and  needy.  Hand  joins  hand  in  wickedness, 
and  base  heart  encourages  base  heart  in  the  mad  endeavour  to  destroy  a  greater  than 
David. 

V.  It  will  pboceed  till  it  sets  at  nought  the  most  sacrbd  thinos.  Bad 
men  are  often  checked  in  their  antagonism  to  God's  purposes  by  the  wholesome 
influence  on  their  remaining  religious  instincts  of  spiritual  institutions  and  characters. 
The  priesthood  was  revered  by  Saul  at  one  time.  The  spiritual  power  had  been 
prominent  in  his  installation  to  the  kingdom.  All  the  influence  of  early  Hebrew 
training  conspired  to  make  him  look  up  with  reverence  to  the  high  priest  as  in  some 
sense  the  representative  of  all  that  is  holy  and  Divine.  Common  prudence,  religious 
prepossessions,  every  sentiment  of  tenderness  and  awe  ought  to  have  discounted  the 
assertion  of  Doeg  in  the  presence  of'  the  high  priest's  emphatic  denial  of  having 
iii^uired  of  the  Lord  for  David.  It  was  therefore  an  evidence  of  the  utter  suppres- 
sion of  all  that  hitherto  had  acted  as  a  beneficial  restraint  when,  in  the  desperate 
violence  of  his  strife  with  God,  Saul  dared  to  sentence  the  innocent  high  priest  to 
death.  He  now  sank  to  a  deeper  deep.  The  spiritual  powers  became  the  object  of 
his  deadly  hate.  The  warfare  inust  now  be  urged  against  the  most  sacred  things  of 
God.  Facilis  descensus  Averni.  Spiritual^  deterioration  is  nearly  complete  when 
men  set  themselves  in  antagonism  to  the  institutions  of  religion.  It  argues  a  terrible 
power  of  evil  when  a  soul  can  accept  the  suggestions  of  bad  characters  and  cast  aside 
all  the  reverence  fostered  by  years  of  education  and  discipline.  Yet  there  is  a  reason 
in  the  madness ;  for,  no  doubt,  as  the  spiritual  in  Israel  was  at  this  time  the  most 
formidable,  though  not  conspicuously  active,  force  against  Saul's  permanence  in  the 
kingdom,  so  it  is  the  spiritual,  as  embodied  in  a  pure  Christianity,  which  bars  the 
way  most  surely  to  the  permanent  prosperity  of  the  man  who  persistently  lives  in 
impenitence,  and,  therefore,  from  his  mistaken  point  of  view,  it  is  essential  if  possible 
to  doom  it  to  destruction.  It  is  the  old  tragedy  again  when  men,  for  love  of  their 
own  sinful  will,  trample  underfoot  the  Son  of  God,  and  count  the  "  blood  of  the 
eovenant  an  unholy  thing  "  (Heb.  x.  29).  The  bold  defiance  of  religion  is  too  often 
simply  an  efEort  to  cast  away  the  cords  of  a  holy  restraint  (Ps.  ii.  3). 

General  lessons: — 1-  It  is  well  to  consider  the  force  of  habit  in  its  bearing  on 
aikwillingness  to  submit  to  God's  judgments.    2.  Whenever  slight  oiroumstanoM 

1  SAM.  1  > 


418  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxn.  1—28. 

create  great  fears  it  should  be  regarded  as  instant  proof  of  the  existence  of  a  perilous 
spiritual  condition,  and  a  demand  for  great  searching  of  heart  3.  Hemembering 
how  much  all  our  judgments  are  coloored  by  our  imperfect  moral  state,  we  should 
pray  much  that  God  would  open  our  eyes  to  see  things  in  his  light  and  le:.d  us  in 
the  "way  everlasting."  4.  History  and  personal  experience  should  teach  us  that 
the  shortest  and  indeed  only  way  to  extricate  ourselves  from  difiSculties  induced  by  our 
sins  is  to  shun  every  evil  way  and  submit  ourselves  entirely  to  God.  6.  Reputations 
are  to  be  held  sacred,  and  all  gain  at  the  cost  of  others'  ruin  brings  a  curse  with  it. 
6.  One  of  the  best  safeguards  against  the  dangerous  allurements  of  wealth  and  the 
love  of  worldly  power  is  a  lofty  spiritual  aspiration — sympathy  with  the  Lord's 
Anointed.  7.  It  is  in  vain  to  spend  arguments  on  men  who  in  self-abandonment  to 
their  sinful  will  seek  to  destroy  the  institutions  of  religion ;  for  it  is  not  a  question 
of  reason,  but  of  perverted,  degraded  nature.  8.  We  should  avoid  the  slightest 
approach  to  evil,  seeing  that  when  indulged  in  the  impetus  downwards  is  so  fearful 

Vers.  17 — 23. — The  tragedy  at  Nob.  The  facts  are — 1.  Saul  commands  his 
guards  to  slay  the  priests  of  Nob,  but  they  refuse.  2.  Thereupon  he  commands 
Doeg  to  effect  their  death,  who  slays  eighty-five  priests,  and  procures  the  destruction 
Df  the  entire  city.  3.  Abiathar,  escaping  to  David,  makes  known  to  him  what  has 
jappened.  4.  David  perceives  that  his  presence  at  Nob  was  the  occasion  of  this  sad 
lalamity,  and  admits  that  he  feared  the  course  Doeg  would  take.  6.  He  encourages 
Abiathar  to  remain  with  him,  and  assures  him  of  safety.  This  section  sets  forth 
Saul's  conduct  in  the  darkest  characters,  and  brings  out  a  turn  in  the  course  of  events 
of  great  consequence  to  David,  while  at  the  same  time  illustrating  several  important 
truths. 

I.  Sinful  men  abb  sometimes  the  instruments  of  fulfilling  Divine  pbedictions 
OF  JUDGMENT.  It  had  been  declared  as  a  judgment  on  the  house  of  Eli  that  terrible 
things  should  befall  his  descendants  (ch.  ii.  31 — 36;  iii  11 — 14).  In  the  fearful 
destruction  at  Nob  this  prediction  was  partly  fulfilled.  The  sins  of  Saul  brought  on 
retribution  for  the  sins  of  Eli  and  his  sons.  In  this  we  have  an  instance  of  frequent 
occurrence  in  human  history,  both  of  nations  and  individuals.  The  savage  ambition 
of  Borne  realised  the  truth  of  our  Saviour's  words  concerning  the  judgment  due  to 
impenitent  Jerusalem  (Matt,  xxiii.  34 — 38 ;  Luke  xxi.  20 — 24).  The  untruthful 
conduct  of  Jacob  was  most  severely  chastised  by  the  lying  tongues  of  his  sons  who 
conspired  against  his  favourite  Joseph ;  just  as  now  the  judgment  due  to  a  parent 
for  irreligious  example  in  the  home  is  often  realised  in  the  open  vices  of  his  children, 
which  perhaps  ruin  his  health  and  fortune.  In  all  these  cases  we  have  to  distinguish 
between  the  just  purpose  of  God  to  visit  sin  by  future  retribution,  and  the  free  action 
of  the  men  who  are  the  means  of  bringing  it  to  pass.  Had  pestilence,  or  plagues,  • 
or  earthquakes  been  more  in  the  line  of  natural  order  just  then,  these  would  have 
conserved  the  Divine  purpose.  But  man's  sinful  action,  free,  responsible,  was  the 
agency  used,  thus  illustrating  the  statement  which  sometimes  perplexes  superficial 
students  of  the  Bible — "the  wicked,  which  is  thy  sword "  (Ps.  xvii.  13).  The  metr  • 
physical  question,  involved  in  this  conjunction  of  a  righteous  retribution  with  the 
free  agency  of  man  in  the  perpetration  of  crimes  for  which  alone  they  are  responsible, 
may  be  beyond  present  solution,  but  the  fact  is  plain.  Philosophical  difiBculties  are 
inherent  in  common  facts,  and  are  not  peculiar  to  theological  truth. 

II.  In    OEDINART  men    EBLIQIOUS    instincts    are    stronger    than    POLITICAL  AND 

social  considerations.  We  need  not  be  surprised  that  Saul's  Hebrew  guards 
decUned  to  obey  his  command  to  slay  the  "priests  of  the  Lord."  No  doubt  strong 
reasons  were  present  to  prove  their  loyalty  to  their  king.  Not  only  is  loyalty  a  first 
principle  of  action  with  good  subjects,  but  the  fact  that  he  was  of  their  own  tribe, 
and  had  been  their  choice  out  of  all  Israel  (ch.  x.  19 — 24),  must  have  made  them 
anxious  to  sustain  his  authority  against  all  comers.  Even  the  very  weaknesses  of  a 
monanjh  will  induce  some  men  to  put  down  with  strong  hand  all  charged  with  con- 
spiracy against  him,  whether  or  not  the  charge  be  fully  established.  Yet  these  men 
had  been  wont  to  recognise  a  higher  authority  than  Saul's.  They  belonged  to  a  race 
whose  vocation  in  the  world  was  of  God.  All  the  sanctities  of  religious  worship  and 
■itnal,  aU  the  rich  instruction  of  their  marvellous  history,  strengthened  and  purifiei) 


CM.  zziL  1— S8.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  411 

the  iiiBtinot  that  leads  man  to  fear  God.  To  them  the  high  priest  and  his  snbordin- 
ates  were  representatives  of  a  sacred  order,  the  exponent?  of  a  spiritual  power,  and 
it  would  therefore  be  violence  to  all  that  was  sacred,  inexpressible,  and  most  influ- 
ential in  their  nature  were  they,  out  of  loyalty  to  the  king  or  from  tribal  considera- 
tions, to  touch  the  "  priests  of  the  Lord."  The  rdigiotis  instincts  of  men,  are  a  great 
power.  They  not  only  prompt  to  actions  more  or  less  good  according  to  the  degree 
of  enlightenment,  but  we  cannot  calculate  the  vast  benefits  resulting  to  mankind  by 
their  restraining  power.  The  fact  is  worthy  of  much  study,  and  the  wide  world 
furnishes  ample  illustrations  of  its  importance.  On  the  nation,  the  family,  and  the 
individual  it  acts  as  a  conservator  of  good  and  a  represser  of  much  that  would 
destroy.  It  is  often  the  only  barrier  against  the  tide  of  passion  and  ignorance.  The 
wise  know  how  to  appeal  to  it  and  turn  it  to  their  own  uses.  It  is  this  in  men, 
among  other  things,  which  renders  null  and  void  all  efEorts  to  exterminate  Christian- 
ity. Men  may  call  reverence  for  sacred  persons  and  ofBces  superstition,  and  in 
extravagant  forms  the  term  is  fitly  applied,  yet  it  is  the  indication  of  a  governing 
influence  in  human  afEairs  superior  to  all  the  advances  of  civilisation.  Man  must  be 
remade  if  his  life  is  permanently  to  be  regulated  by  any  principles  or  opinions  at 
variance  with  the  natural  religiousness  of  his  spirit, 

III.  Actions  innocent  in  intention  may  be  feaught  with  serious  consequences 
TO  OTHERS.  It  can  scarcely  be  charged  on  David  that  he  was  guilty  of  sin  in  visiting 
the  tabernacle  at  Nob,  seeking  there  food  and  shelter,  though  it  may  have  been  an 
indiscretion.  The  false  representation  by  reason  of  which  Ahimelech  was  induced  to 
give  him  bread  and  a  sword  was  the  real  wrong.  On  a  wider  survey  of  facts,  and 
with  a  juster  estimate  of  the  risks  of  compromising  the  officials  of  the  sanctuary,  he 
would  probably  have  sought  food  in  some  other  quarter,  or  have  cried  out  to  God  for 
special  deliverance.  As  it  was,  his  device  of  being  on  Saul's  business  was  evidently 
intended  to  save  the  high  priest  from  the  political  sin  of  aiding  one  outlawed  by  the 
king.  But  his  good  motives  were  entirely  useless  because  the  overt  act  was  wit- 
nessed by  an  enemy,  who,  David  felt  sure,  would  put  on  it  a  construction  inconsistent 
with  his  own  wishes  and  the  knowledge  of  the  high  priest.  His  conduct,  therefore, 
pare  in  intentions  and  fenced  with  precaution,  did  compromise  a  band  of  innocent 
-  inen,  and  was,  owing  to  the  wickedness  of  the  parties  he  had  to  contend  with,  and  not 
to  the  natural  justice  of  the  case,  the  occasion  of  the  fearful  slaughter  of  the  priests 
and  entire  population  of  the  city.  The  guilt  of  the  slaughter  rested  on  Saul ;  the 
occasion  for  the  exercise  of  the  murderous  malice  was  unwittingly  created  by 
David.  With  a  sorrowful  heart  he  admits  the  great  woe  to  have  had  its  origin 
incidentally  in  his  own  action.  It  is  a  truism  that  every  action  carries  ttnth  it  eon- 
lequences  into  the  future,  in  which  we  ourselves  and  others  are  concerned.  One  of 
the  effects  of  our  action  is  to  prompt  the  action  of  other  men,  or  to  modify  the 
i^ourse  which  otherwise  they  would  have  taken.  And  as  the  interests  of  many  may 
depend  not  on  what  we  do  directly,  but  on  the  conduct  of  others  whom  we  directly 
affect,  it  is  obvious  that  it  is  often  possible  for  us  to  perform  deeds  or  pursue  co.JBe8 
which  shall  give  occasion  for  other  men  to  perpetrate  great  wrongs  on  those  we 
would  gladly  shield.  In  that  case  we  are  not  responsible  for  their  crimes  or  follies, 
but  we  are  responsible  for  any  indiscretions  which  may  have  given  plausible  ground 
for  their  procedure,  or  have  rendered  it  possible.  But  it  is  only  where  indiscre- 
tions are  possible  that  blame  really  rests.  The  wise  men  from  the  Bast,  inquiring 
with  all  simplicity  of  purpose  for  the  new-born  king,  were  the  occasion  of  the 
slaughter  of  the  children  of  Bethlehem ;  but  though  they  no  doubt  were  pained,  if 
ever  they  knew  the  fact,  they  were  not  guilty  of  any  wrong.  We  cannot  always 
refuse  to  act  because  evil  men  exist.  Indiscretion  is  chargeable  where  a  knowledge 
of  facts  and  of  the  probable  uses  men  will  make  of  our  deeds  is  presumably  possible. 
The  practical  bearmg  of  the  risks  attendant  on  our  actions  is  to  induce  extreme 
caution,  to  awaken  watchfulness,  lest  by  our  well-intentioned  deeds  we  should  com- 
-^romise  others,  or  give  an  appearance  of  reason  for  wicked  men  to  manifest  their 
«rickedness.  In  the  memory  of  many  a  man  there  are  records  of  deeds  unwise  and 
out  of  season,  which  have  left  a  fatal  mark  on  the  world  in  spite  of  subsequent 
efforts  of  wisdom  and  goodness.    Like  David  men  can  say,  "  I  have  oocarioned  "  »1! 

this. 

II  S 


iM  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxn.  1— Ml 

IV.  The  designs  op  the  wicked  defeat  themselves.  Tlie  conflict  waged  by 
Saul  was,  as  we  have  seen,  i;eally  against  the  decree  of  God,  but  its  ostensible  object 
"vas  a  plot  on  the  part  of  David  against  the  throiie.  Whatever  fears  Saul  may  have 
had  concerning  Samuel's  sympathy  with  David,  there  was  no  public  ground  for  them 
in  any  positive  action  taken  by  the  prophet  in  concert  with  David.  What  ho  dreaded 
most  of  all  was  the  open  espousal  of  David's  ciuise  by  the  spiritual  power ;  for  the 
priesthood  had  immense  influence  with  the  people.  It  was  to  crush  out  by  one 
terrible  blow  any  supposed  concert  that  he  caused  the  slaii^liter  at  Nob ;  and  it  is 
instructive  to  observe  how  this  very  attempt  to  deprive  David  of  the  official  support 
of  the  spiritual  power  really  put  it  on  his  side.  The  deeds  of  bad  men  are  never 
complete  enough  for  insuring  a  final  triumph  ;  some  oversight,  some  weakness,  some 
so-called  accident  gives  occasion  for  the  ultimate  frustration  of  their  purpose.  By 
some  chance,  as  men  say,  Abiathar  esccaped  and  went  over  to  David.  Saul  fell  into 
the  pit  he  had  prepared  for  David  (Ps.  lii.  6).  There  is  now  a  Christian  spiritual 
jjoiuer,  and  the  truth  thus  exemplified  is  especially  seen  in  the  great  conflict  of  men 
against  it.  The  same  interests  in  higher  form  are  still  in  conflict  with  opposing 
forces.  Every  effort  to  subvert  or  crush  out  the  kingdom  of  God,  though  it  should 
be  a  great  "  slaughter  "  either  of  bodies  or  of  characters,  develops  more  life,  leads  to 
closer  union,  throws  the  Church  more  on  the  power  and  guidance  of  God,  and  so 
prepares  the  way  for  a  new  movement  of  a  higher  spiritual  character  before  which 
the  powers  of  evil  must  yield.     Give  time,  and  the  spiritual  will  triumph. 

General  lessons: — 1.  In  matters  of  doubt,  where  evil  consequences  may  possibly 
ensue  from  our  conduct  it  is  best  to  abstain  from  action ;  for  it  is  a  good  rule  to  bar 
the  way  to  evil  by  every  possible  contrivance.  2.  Where  the  reputation  of  others  is 
afEected  by  our  conduct  we  should  either  seek  their  consent  or  avoid  a  possible  com- 
promise of  their  character.  3.  Any  false  step  in  life  is  greatly  embittered  in  review 
if  it  has  been  attended  with  untruthfulness.  4.  We  may  confidently  appeal  to  the 
religious  feelings  of  men  in  our  defence  of  Christian  truth  even  when  by  bare  argu- 
ment we  cannot  touch  them.  5.  In  the  frequent  historical  illustrations  of  the  impos* 
sibility  of  men  crushing  out  the  spiritual  power,  whether  in  Jewish  or  Christian  form, 
we  see  a  prophecy  of  the  time  when  Christ  shall  have  "  put  down  all  role  and  all 
authority  and  power  "  (1  Cor.  zr.  24). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1,  2.  (The  cave  of  Adullam.) — David's  refuge  and  followiitg.  David's 
escape  'bom  Oath  to  the  cave  of  Adullam  marks  a  fresh  starting-point  in  his  career. 
Htmceforth  he  led  the  life  of  an  independent  outlaw  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  armed 
men.  He  was  openly  and  continually  persecuted  by  Saul,  under  the  illusion  that  he 
was  aiming  at  the  crown,  although  he  neither  rebelled  nor  encouraged  rebellion 
against  his  authority.  He  was  thereby  kept  prominently  before  the  minds  of  the 
people,  and  must  have  fized  the  attention  of  the  most  observant  and  devout  upon 
him,  as,  in  contrast  to  Saul  (whose  government  became  more  and  more  arbitrary, 
inefficient,  and  ungodly),  the  man  who  alone  was  worthy  to  be  "captain  over  the 
Lord's  inheritance ; "  and  the  experience  through  which  he  passed  served  to  prepare 
him  for  his  destination.  "This  very  period  of  his  deepest  sufferings  becomes  the 
decisive  turning-point  of  his  whole  history,  at  which  it  enters  upon  a  true  upward 
course,  thence  to  rise  ever  higher  and  higher ;  while  his  real  destiny,  viz.,  to  rule,  is 
now  for  the  first  time  not  only  foreshadowed,  but  already  begun,  tliough  only  on  the 
smallest  scale ;  and  the  clearest  proof  that  this  actually  is  his  destiny  is  found  in  the 
fact  that  he  begins  to  work  it  out  without  consciously  exerting  himseU  to  do  so " 
(Ewald).  He  may  be  considered  as  representing,  in  some  respects,  the  good  vum 
under  persecution,  and  as — 

I.  Peotectbd  feom  thb  violence  or  PEBSEcnroRS,  with  which  the  servants  of 
God  have  been  threatened  in  every  age.  1.  Underneath  the  personal  and  ostensible 
rrounds  of  such  violence  lie  the  opposition  of  "  the  kingdom  of  darkness "  to  the 
kingdom  of  God,  and  the  enmity  of  the  evil  heart  against  righteousness  and  good- 
neaa.     David  wm  "the  repicMntatiye  of  the  theocratic  principle  for  which  h« 


n.  xzn.  1—23.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  411 

■offers  and  endures;  Saol  of  the  anti-theocratio  principle."  Like  Moses,  Dayld 
bore  "  the  reproach  of  Christ,"  who  was  in  him  and  suffered  with  him  (Acts  ix.  4 ; 
Col.  i.  24 ;  Heb.  xi.  26,  32 — 38).  2,  It  is  limited  in  its  power,  and  is  always  ulti- 
mately defeated.  "  Be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body,"  &o.  (Luke  xii.  4). 
.1.  God  himself  is  the  Hefuge  of  the  persecuted,  and  provides  varied,  wonderful,  and 
effectual  means  for  their  deliveraijce.  "Thou  art  my  refuge"  (Ps.  czlii.  6). 
"  Thou  hast  delivered  my  soul  from  death,"  &c.  (Ps.  Ivi.  13).  The  operation  of 
Divine  providence  was  displayed  in  a  remarkable  manner  in  the  preservation  of 
David  throughout  the  whole  course  of  his  persecution  by  Saul. 

II.  Sympathising  with  thb  misery  of  thb  oprBESsED.  "His  brethren  and  aU 
his  father's  house,"  endangered  by  Saul's  jealousy  as  well  as  by  the  Philistine 
garrison  at  Bethlehem  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  13,  14),  "  and  every  one  that  was  in  distress  " 
(outwardly  impoverished  and  harassed),  "  and  in  debt "  (to  avaricious  usurers,  and 
not  necessarily  through  any  fault  of  his  own),  "  and  discontented  "  (inwardly  em- 
bittered and  dissatisfied  with  the  existing  state  of  things),  owing  to  bad  government. 
"  Surely  oppression  maketh  a  wise  man  mad  "  (Eccles.  vii.  7),  and  incites  and  justifies 
the  adoption  of  a  course  which,  under  other  circumstances,  would  be  highly  culpable. 
They  did  not  gather  to  David  in  vain.  1.  Sympathy  with  suffering  is  usually /rf< 
in  an  eminent  degree  by  those  who  have  themselves  suffered  (Heb.  li.  18).  2.  It  is 
always  shown,  when  it  is  genuine,  in  practical  effort  for  its  alleviation  (2  Cor.  i.  4). 
3.  It  generally  produces  in  those  toward  whom  it  is  shown  a  peculiarly  strong  and 
enduring  attachment.  "  Pain  is  the  deepest  thing  we  have  in  our  nature,  and  union 
through  pain  has  always  seemed  more  real  and  more  holy  than  any  other"  (A.  H. 
Ilallam).  "  I  do  not  know  where  a  better  home  could  have  been  provided  for  David 
than  among  those  men  in  distress,  in  debt,  in  discontent.  If  it  behoved  a  ruler  to 
know  the  heart  of  his  subjects,  their  sorrows,  their  wrongs,  their  crimes, — ^to  know 
them  and  to  sympathise  with  them, — this  was  surely  as  precious  a  part  of  his  school- 
ing as  the  solitude  of  his  boyhood,  or  as  any  intercourse  he  had  with  men  who  had 
aever  faced  the  misery  of  the  world,  and  never  had  any  motive  to  quarrel  with  its 
laws.  Through  oppression,  confusion,  lawlessness  he  was  learning  the  eternal, 
essential  righteousness  of  God"  (Maurice). 

III.  AsBUMlNO  THB  LEADEBSHIF  OF  THB  FAITHFOI..  "  He  became  Captain  over 
them :  and  there  were  with  him  about  four  hundred  men  " — afterwards  six  hundred 
(ch.  xxiii.  13)  ;  including  his  nephews,  Abishai  (ch.  xxvi.  6),  Joab,  Asahel,  and 
Amasa,  Ahimelech  the  Hittite,  the  "  three  mighty  men  "  who  "  broke  through  the 
host  of  the  Philistines  and  drew  water  out  of  the  well  of  Bethlehem"  (2  Sam. 
xxiii.  16),  many  of  those  whose  names  are  recorded  in  the  list  of  David's  heroes 
(1  Cl:ion.  xi.  10 — 47),  Gadites  "whose  faces  were  like  the  faces  of  lions,  and  were 
as  swift  as  the  roes  upon  the  mountains,"  Benjaraites  and  men  of  Judah,  under 
Amasai,  on  whom  "  the  Spirit  came,  and  he  said,  Thine  are  we,"  &c.  ;  "  for  thy 
God  helpeth  thee  "  (1  Chron.  xii.  8 — 18).  Some  of  them  possessed,  perhaps,  little 
religious  principle,  and  were  ready  for  any  adventurous  enterprise ;  but  most  of 
them  were  young,  free,  noble  spirits,  resenting  the  tyranny  of  Saul,  and  sympa- 
thising with  all  that  was  best  in  the  nation — "the  unconscious  materials  out  of 
which  a  new  world  was  to  be  formed."  David's  leadership  was  —  1.  Exercised 
by  virtue  of  his  peculiar  position,  eminent  godliness,  and  surpassing  ahility.  2. 
Accepted  by  them  voluntarily,  and  followed  with  fidelity  and  enthusiasm.  3.  Con- 
tributed to  their  discipline,  improvement  (Ps.  xxxiv.  11),  and  future  service  against 
the  common  enemy,  as  well  as  his  own  moral  force  and  power  of  organisation  and 
rule.  "  The  effect  of  such  a  life  on  his  spiritual  nature  was  to  deepen  his  uncon- 
ditional dependence  on  God;  by  the  alternations  of  heat  and  cold,  fear  and  hope, 

.  danger  and  safety,  to  temper  his  soul  and  make  it  flexible,  tough,  and  bright  as  steel 
It  evolved  the  qualities  of  a  leader  of  men,  teaching  him  command  and  forbearance, 
promptitude  and  patience,  valour  and  gentleness.  It  won  for  him  a  name  as  • 
founder  of  a  nation,  and  it  gathered  around  him  a  force  of  men  devoted  to  him  by 
»n  enthusiastic  attachment,  bred  by  long  years  of  common  dangers  and  the  hearty 
friendships  of  many  a  march  by  day  and  nightly  encampment  round  the  glimmering 
iratchiires  beneath  the  lucid  stars  "  (Maclaren). 
IV.  Dbvotkd  TO  THB  8EKVICB  OF  GoD.    The  effect  of  persecution  on  «  good  man 


422  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xxii.  1— SS 

is  to  cause  him  to  draw  nigh  to  God  in — 1.  'Renewed  conscience  and  hope.  2.  Intense 
desire /or  the  mamfestation  of  his  glory  in  "  bringing  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked 
to  an  end  and  establishing  the  just "  (Ps.  vii.  9).  He  wishes  above  all  things  and 
strives  for  the  setting  up  of  the  kingdom  of  God  upon  earth.  3.  Earnest  prayera 
and  thanksgivings,  such  as  are  expressed  in  the  "  cave  songs  "  of  David.  Pa  OXLIL, 
'A  cry  of  the  persecuted  to  God'  (see  inscription): — 

"  With  my  voice  to  Jehovah  do  I  cry, 
With  my  voice  to  Jehovah  do  I  make  snpplicatioa^ 
Deliver  me  from  my  persecutors. 
For  they  are  stronger  than  I." 

Pb.  LTn.,  'Trnsting  in  the  protection  of  God'  (see  inscription):— 

"  Be  gracious  onto  me,  O  God,  be  gracious  unto  ms, 
For  in  thee  hath  my  soul  found  refuge  ; 
And  in  the  shadow  of  thy  wings  will  I  find  refog* 
Until  the  destruction  passeth  by. 
Be  thou  exalted  above  the  heavens,  0  God, 
Thy  glory  above  all  the  earth." 

"When  Mb  companions  in  arms  were  carousing  or  asleep,  he  sat  by  his  lamp  in 
some  still  retreat,  or  '  considered  the  heavens '  as  they  spread  above  him,  or  medi- 
tated on  the  law,  or  engaged  in  prayer,  or  held  intimate  communion  with  God,  and 
composed  and  wrote  (though  he  thought  not  so)  what  shall  sound  in  the  Church  and 
echo  through  the  world  to  all  time  "  (Binney). — D. 

_  Vers.  3,  4.  (Moab.) — Filial  kindness.  To  honour  parents  is  the  earliest  obliga- 
tion of  life,  the  foundation  of  human  duties  and  a  stepping-stone  to  Divine.  It 
applies  to  children  not  only  when  they  dwell  at  home  and  depend  on  their  parents, 
but  also  when  they  leave  home  and  become  independent  of  them.  The  manner  in 
which  it  should  be  shown  in  the  latter  case  differs  in  some  respects  from  that  in  the 
former ;  but  such  kindness  as  David  exhibited  towards  his  aged  father  and  mother 
ought  never  to  be  neglected.     It  was — 

I.  Nebdiptjl.  In  early  life  we  need  the  care  of  parents,  in  old  age  that  of  chil- 
dren. 1.  Bodily  weahness  and  failing  health  often  render  parents  dependent  for 
physical  comforts  and  even  necessaries  (Gen.  xlvii.  12).  2.  Increasing  loneliness 
makes  them  desirous  of  the  cheering  presence  and  intercourse  of  their  children ;  and 
much  pain  is  naturally  given  by  lack  of  respect,  affection,  confidence,  and  gentle 
ministrations.  3.  Special  emergencies,  like  those  here  aUuded  to,  sometimes  demand 
unusual  efforts  for  their  safety  and  happiness.  Their  condition  appeals  to  the  ten- 
derest  and  best  feelings  of  the  heart,  though,  alas,  it  sometimes  appeals  in  vain. 

II.  Obligatobt.  1.  Arising  out  of  natural  relationship,  the  duties  of  which  on 
the  part  of  children,  however  imperfectly  they  may  have  oeen  fulfilled  on  the  part 
of  parents,  cannot  be  cancelled.  2.  Required  by  the  claims  of  gratitude  for  innu- 
merable benefits  received.  3.  Enjoined  by  the  Divine  word  in  many  precepts  to 
which  great  promises  are  annexed.  "  The  fifth  commandment  is  the  centre  of  all 
the  others ;  for  upwards  it  is  the  point  of  departure  for  Divine,  and  downwards  for 
human  duties"  (Ephes.  vi.  1).  "Despise  not  thy  mother  when  she  is  old"  (Prov. 
xxiii.  22).  "God  commanded,  saying.  Honour  thy  father,"  &c.  (Matt.  xv.  4 — 9). 
"Let  them  learn  first  to  show  (filial)  reverence  to  their  own  household,  and  to 
requite  their  parents,"  &c.  (1  Tim.  v.  4).  4.  Commended  by  the  example  of  the 
good.  "  Because  ye  have  obeyed  the  commandment  of  Jonadab  your  father,"  &c. 
( Jer.  XXXV.  18,  19).     Jesus  Christ  himself  (John  xix.  26). 

III.  ExEMPi,AEY  in  the  way  in  which  it  was  displayed.  1.  Thoughtful,  affectionate, 
and  tender.  _  2.  Self-denying  and  self-sacrificing,  with  much  effort  and  risk,  and  as 
was  best  suited  to  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  3.  Religious:  "Till  I  know  what 
God  will  do  to  me ; "  where  there  is  a  recognition  of  his  will  as  supreme,  faith  in  his 
wise  and  gracious  disposal  (Ps.  xxvii.  10),  and  hope  of  his  enabling  him  to  see  again 
his  parents,  from  whom  he  parted  with  regret,  and  provide  for  their  permanem 
weUaia. 


W.  xxn.  1— 28.J  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  4tS 

Exhortation: — 1.  To  children.  Be  kind  to  your  parents,  though  yon  no  longer 
need  their  care,  if  you  would  not  have  your  children  be  unkind  to  you.  2.  To 
parents.  Seek  to  gain  the, respect  and  affection  of  your  children,  and  teach  them  to 
honour  God,  if  you  would  have  them  to  honour  you.  3.  To  all.  Be  not  like  those 
of  whom  the  heavenly  Father  said  of  old,  "I  have  nourished  and  brooght  op 
children,  and  they  have  rebelled  against  me  "  (Isa.  i.  2). — D. 

Ver,  4.  (MoAB.) — Awaiting  the  future.  "  Till  I  know  what  God  will  do  to  me." 
There  are  times  when  our  thoughts  naturally  turn  toward  the  future :  the  commence- 
ment of  a  fresh  enterprise  or  a  new  season,  suspense  in  sickness,  the  approach  of 
critical  events,  especially  when  they  lie  beyond  our  control  or  even  our  probable 
conjecture.  At  such  times  this  is  the  appropriate  language  of  a  good  man.  He 
awaits  it  in — 

I.  Uncertainty  about  the  events  of  the  future — ^new  positions,  opportunities,  ad- 
vantages, trials,  duties.  "  We  know  not  with  what  we  must  serve  the  Lord  until 
we  come  thither  "  (Exod.  x.  26).  "  Ye  have  not  passed  this  way  heretofore  "  (Josh, 
iii  4),  and  cannot  tell  what  may  befall  you  therein.  "  Shadows,  clouds,  and  dark- 
ness rest  upon  it."  But  the  good  man  is  not  distracted  by  curiosity  or  anxiety, 
inasmuch  as — 1.  Neither  is  of  any  avail.  2.  The  Father  has  reserved  the  times  and 
the  seasons  "  in  his  own  power  "  (Acts  i.  7).  3.  And  he  has  done  so  wisely  and  for 
our  good.     "The  veil  that  hides  the  future  is  woven  by  the  hand  of  mercy." 

II.  CoNFlDBNCE  in  the  care  of  God.  "  My  times  are  in  thy  hand"  (Ps.  xxxi.  15). 
"  I  will  cry  unto  God  that  performeth  all  things  for  me  "  (Ps.  Ivii.  2).  Such  con- 
fidence respects — 1.  His  perfect  knowledge,  almighty  power,  and  supreme  control 
of  all  things,  including  the  thoughts  and  purposes  of  men  (ch.  xix.  23).  2.  His 
individual  observation.  3.  His  heTieflceni  operation.  "  Being  well  assured  of  the 
justice  of  his  cause  as  contrasted  with  the  insane  persecutions  of  Saul,  David  con- 
fidently hoped  that  God  would  bring  his  flight  to  an  end  "  (Eeil). 

"  O  Lord,  how  happy  should  we  be, 
If  we  could  cast  our  care  on  theej 

If  we  from  self  could  test, 
And  feel  at  heart  that  One  above, 
In  perfect  wisdom,  perfect  love, 
la  working  for  the  best "  (Keble). 

ni.  Readiness  for  whatever  uiay  take  place.  1.  By  watchful  attentioH  to  every 
indication  of  the  will  of  God,  looking  out  for  it  as  a  watchman  for  the  dawn  of  the 
morning.  "  I  will  stand  upon  my  watch,"  &c.  (Hab.  ii.  1).  2.  By  cherishing  a 
spirit  of  humble  submissiveness  to  what  he  may  think  fit  to  do  and  fixed  determina- 
tion to  do  what  he  may  require.  3.  By  faithful  fulfilment  of  the  plain  and  im- 
mediate  duty  of  the  present  time.  "  Let  my  father  and  mother  come  forth  "  (from 
the  hold  in  Mizpeh)  "and  be  with  you,  till,"  &c.  Its  performance  is  the  best  pre- 
paration for  the  events  and  duties  of  the  future. — D. 

Ver.  6.  (Mizpeh  of  Moab.) — A  summons  to  duty.  The  prophet  Gad  was  pro- 
bably sent  at  the  instance  of  Samuel  to  David,  who  was  now  "  in  the  hold  "  in  Moab, 
and  with  whom  he  may  have  become  acquainted  at  Ramah.  His  message  was  im- 
portant in  relation  to  the  future  course  of  David  (ver.  3).  "  According  to  the  coun- 
sels of  God  he  was  not  to  seek  for  refuge  outside  the  land  ;  not  only  that  he  might 
not  be  estranged  from  his  fatherland  and  the  people  of  Israel,  which  would  have 
been  opposed  to  hia  calling  to  be  king  of  Israel,  but  also  that  he  might  learn  to  trust 
entirely  in  the  Lord  as  his  only  refuge  and  fortress  "  (Keil).  There  was  also  a  special 
reason  why  he  should  be  recalled  in  the  incursions  of  the  Philistines,  which  Saul 
failed  to  repel  (ch.  xxiii.  1).  And  the  message  furnished  a  test  of  his  obedience  to 
the  will  of  God  as  declared  by  the  prophets.  "  Immediately  he  conferred  not  with 
flesh  and  blood,"  but  did  as  he  was  directed,  and  thereby  afforded  an  instructiva 
•xample  to  others.     Consider  the  message  as — 

I.  CoMMUNiCATBD  BY  THE  PROPHETIC  WORD.  This  word  IS,  for  US,  Contained  in 
•the  Scriptures  of  truth."    1.  It  speaks  with  authority.    2.  It  speaks  ptmnly,  "in 


4U  "ras  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xxn.  1—28. 

divers  manners,"  according  to  onr  need,  and  "  for  our  good  always."  S.  It  speaki 
in  the  reading  of  the  Scriptures,  in  the  voice  of  preachers  and  teachers,  parents  and 
friends,  in  the  recollections  of  the  memory,  and  often  comes  to  the  heart  and  con- 
science with  peculiar  force.  "Believe  his  prophets,  so  shall  ye  prosper"  (2  Chron. 
XX.  20). 

II.  CALLma  TO  imEXFECTED  DUTT ;  Unexpected,  inasmuch  as,  not  nnfreqaently — 
1.  It  is  such  as  we  should  not  naturally  have  supposed.  2.  It  differs  from  the 
course  which  we  have  chosen  for  ourselves.  "  Abide  not  in  the  hold."  3.  It  requires 
us  to  meet  unusual  difficulties  and  dangers.  "  Depart,  and  get  thee  into  the  land  of 
Judah  "  (into  the  very  presence  of  a  deadly  foe).  "  Master,  the  Jews  of  late  sought 
to  stone  thee ;  ftnd  goest  thou  thither  again  ?  "  (John  zL  8 — 10 ;  Luke  iz.  61). 

"  Do  thy  duty ;  that  is  best ; 
Leave  unto  thy  Lord  the  rest" 

III.  OoMPLiBD  WITH  IN  A  BIGHT  MANNEB.  "And  David  departed,"  fto.  1. 
Without  question,  like  a  good  soldier  at  the  word  of  command.  2.  Without  hesita- 
tion or  delay.  3.  Without  fear.  How  difiEerent  was  it  with  Saul  1  (ch.  xiii.  11 ; 
XV.  11).     "  Whosoever  will  save  his  life,"  &c.  (Matt.  xvi.  25). 

IV.  Conducting  to  safety,  usefulness,  and  honour.  1.  Safety;  for  he  was 
"kept  by  the  power  of  God."  2.  Usefulness;  for  he  "saved  the  inhabitants  of 
Keilah  "  (ch.  xxiii.  5).  3.  Honour ;  for  he  was  more  fully  recognised  as  the  true 
defender  of  Israel  against  their  enemies,  and  his  heroic  band  was  largely  increased 
(ch.  xxiii.  13). 

"  Stem  Lawgiver  I  yet  thou  dost  wear 
The  Godhead's  most  benignant  grace ) 
Kor  know  we  anything  so  fair 
As  is  the  smile  upon  tny  face : 
Flowers  laugh  before  thee  on  their  bed», 
And  fragrance  in  thy  footing  treads ; 
Thon  dost  preserve  the  stars  from  wrong ; 

And  the  most  ancient  heavens  through  the*  are  fresh  and  iliOBgi 
Give  unto  me,  made  lowly  wise, 
The  spirit  of  self-sacrifice ; 
The  confidence  of  reason  give, 
And  in  the  light  of  truth  thy  bondman  let  me  live." 

(Wordsworth,  '  Ode  to  Duty.')— D. 

Vers.  6 — W.  (Gibbah.) — Tlie  tyranny  of  Said.  With  his  spear-sceptre  in  his 
hand,  Saul,  now  considerably  past  the  meridian  of  life,  sat  in  the  midst  of  his 
council  of  officers  and  magnates,  under  the  tamarisk  tree  on  the  height,  in  Gibeah. 
The  description  of  what  took  place  in  this  assembly — "  a  kind  of  parliament  in  the 
open  air" — casts  a  lurid  light  upon  his  character  and  rule.  In  it  we  see — 1.  The 
fulfilment  of  the  prediction  of  Samuel  concerning  the  course  which  would  ba 
pursued  by  a  king  such  as  the  people  desired  (ch.  viiL  11 — 18).  2.  The  moral 
deterioration  of  Saul  since  the  day  when  they  shouted  "God  save  the  king"  in 
Mizpeh  (ch.  x.  24),  and  "  made  him  king  before  the  Lord  in  Gilgal "  (ch.  xi.  15)  ; 
and  even  since  Ins  rejection  (ch.  xv.  26).  3.  The  working  out  of  the  law  of 
retribution  in  their  chastisement  through  the  king  chosen  by  themselves  and  reflect 
ing  their  own  sin.  The  early  brilliance  of  his  reign  had  been  long  overcast,  and  the 
thunder-storm  was  approaching.  Saul  had  ceased  to  be  a  servant  of  Jehovah.  His 
government  was  the  reverse  of  what  it  ought  to  have  been.  Although  it  had  respect 
to  the  outward  forms  of  religion,  and  displayed  much  zeal  against  irreligious  prac- 
tices, yet  it  did  not  really  recognise  the  invisible  King  of  Israel,  obey  his  will,  or 
observe  "  the  manner  of  the  kingdom  "  which  had  been  ordained  of  old  (Deut.  xvii. 
14 — 20),  and  formally  recorded  as  a  permanent  law  and  testimony  (ch.  x.  25).  It 
was  essentially  anti-theocratic.  The  true  theocracy  was  represented  by  Samuel  and 
the  prophets  at  Ramah  and  David  and  his  band  at  Adullam;  and  through  them 
(in  the  wonderful  working  of  Divine  providence)  the  nation  would  be  raised  to  powei 
•nd  glory,  and  the  purpose*  of  Ood  concerning  it  accomplished.  His  oharaoter  and 
nil*  w*r«  marked  by— 


OH.  xxn.  1—23.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL,  4S6 

I.  MoEBiD  SELFISHNESS.  By  constantly  directing  his  thoughts  toward  himself, 
instead  of  toward  God  and  his  people,  Saul  had  come  to  think  of  nothing  else  bat 
his  own  safety,  power,  and  honour.  Selfishness  appears  in  —  1.  Pride  and  vain- 
j[lory.  Of  this  he  had  previously  exhibited,  unmistakable  signs  (ch,  xv.  12).  Yet 
It  was  expressly  required  that  his  heart  should  not  be  "lifted  up  above  hii 
brethren  "  (Dent  xvii.  20).  2.  The  use  of  power  for  personal  ends.  In  contrast  t4 
charity,  it  seeketh  its  own.  The  king  exists  for  the  good  of  the  people,  not  the 
people  for  the  glory  of  the  king.  "Behold,  I  am  against  thee,  Pharaoh  king  of 
Egypt,  the  great  dragon  that  lieth  in  the  midst  of  his  rivers,  which  hath  said,  My 
river  is  my  own,  and  I  have  made  it  for  myself "  (Ezek.  xrix.  3).  3.  The  neglect 
of  the  performance  of  duty  to  others.  Unlike  Samuel,  when  he  was  judge,  Saul 
had  evidently,  in  his  concern  for  himself,  omitted  to  maintain  law  and  order  (ver.  2), 
and  even  to  resist  the  encroachments  of  the  Philistines,  against  whom  he  had 
formerly  rendered  signal  service. 

II.  Avowed  misgovebnmbnt  (vers.  7—9).  1.  Partisanship.  He  placed  men  of 
his  own  tribe  in  the  chief  ofSces  of  state,  and  this  would  not  be  conducive  to  the  unity 
of  the  nation.  "Hear  now,  ye  Benjamite's."  2.  Mercetiariness.  He  sought  to 
attach  them  to  his  interest  by  the  lowest  motives.  "  He  boasts  that  he  has  given 
tields  and  vineyards  to  all  his  Benjamite  servants  and  accomplices;  and  what  he 
gave  to  them  he  must  have  taken  away  from  others  "  (Hengstenberg).  His  reign 
was  oppressive,  as  it  had  been  predicted.  3.  Suspicion  of  disloyalty,  and  reproach 
for  want  of  gratitude  and  sympathy.  "  AH  of  you  have  conspired  against  me,"  &c. 
A  man  is  apt  to  suspect  in  others  the  evil  which  exists  by  his  own  heart  4.  False- 
hood. Having  heard  that  a  number  of  men  had  gathered  around  David,  he  said, 
"My  son  hath  stirred  up  my  servant  against  me,"  &c.  "There  is  herein  a  twofold 
false  accusation :  as  to  David,  that  he  was  lying  in  wait  to  take  his  throne  and  his 
life ;  and  as  to  Jonathan,  that  he  was  the  cause  of  this  insorrectionsiT'  and  inaidioua 
conduct  of  David." 

III.  Flagrant  injustice  (vers.  9 — 16).  The  people  desired  a  king  that  he  might 
judge  them  (ch.  viii.  20).  But  Saul  abused  his  judicial  office  by — 1.  Beceiving  and 
relying  upon  insufficient  testimony.  The  law  required  the  evidence  of  at  least  two 
witnesses ;  but  he  was  satisfied  with  the  information  of  one  of  his  creatures — Doeg 
the  Edomite.  2.  A  prejudiced  prejudgment  of  the  guilt  of  the  accused.  He  sent 
for  Ahimelech  "and  all  his  father's  house,"  having  already  resolved,  apparently, 
upon  their  destruction.  3.  Utter  disregard  of  the  plainest  proofs  of  innocence.  The 
priest  gave  his  evidence  in  a  dignified, ,  simple,  and  straightforward  manner.  In 
what  he  had  done  he  was  fully  justified.  And  he  had  not  done  all  that  was  attri- 
buted to  him.  "  The  force  of  the  word  begin  lies  in  this,  that  it  would  have  been  liis 
first  act  of  allegiance  to  David  and  defection  from  Saul.  This  he  strenuously 
repudiates  "  (Speaker's  '  Com.')  He  was  ignorant  of  any  treason  in  others,  guiltless 
of  it  himself,  and  had  done  no  wrong.     4.  A  rash,  precipitate,  revengeful,  and  dis- 

Eroportionate  sentence.     "  Thou  shalt  surely  die,  Ahimelech,  thou,  and  all  thy  father's 
ouse"  (ver.  16). 

IV.  Persistent  wilfulness  (ver.  17).  "  Never  was  the  command  «f  a  prince 
more  barbarously  given,  never  was  the  command  of  a  prince  more  honourably  dis- 
obeyed" (M.  Henry).  "We  ought  to  obey  God  rather  than  man."  The  besetting 
sin  of  Saul  received  another  check ;  and  another  merciful  warning  was  given  him, 
which  should  have  made  him  pause  and  desist  from  his  evil  purpose.  But,  blinded 
by  passion,  and  probably  thinking  (being  turned  aside  by  a  deceived  heart)  that  his 
course  was  justifiable,  he  heeded  it  not,  outraged  the  public  conscience,  as  expressed 
in  the  refusal  of  his  own  body-guard,  and  gave  tlie  order  for  immediate  execution 
to  one  of  his  vilest  servants  and  accomplices.  Wicked  men  generally  find  appro- 
priate instruments  for  the  accomplishment  of  their  wickedness. 

v.  Atbocious  cruelty  (vers.  18,  19).  Impelled  by  the  same  self-will  as  formerly 
led  him  to  spare  Agag,  he  not  only  destroyed  eighty-five  "  priests  of  the  Lord,"  but 
also  gave  to  the  sword  "the  city  of  priests,  both  men  and  women,  children  and 
sucklings,  and  oxen,  and  asses,  and  sheep ; "  nor  was  he,  as  in  his  attack  upon  the  pro* 
phets,  restrained  by  the  hand  of  God.  1.  In  fulfilling  their  own  purposes  evil  mei 
often  onconaciouflly  execute  ^^  predicted  and  rigkteom  judgment*  t^f  Hecue»  (oh.  iL 


4M  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxu.  1— 2i 

31 — 3S ;  iii.  11 — 14).  2.  Those  judgments,  though  startling  in  their  inimediatt 
occasion,  are  connected  with  their  mavn  cause.  If  the  house  of  Eli  had  not  been 
reduced  to  a  dependent  and  despised  condition  by  notorious  transgression,  Saul  would 
hardly  have  dared  to  commit  this  act.  3.  The  evil  which  men  do  lives  after  them 
in  its  effects,  and  one  generation  suSers  for  the  preceding  (Exod.  xx.  5).  4. 
Although  men  in  doing  wrong  may  execute  the  will  of  God,  they  are  responsible  for 
their  own  acts,  and  must  sooner  or  later  suffer  the  penalty  due  to  them.  Saul's 
reckless  cruelty  alienated  the  best  of  his  subjects  and  hastened  his  doom.  This  was 
not  the  only  instance  in  which  it  was  displayed  (see  2  Sam.  xxi.  1 — 6). 

VI.  Impious  eebellton.  In  destroying  the  servants  of  God  for  imaginary  rebel- 
lion against  himself  Saul  was  guilty  of  real  rebellion  against  the  Divine  King  of 
Israel.  More  fully  than  ever  he  renewed  a  conflict  which  could  end  only  in  his  defeat. 
"  Woe  to  him  that  striveth  with  his  Maker." 

Reflections : — 1.  How  vast  is  the  mischief  which  self-will  works  in  the  world  I  2. 
How  base  do  men  sometimes  become  under  its  dominion!  3.  How  fearfully  is  the 
possession  of  power  frequently  misused  1  4.  "  How  unsearchable  are  his  judgments, 
and  his  ways  past  finding  out  I " — D. 

Vers.  18,  19.  (Gibeah.) — Doeg  the  Edomite.  Wicked  men,  especially  when  they 
occupy  positions  of  authority  and  possess  wealth  and  influence,  attract  to  themselves 
others  of  like  character,  and  become  more  wicked  by  association  with  them.  Of  the 
latter  Doeg  the  Edomite  was  one.  He  belonged  to  t>  people  between  whom  and 
Israel  the  bitterest  enmity  existed.  But  he  had  apparently  become  a  proselyte,  and, 
being  a  man  of  some  ability,  was  made  overseer  of  the  herdsmen  of  Saul  and  one  of 
his  council.  His  real  character  seems  to  have  been  perceived  by  David  before  he 
fled  from  court  (ver.  22)  ;  and  it  is  very  probable  that  he  gave  secret  information  to 
the  king  of  what  took  place  at  the  tabernacle  at  Nob  previous  to  bearing  open 
testimony  in  the  council.     He  was — 

I.  A  HEAETLBS8  WOBSHIPPEB ;  "  detained  before  Jehovah  "  (ch.  xxi.  7).  Whatever 
may  have  been  the  reason  of  his  detention,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  he  was  pre- 
sent in  the  sacred  place  either  unwillingly  and  by  constraint,  or  offering  a  formal 
and  hypocritical  worship.  "  He  concealed  his  heathen  heart  under  Israelitish  forms." 
He  was  more  observant  of  the  conduct  of  others  in  the  house  of  God  than  careful  to 
correct  his  own.  He  cherished  "a  wicked  mind,"  and  perhaps  revolved  therein  how 
he  could  turn  what  he  saw  to  his  own  advantage,  or  employ  it  for  the  gratification  of 
his  hatred  and  enmity.  All  who  join  in  the  outward  forms  of  worship  do  not  "  lift 
up  holy  hands  without  wrath  and  disputation." 

II.  A  MALICIOUS  INFOHMEE  (vcrs.  9,  10).  His  immediate  purpose  in  giving 
information  may  have  been  to  avert  the  reproaches  of  the  king  from  his  courtiers ; 
but  he  must  have  known  what  its  effect  would  be  with  respect  to  the  high  priest, 
and  doubtless  deliberately  aimed  at  producing  it.  He  also  appears  to  have  gone 
beyond  the  truth ;  perchance  supposing  that  when  he  saw  the  priest  take  "  the 
sword  of  Goliath"  from  behind  the  ephod,  he  used  the  latter  for  the  purpose  of 
"  inquiring  of  the  Lord."  "  Thou  lovest  evil  more  than  good ;  and  lying  rather  than 
to  speak  righteousness.  Thou  lovest  all  devouring  words,  0  thou  deceitful  tongue  " 
(Ps.  Iii.  3,  4). 

III.  A  EUTHLESS  BXECUTIONBE  (vcrs.  18,  19).  What  Others,  whose  consciences 
were  not  hardened,  refused  to  do  he  willingly  and  readily  accomplished,  and  probably 
found  therein  a  gratification  of  the  enmity  of  his  race  against  Israel.  The  command  of 
the  king  could  not  relieve  him  of  his  responsibility  for  his  deed  of  blood.  "  Louis  XIV., 
who  had  sanctioned  the  Dragonades,  died  declaring  to  the  cardinals  Rohan  and 
Bissy,  and  to  his  confessor,  that,  being  himself  altogether  ignorant  of  ecclesiastical 
questions,  he  had  acted  under  their  guidance  and  as  their  agent  in  all  that  he  had 
done  against  the  Jansenists  or  the  Protestant  heretics,  and  on  those  his  spiritual 
advisers  he  devolved  the  responsibility  to  the  supreme  Judge  "  (Stephen,  '  Lect.  on 
the  Hist,  of  France'). 

IV.  A  EETRiBUTOKT  INSTRUMENT  (see  last  homlly).  When  the  great  wickedness 
of  men  like  Doeg  is  c^.  o'dered,  it  is  not  surprising  that  David  (living  under  ths 
former  dispensatiun)  ilteold  predict  and  desire  their  due  punishment  u  public 


CH.  XXII.  1—23.]  THE  PIKST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  427 

enemies  ;  "  not  in  a  spirit  of  revenge,  but  rather  in  a  spirit  of  sseal  for  the  glory  of 
God,  desire  for  the  vindication  of  right,  and  regard  for  the  peace  and  purity  of 
society"  ('  Expositor,'  iv.  56),  as  he  does  in  Ps.  Lii.,  "The  pimishment  of  an  evil 
tongue  '■  (see  inscription) : — 

"  Why  boastest  thou  thyself  in  wickedness,  0  mighty  man  I 
The  mercy  of  God  endureth  continually. 
Destruction  doth  thy  tongue  devise, 
Like  a  sharp  razor,  working  guile. 
Thus  then  God  will  smite  thee  down  for  ever. 
He  will  seize  thee  and  pluck  thee  out  of  thy  tent, 
And  root  thee  out  of  the  land  of  the  living." 

Other  psalms  have  been  supposed  by  some  to  refer  to  Doeg  and  the  massacre  of  tha 
■    ■  I  viz.,  xviL,  XXXV.,  liiv.,  cix.,  cxl. — D. 


Vers.  20 — 22.  (The  forest  of  Hargth.)  —  Conscience.  Conscience  is  the  con- 
sciousness a  man  has  of  himself  in  relation  to  the  standard  of  right  which  he  recog- 
nises. It  is  at  once  a  judgment  of  his  conformity  or  otherwise  to  that  standard,  and 
a  corresponding  feeling  of  approbation  or  disapprobation.  It  is  the  crowning  faculty 
of  the  soul.  "The  whole  world  is  under  a  solemn  economy  of  government  and 
judgment.  A  mighty  spirit  of  judgment  is  in  sovereign  exercise  over  all ;  discern- 
ing, estimating,  approving  or  condemning.  And  it  is  the  ofSce  of  conscience  to 
recognise  this  authority  and  to  represent  it  in  the  soul.  It  communicates  with 
something  mysteriously  great  without  the  soul,  and  above  it,  and  everywhere.  It  is 
the  sense  (more  explicit  or  obscure)  of  standing  in  judgment  before  the  Almighty  " 
(J.  Poster).  Its  operation  appears  in  what  is  here  said  of  David  as— 1.  Uttering  a 
warning  against  sin.  "  1  knew  it  that  day,"  &c.  Conscience  is  not  only  reflective, 
but  prospective  in  its  operations.  The  sight  of  Doeg  led  him  to  see  and  feel  that 
the  course  which  he  was  about  to  take  in  deceiving  Ahimelech  was  wrong,  and  would 
be  productive  of  evil  consequences.  But  under  the  pressure  of  urgent  need  he  neg- 
lected the  premonition.  2.  Inflicting  remorse  on  account  of  dn.  "  I  am  guilty  as 
to  every  soul  (life)  of  the  house  of  thy  father."  The  information  he  received  called 
his  conscience  into  the  highest  activity.  He  judged  himself  strictly.  He  felt  his 
sin  deeply.  And  most  gladly  would  he  recall  the  evil  he  had  done  if  he  conld.  But 
that  was  impossible.  "The  lie  had  gone  forth  from  him;  and  having  done  so,  it 
was  no  longer  under  his  control,  but  would  go  on  producing  its  diabolical  fruits  " 
(W.M.Taylor).  3.  Constraining  to  the  confession  of  sin.  He  did  not  (as  Saul  had 
done)  seek  to  conceal  or  palliate  his  transgression,  but  freely  and  fully  acknowledged 
it,  renounced  it,  and  sought  its  forgiveness  (Ps.  zxxii.  6).  4.  Indtimg  to  reparation 
for  sin.  "  Abide  thou  with  me,"  &c.  It  was  little  that  he  could  do  for  this  purpose, 
but  what  was  in  his  power  he  did.  It  is  evident  that,  notwithstanding  he  had  yielded 
to  temptation,  he  possessed  a  tender  conscience  (Acts  xxiv.  16).  "  And  wouldst  thou 
be  faithful  to  that  work  which  God  hath  appointed  thee  to  do  in  this  world  for  his 
name?  Then  make  much  of  a  trembling  heart  and  conscience;  for  although  the 
teord  be  the  line  and  rule  whereby  we  must  govern  and  order  all  onr  actions,  yet  a 
breaking  heart  and  tender  conscience  is  of  absolute  necessity  for  so  doing.  A  hard 
heart  can  do  nothing  with  the  word  of  Jesus  Christ.  Keep  then  thy  conscience 
awake  with  wrath  and  grace,  with  heaven  and  hell.  But  let  grace  and  heaven  bear 
■way  "  (Bunyan). 

"  O  clear  conscience  and  upright  I 
How  doth  a  little  &iling  wound  thee  sore."  D. 

Ver.  23.  (Hareth.) — The  defender  of  the  persecuted.  As  David  afforded  pro- 
tection to  Abiathar,  so  Christ  affords  protection  to  those  who  betake  themselves  to 
him.  This  is  not  a  mere  resemblance,  but  is  directly  involved  in  that  (his  royal 
oflSce)  wherein  David  was  a  type  or  Divine  foreshadowing  of  "the  King  of  kings." 
They — 

I.  Endtjbb  pebsbcution  foe  his  sake.  "He  that  seeketh  my  life  seeketh  thy 
life."  They  do  so — 1.  Because  of  their  union  with  him,  and  partaking  of  his  life 
4nd'  righteousness,  to  which  "  this  present  evil  world  "  is  opposed.     2.  BecaujM  of 


42S  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxu.  1— JIL 

their  love  to  him,  which  will  not  suffer  them  to  leave  him,  or  be  unfaithful  to  him 
for  the  Bake  of  gaining  the  favour  of  the  world.  3.  Because  it  has  been  thug 
wdained.  "Unto  you  it  is  given,"  &c.  (Phil.  i.  29).  "With  persecutioDB  "  (Mark 
X.  30),  which  are  an  occasion  of  spiritual  blessing  (Matt.  v.  10). 

II.  Must  abide  in  his  fellowship.  "  Abide  thou  with  me."  1.  By  unwavering 
reliance  upon  him  (John  xv.  4 — 7  ;  1  John  ii.  28).  2.  By  intimate  intercourse  with 
him.     3.  By  constant  obedience  to  him. 

III.  FiKD  SAPBTT  DNDEB  HIS  PEOTECTioN.  "Fearnot;  with  me  thou  art  in  safe- 
guard." "  David  spoke  thus  in  the  firm  belief  that  the  Lord  would  deliver  him  from 
■his  foe  and  give  him  the  kingdom  "  (Keil).  Ch|4st  has  "  all  power  in  heaven  and  in 
earth,"  and  he  will  assuredly  be  "a  hiding-place  from  the  wind  and  a  covert  from 
the  tempest."  1.  Because  of  Ms  love  to  them.  2.  Because  of  his  regard  for  his 
kingdom,  to  which  they  belong,  and  which  they  represent.  3.  Because  of  his  express 
and  faithful  promise.  "  Fear  not."  If  the  worst  that  can  befall  them  should 
happen,  even  then 

"  Then,  Saviour,  art  their  charmed  Bower, 
Their  magic  £ing,  their  Bock,  their  Tower."  IX 

Vers.  1,2. — The  cave  of  Advllam.  David  knew  well  that  he  could  nevermore  lire 
in  safety  at  tlie  court  of  Saul.  He  would  not  raise  a  hand  against  his  king  and 
father-in-law,  but  he  would  not  place  himself  again  within  his  reach.  Better  a  free 
life  even  in  deserts  and  caves  of  the  earth  than  a  life  in  constant  peril  in  ceiled 
houses.     Behold  him  then  in  the  cave  of  AduUam. 

I.  The  captain  op  the  eefuqees.  No  question  arises  here  respecting  the  right 
of  revolt  against  a  perverse,  tyrannical  king.  We  entirely  believe  in  such  a  right, 
because  the  king  exists  for  the  good  of  the  people,  not  the  people  for  the  service  of 
the  king.  We  have  no  misgiving  as  to  the  right  of  the  British  nation  to  rid  itself 
of  King  James  II.,  or  that  of  the  people  in  the  kingdom  of  the  Two  Sicilies  to  drive 
away  King  Francis  II.  But  the  case  of  Saul's  royalty  over  Israel  was  unique.  The 
people  had  chosen  him  by  acclamation,  and  there  was  no  proof  as  yet  that  the  mass 
of  the  people  wished  to  dethrone  him.  Even  if  they  had  so  wished,  David  was  not 
the  man  to  lead  their  revolt ;  for  it  was  one  of  the  tests  of  his  fitness  for  the  suc- 
cession that  he  should  not  snatch  at  the  honour  to  which  he  was  destined,  but  wait 
the  evolution  of  the  Divine  purpose,  recognising  God  only  as  the  true  and  absolute 
King  of  Israel.  Therefore,  what  he  did  at  this  period  was  simply  for  preservation 
of  himself  and  his  relatives.  The  times  were  "  out  of  joint,"  and  he  had  no  pro- 
tection of  law  or  civil  order  against  the  mad  suspicions  of  the  king.  So  he  took 
refuge  in  a  cavern,  waiting  for  God  and  hoping  in  his  word.  The  hero  raised  no 
standard  of  revolt,  and  drew  no  followers  by  prospect  of  plunder  or  revenge.  Yet 
he  did  draw  hundreds  of  the  men  of  Israel  to  his  place  of  refuge.  These  must  not 
be  likened  to  the  riotous  and  desperate  followers  of  Catiline,  or  even  to  the  "  empty 
persons"  who  attached  themselves  to  Jephthah.  Doubtless  there  may  have  been 
among  the  young  men  some  who  were  more  adventurous  than  devout,  and  cared  for 
their  leader's  sword  and  spear  more  than  for  his  psalms ;  but  they  were  in  general 
young  men  of  patriotic  temper  who  had  suffered  damage  through  the  misrule  of  the 
time,  and  found  the  public  disorder  and  tyranny  intolerable.  They  turned  their 
wistful  eyes  towards  one  who  had  borne  himself  wisely  in  the  station  he  had  occu- 
pied, and  from  whom  they  hoped  for  a  just  and  prudent  administration  of  public 
affairs.  There  are  parallels  to  this  position  in  the  history  of  other  nations ;  but  most 
worthy  of  our  thought  is  the  parallel  of  the  great  Son  of  David,  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  When  he  was  a  young  man  in  Galilee  the  people  were  distressed  under  their 
rulers.  The  civil  government  was  oppressive ;  the  religious  surveillance  by  the 
chief  priests  and  elders  was  worse.  Heavy  burdens  were  imposed  without  pity, 
and  grievous  abuses  of  power  and  office  were  committed.  The  eyes  of  many  had 
failed  them,  looking  long  for  a  deliverer  who  should  be  the  Consolation  of  IsraeL 
Then  appeared  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  raising  no  standard  of  revolt,  indeed  refusing  to 
be  made  a  king  by  the  voice  of  the  multitude,  while  himself  under  the  evident  dis- 
pleasure  of  the  luthorities,  and  exposed  to  frequent  risks  of  arrest  and  death.  But 
to  him  followers  repaired,  and  they  were  welcome.     Jesus  called  to  him  the  Iftboor- 


BH.  xxn.  1—23,]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  421 

Ing  and  heaTy-laden,  He  had  powerful  attraction  for  all  who  were  distreased.  And 
from  the  day  when  he  took  up  a  position  apart  from  the  rulers  of  the  Jews,  though 
he  headed  no  movement  of  resiatance,  it  became  more  and  more  obvious  that  those 
mlers  had  lost  the  favour  of  Jehovah,  and  had  nothing  before  them  but  thickening 
disaster  and  a  final  collapse  of  their  power  like  that  of  Saul  on  Mount  Gilboa,  The 
only  hope  of  Israel  thenceforth  was  with  and  in  the  de'spised  and  rejected  One  who 
had  been  born  in  David's  city  and  of  David's  line.  So  it  is  still.  It  is  Jesus  Christ, 
as  rejected  of  men,  bumbled,  crucified,  who  appeals  to  human  hearts.  Who  will  go 
out  to  him,  "  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach  "  ?  Who  will  repair  to  him  at 
the  cave  of  Adullam  ?  Not  the  proud,  nor  the  thoughtless,  nor  the  self-satisfied ; 
but  the  distressed,  the  ruined,  and  the  bereaved  will  go ;  and  over  such  he  is  willing 
to  be  Captain.  Let  them  como  to  him,  and  his  life  is  thenceforward  bound  up  with 
theirs,  and  theirs  with  his.  With  him  they  are  "in  safeguard"  till  the  end  of  the 
tribulation ;  and  when  the  King  appears  in  hia  great  power  these  will  appear  with 
him  in  glory ;  the  triala  of  Adullam  more  than  recompensed  by  the  joys  of  New 
Jerusalem. 

II.  The  position  of  separation.  When  is  it  justified  ?  David  and  his  followers 
went  apart  from  the  common  life  of  their  countrymen,  and  renounced  all  idea  of 
rendering  service  or  occupying  any  post  of  honour  under  Saul.  Jesus  Christ  and  his 
disciples  broke  with  the  course  of  the  Jewish  and  Galilean  world  in  which  they  lived, 
and  took  up  a  position  quite  aloof  from  the  priests,  elders,  and  scribes.  What  is  the 
duty  of  modem  Christians  towards  the  society  around  them  ?  Are  they  to  come  out 
and  be  separate  ?  Some  persons  have  almost  a  craze  for  separation,  and  support  it 
on  this  story  of  Adullam.  They  hold  it  to  be  the  duty  of  Christians  to  stand  aloof 
from  all  the  existing  order  of  things,  and  all  the  plans  and  occupations  of  society ; 
to  accept  no  ofBce  in  the  State,  and  be  subject  to  the  powers  that  be  only  in  the 
sense  in  which  David  continued  subject  to  Saul ;  and  to  come  out  from  all  organised 
historical  Churches,  on  the  ground  that  they  contain  worldly  elements  and  principles, 
and  are  therefore  impure  and  ready  to  perish.  All  this  seems  to  us  extravagant  in 
theory  and  uncharitable  in  spirit.  Separation  from  evil  does  not  mean  alienation 
from  every  place  and  every  institution  in  which  a  fault  can  be  found.  For  good 
men  to  hold  aloof  from  public  afEairs  is  simply  to  play  into  the  hands  of  evil-doers ; 
and  to  separate  from  every  Church  that  has  a  faulty  element  in  it  is  to  disintegrate 
Christian  society,  and  miserably  embitter  it  in  the  process.  But  we  must  hold  the 
balance  true.  It  may  be  one's  duty  to  separate  himself  from  institutions  of  both 
Church  and  State  under  which  he  was  born.  As  to  civil  institutions,  this  is  plain 
enough.  As  to  ecclesiastical  relations,  tliere  are  critical  times  when,  as  it  was  right 
for  Israelites  to  separate  from  Saul  and  go  over  to  David,  so  it  has  been  and  is  right 
for  Christians  to  withdraw  from  positions  which  thoy  could  not  correct  or  amend, 
and  go  over  to  some  simpler  and  purer  expression  of  their  faith  and  hope.  On  this 
ground  we  justify  without  hesitation  the  erection  of  reformed  Churches  in  the 
sixteenth  century  apart  from  the  unreformed.  The  Papal  system  had  a  long  trial, 
and  was  found  wanting.  Such  men  as  Wicklifle,  Savonarola,  and  Husa  tried  to 
correct  its  errors  and  rouse  a  new  spirit  within  its  pale,  just  as  David  played  on  his 
harp  to  cure  the  mania  of  King  Saul.  It  was  labour  lost.  That  which  was  evil 
grew  worse.  The  tyranny  which  hung  over  Western  Christendom  became  intoler- 
able. Then  they  did  wisely  and  well  who  threw  off  the  yoke  and  began  afresh, 
with  the  word  of  God  for  their  directory,  and  the  Son  of  God,  who  became  Son  of 
David,  for  their  Captain.  On  the  same  ground  we  justify  those  who  now-vdays 
break  away  from  the  same  Papal  infallible,  and  therefore  incurable,  system  to  join  or 
to  organise  a  reformed  Church,  And  we  add  that  those  who  do  so  in  a  Roman  Catholic 
country,  like  Spain  or  Italy,  to  worship  with  some  small  evangelical  congregation 
in  a  hall,  mocked  and  despised,  show  a  courage  not  at  all  inferior  to  that  of  the 
four  hundred  who  defied  the  power  of  Saul,  and  flocked  around  David  in  the  cave  of 
Adullam.  Those  men  did  not  lift  their  swords  against  Saul.  David  did  not  desire 
them  to  do  so.  He  saw  something  still  to  honour  in  that  king,  and  knew  that  the 
throne  would  be  vacated  without  any  assistance  from  him.  So,  in  that  system  of 
infatuation  and  spiritual  tyranny  which  centres  at  Rome,  there  is  something  of  that 
common  Christianity  which  we  iiuist  reverence,  and  against  which  we  may  not  fight 


4ao  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [cH.  ixn.  1— 2t 

While  we  expose  its  errors,  let  ns  always  acknowledge  whatever  of  the  truth  of  God 
it  contains,  and  be  patient.  Ultimately  that  system  must  perish.  As  the  Philistines, 
and  not  the  followers  of  David,  made  an  end  of  Saul,  so  the  democratic  infidelity, 
not  the  reformed  Church,  is  likely  to  make  an  end  of  the  Papacy,  and  all  the  religions 
delusion  and  oppression  of  the  Latin  Church.  Happy  they  who  are  in  a  fellowship 
which  gives  them  direct  access  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  has  in  him  the  living  centre  and 
the  joy  of  all     O  Saviour,  draw  ns  to  thyself,  and  be  thou  a  Captain  over  us  I — F, 

Vers.  18-23.-Jfesacr«  and  safeguard.  '^t,-*"f  %l"*,ff  n  °*i  *''«  P""'/!? 
groups  itself  about  four  men:  (1)  the  furious  '^'"S!  (2)  the  cruel  officer;  (3) 
the  innocent  priest ;  (4)  the  self-reproaching  hero. 

I.  Saul  and  his  mad  ttbanny.  How  much  allowance  may  be  made  for  actual 
insanity  in  the  king  God  only  knows.  But  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  disorder 
of  his  mind  was  largely  due  to  his  own  indulgence  of  fierce  and  arrogant  passions, 
and  his  wilful  refusal  to  obey  the  commands  of  the  Lord  and  the  guidance  of  his 
prophet.  He  had  now  become  quite  furious  in  his  jealousy  of  David  and  in  his 
suspicion  of  all  around  him  as  plotting  his  downfall.  Unable  to  capture  David,  he 
turned  fiercely  on  those  whom  he  supposed  to  be  aiding  and  abetting  him  in  rebellion ; 
and  the  homicidal  mania  which  he  had  already  betrayed  in  hurling  his  javelin  at 
David,  and  even  at  Jonathan,  now  broke  out  against  the  innocent  priests.  When  one 
begins  to  indulge  a  bad  passion,  how  little  he  can  tell  the  length  to  which  it  may 
carry  him  1  We  remember  how  Saul  at  the  outset  of  his  reign  would  not  have  a  man 
in  Israel  put  to  death  on  his  account.  But  now  he  had  no  pity  on  the  innocent. 
Nothing  can  be  more  shocking  than  the  hardness  of  heart  which  disregarded  the  noble 
defence  of  the  priests  against  unjust  accusation,  and  condemned  them  and  their 
families  to  immediate  death.  By  this  Saul  forfeits  all  claim  to  our  sympathy.  He 
is  a  bloodstained  tyrant.  Nero  on  his  accession  to  the  imperial  dignity  at  Rome 
showed  a  similar  reluctance  to  sign  a  legal  sentence  of  death  on  a  criminal,  and  yet 
broke  forth  into  horrid  cruelty  at  the  age  of  seventeen.  Saul  was  not  so  precocious 
m  cruelty,  and  seems  to  have  been  free  from  other  vices  that  made  Nero  infamous. 
But  it  should  be  considered,  on  the  other  hand,  that  Saul  had  knowledge  of  Jehovah, 
while  Nero  knew  only  the  gods  of  Rome  ;  and  that  though  Nero  had  a  great  teacher 
in  Seneca,  Saul  had  a  still  greater  in  Samuel.  There  is  no  palliation  of  his  conduct 
admissible  unless  on  the  plea  of  disease  of  the  brain — an  excuse  which  may  also  be 
advanced  in  behalf  of  such  wretches  as  Antiochua  Epiphanes  and  the  Emperor 
Caligula.  The  lesson  of  admonition  is  that  wickedness  has  horrible  abysses  unseen 
at  first.  Stop  short  at  the  beginnings  of  evil.  Check  your  peril,  calm  your  anger, 
correct  your  suspicions,  hold  back  your  hasty  javelin  ;  for  if  you  lose  self-control 
and  a  good  conscience  there  is  hardly  any  depth  of  injustice  and  infatuation  to 
which  you  may  not  fall. 

II.  DoEG  AND  HIS  EDTHLBSS  swoBD.  Cruel  masters  make  cruel  servants.  Tyrants 
never  lack  convenient  instruments.  Caligula,  Nero,  and  Domitian  had  favourites 
and  freed-men  ready  to  stimulate  their  jealous  passions  and  carry  out  their  merciless 
commands.  At  Saul's  elbow  stood  such  a  wretch,  Doeg  the  Edomite.  The  repeated 
mention  of  this  ofBcer's  extraction  seems  to  imply  that  he  was  actuated  by  the  here- 
ditary jealousy  of  Israel  which  filled  the  descendants  of  Esau,  and  took  a  malicious 
pleasure  in  widening  the  gulf  between  Saul  and  David  and  slaying  the  priests  of 
Israel's  God.  With  his  own  hand  he  cut  them  down,  when  the  Israelite  officers 
shrank  from  the  bloody  deed ;  and  no  doubt  it  was  he  who  executed  the  inhuman 
sentence  against  the  women  and  children  at  Nob,  and  smote  the  very  "  oxen,  asises, 
and  sheep  with  the  edge  of  the  sword."  Doeg  has  had  many  followers  in  those 
who  have  with  fiendish  relish  tortured  and  slain  the  servants  of  our  Lord  and  of  his 
Christ.  And  indeed  all  who,  without  raising  the  hand  of  violence,  take  part  with 
malicious  purpose  against  servants  of  God,  who  misrepresent  them  and  stab  their 
reputations,  are  of  one  spirit  with  this  Edomite  whose  memory  is  cursed. 

III.  Ahimblbch  in  his  integrity.  How  fine  the  contrast  between  the  calm 
bearing  of  the  chief  priest  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  unreasoning  fury  of  Saul  and 
truculent  temper  of  Doeg  on  the  other  1  How  straightforward  was  the  vindication 
of  Ahin'.elechl     If  Saul  had  not  been  blind  with  passion  he  must   have  seen  it* 


BH.  xxn.  1—23.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


481 


transparent  truth  and  noble  oandonr.  When  it  became  known  throngh  the  land  that 
Ahimeleoh  and  the  priests  had  been  killed  by  the  king's  order  on  a  mere  suspicion  ol 
disa£Eection  which  was  false,  a  thrill  of  horror  must  have  run  through  many  bosoms, 
and  those  who  feared  the  Lord  must  have  had  sore  misgiving  that  he  had  forsaken 
his  people  and  his  land.  Under  such  mishaps  in  later  times  similar  fears  have 
been  awakened.  Indeed  men  have  been  tempted  to  question  whether  there  be  any 
God  of  righteousness  and  truth  actually  governing  the  world  ;  for  the  virtuous  suffer, 
the  innocent  are  crushed,  might  overrules  right,  victory  seems  to  be  to  the  proud 
and  not  the  lowly.  It  is  useless  to  deny  that  there  are  strange  defeats  of  goodness 
and  truth,  and  that  blows  fall  on  heads  that  seem  least  to  deserve  them.  All  that  we 
can  do  is  to  cleave  to  our  belief,  firm  on  its  own  grounds,  that  God  is,  and  to  say 
that  the  calamities  complained  of  have  his  permission  for  some  good  ends  in  his  far- 
reaching  purpose.  At  all  events  we  can  go  no  further  into  the  mystery  on  a  survey 
of  this  present  life.  But  there  is  another,  and  in  it  lies  the  abundant  recompense  for 
present  wrongs.  It  seems  strange  that  a  life  so  precious  as  that  of  Paul  should  have 
been  assailed,  bruised,  and  finally  taken  by  violence  for  no  crime,  but  for  the  name 
of  Jesus.  But  Paul  himself  has  given  us  some  clue  to  the  compensation :  "  our  light 
afSiction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal 
weight  of  glory."  Ahimelech  and  the  priests,  we  may  be  sure,  though  they  suffered 
not  directly  for  Christ,  but  on  account  of  his  human  ancestor,  lost  nothing,  but  gained 
much,  by  forfeiting  their  lives  in  innocence. 

IV.  David  and  his  self-befsoach.  News  of  this  massacre  must  have  shocked  all 
.thoughtful  men  in  Israel,  and  deepened  the  distrust  with  which  Saul  was  now  regarded. 
David,  when  he  heard  of  it,  felt,  besides  horror  and  indignation,  a  bitter  pang  of  self- 
reproach.  It  was  he  who  had  played  on  the  simplicity  of  the  priests  at  Nob,  and  so 
had  given  occasion  to  Doeg  to  accuse  them.  Would  that  he  had  gone  without  bread, 
whatever  the  consequence  to  himself,  rather  than  have  exposed  so  many  innocent 
persons  to  such  a  cruel  fate  1  And  now  the  horrid  deed  was  done,  and  quite  past 
remedy.  What  a  lesson  against  crafty  strokes  and  plausible  pretexts  t  One  may 
gain  his  point  at  the  time  by  such  devices,  but  after  consequences  little  expected 
may  fall  on  some  innocent  head ;  and  surely  there  is  no  sting  so  sharp  in  the  con- 
science of  an  honourable  man  as  the  feeling  that,  for  his  own  safety  or  interest,  he  has 
misled  his  own  friends,  and  unwittingly  brought  disaster  on  them.  We  can  believe 
that  David,  on  hearing  what  Abiathar  told  him,  was  bowed  down  with  shame  such 
as  he  never  yet  had  needed  to  feel.  In  this  respect  he  failed  to  typify  Christ.  Our 
Lord  had  no  self-reproach  to  bear.  He  never  had  recourse  to  subterfuge,  and  no 
guile  was  found  in  his  mouth.  Those  who  have  suffered  for  his  sake  have  not  been 
led  into  the  risk  of  death  unwittingly.  It  was  of  some  comfort  to  David  that  he 
could  give  protection  to  Abiathar.  "  He  that  seeketh  my  lifeseeketh  thy  life."  We 
have  a  common  enemy.  Thy  life  is  in  peril  on  my  account ;  therefore  stay  with 
me ;  "  thou  shalt  be  in  safeguard."  Here  we  do  seem  to  hear  the  voice  of  Christ  in 
a  figure.  "  If  the  world  hate  you,  ye  know,"  &c.  (John  xv.  18 — 20).  Our  Lord 
-gives  his  people  safeguard  with  himself.  "  Abide  in  me."  "  Continue  in  my  love." 
Such  words  are  dear  to  mourners.  As  David  gave  to  Abiathar  immediate  and  sym- 
pathetic attention,  so  the  Son  of  David  hearkens  at  once  to  those  who  repair  to  him 
with  the  tale  of  their  mishap  and  grief.  He  will  take  them  all  under  the  guarantee 
of  his  faithful  safeguard.  Whatever  solace  it  is  possible  to  have  in  this  world  they 
tave  who  abide  with  him      And  no  one  can  pluck  them  out  of    is  hand. — F. 


EXPOSITION. 
Advkntoem  Of  David  at  Eeilah  and  in  thb  Wudbknuss  oj  Ziph  (oh.  xxin.). 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

David  ebscubs  Keilah,  but  has  to 
■scape  from  the  trbaohbkt  of  its  in- 
HABITANTS (vers._l — 13).  Ver.l.— They 
told  David,  kc 


The  return  of  David  into 


his  own  land  was  quickly  followed  by  ex- 
ploits which  not  only  increased  his  power, 
but  turned  the  eyea  of  all  the  people  towards 
him  as  their  protector.  His  first  snccesB 
was  the  delivemnce  of  the  city  of  Keilah 
iK.m  a  body  of  Philistines  who  were  plan- 


4M 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  xxiii.  1 — IS. 


ierlng  It  of  the  produce  of  its  harvest.  .This 
place  lay  a  few  miles  south  of  the  strong- 
hold of  Adullam,  and  itself  occupied  a  de- 
fensible position,  being  perched  on  a  steep 
hill  OTerlooking  the  valley  of  Elah,  not  far 
from  the  thickets  of  Hareth  (Conder,  '  Tent 
Work,'  ii.  88).  Being  thus  at  no  great  dis- 
tance from  the  Philistine  border,  a  band  of 
men  started  thence  on  a  foray  for  th#  purpose 
of  robbing  the  threshing-floors.  As  no  rain 
falls  in  Palestine  in  the  harvest  season  (ch. 
xii  17),  the  com  is  threshed  out  in  the  open 
air  by  a  heavy  wooden  sledge  made  of  two 
boards,  and  curved  up  in  front,  with  pieces  of 
basalt  inserted  for  teeth,  drawn  over  it  by 
horses,  or  it  is  trampled  out  by  cattle.  Con- 
der ('  Tent  Work,^  ii  259)  describes  the 
threshing-floor  as  "a  broad  flat  space  on 
open  ground,  generally  high.  Sometmies  the 
floor  is  on  a  flat  rocky  hill-top,  and  occasion- 
ally it  is  in  an  open  valley,  down  which 
there  is  a  current  of  air ;  but  it  is  always 
situated  where  most  wind  can  be  found,  be- 
cause at  the  threshing  season  high  winds 
never  occur,  and  the  grain  is  safely  stored 
before  the  autumn  storms  commence."  As 
the  grain  after  winnowing  is  made  into  heaps 
nntU  it  can  be  carried  home,  there  is  always 
a  period  when  the  threshiug-floors  have  to 
be  watched  to  guard  them  from  depredation, 
and  this  was  the  time  chosen  by  the  Philis- 
tines for  a  foray  in  force. 

Vers.  2 — 5. — David  enquired  of  Jehovah. 
This  seems  to  show  that  Abiathar  was  already 
with  David,  as  the  prophet  Gad  had  no 
ephod,  and  at  this  time,  and  for  a  consider- 
able period  subsequently,  the  usual  way  of 
eonsmting  God  was  by  the  Urim  and  Thum- 
mim  (see  ver.  6).  Though  the  answer  was 
a  command  to  go,  yet  David's  men  hesi- 
tated ;  not  that  they  had  any  doubt  of  the 
immediate  result,  but,  regarding  Saul  as  their 
most  dangerous  enemy,  they  were  unwilling 
to  embroil  themselves  also  with  the  Fhilis- 
tine&  They  argue.  We  be  afraid  here  in 
Judah :  why  then  should  we  close  the  Philis- 
tine territory  against  us  by  attacking  their 
armies  1  Hebrew,  "ranks,"  men  disciplined 
and  drawn  up  in  array  (see  ch.  zviL  22).  In 
order  to  remove  these  prudential  doubts, 
David  again  consults'  God,  and  being  a  second 
time  encouraged  to  undertake  the  rescue  of 
Eeilah,  proceeds  thither  with  his  men.  This 
attack,  being  unexpected,  was  entirely  suc- 
cessfuL  The  Philistines  were  driven  back 
with  great  slaughter,  and  David  brought 
aw&y  their  cattle.  The  word  siguL&es 
"  small  cattle,"  such  as  sheep  and  goats. 
Besides  robbing  the  threshing-floors,  the 
Philistines  apparently  had  been  driving  off 
the  flocks  from  the  neighbouring  pastures. 
Both  Hareth,  where  David  and  his  men 
had  lain  hid  in  the  thickets  (ch.  xxiL  5), 
and  Eeilah  were  in  the  tribe  of  Jqdah,  in  the 


sonthem  portion  of  the  ShepheUh  (Josh.  zr. 
44). 

Yer.  6.  — When  Abiathar  .  .  .  fled  ta 
Oavid  to  Eeilah,  he  came  down  with  an 
ephod  in  his  hand.  Literally,  "  an  ephod 
came  down  in  his  hand,"  and  so,  word  for 
word,  the  Syriac.  The  object  of  this  verse 
is  to  explain  how  it  was  that  David  (in  vera. 
2  and  4)  was  able  to  inquire  of  Jehovah. 
The  words  to  Keilah  —  Hebrew,  Keilah- 
wards— do  not  mean  that  it  was  at  Eeilah 
that  Abiathar  joined  David,  but  that  he 
came  in  time  to  go  thither  with  him.  In 
ch.  zzii  20  it  seems  as  if  Abiathar  must 
have  joined  David  even  at  an  earlier  date, 
for  he  is  represented  as  fleeing  to  him  imme- 
diately after  the  massacre  of  the  priests  at 
Nob.  Now,  granting  that  David's  stay  at 
Gath  with  Achish  was  very  brief,  he  must 
have  remained  at  Adullam  a  considerable 
time,  inasmuch  as  men  joined  him  there  in 
large  numbers  (ch.  zxii.  2),  which  seems 
to  show  that  his  hiding-place  had  become 
generally  known.  It  was  probably  this  con- 
conrse  of  men  to  him  that  was  "discovered," 
i.  e.  made  known,  to  Saul,  and,  as  being  an 
act  of  formal  revolt,  so  raised  his  ire.  As 
being  supposed  to  be  in  -league  with  David, 
Saul  put  the  priests  to  death,  and  Abiathar 
fled ;  but  probably  the  news  of  this  terrible 
act  had  already  reached  David,  and,  id 
anxiety  about  his  father  and  mother,  he  had 
gone  to  find  refuge  for  them  in  Moab. 
Thither  Gad  follows  him,  bringing  prophetic 
approval  of  his  conduct,  but  ordering  him  to 
return  into  the  territory  of  his  own  tribe.  If 
then  David  was  on  his  way  to  Moab  when 
Abiathar  reached  Adullam,  he  may  have 
remained  in  hiding  there  till  David's  return 
to  the  thickets  of  Hareth.  But,  possibly, 
even  before  Abiathar  joined  him  the  news 
may  have  arrived  of  the  Philistine  foray,  and 
David's  mind  was  set  Keilah-wards.  But 
there  were  those  who  doubted  of  the  pru- 
dence of  this  proceeding,  and  Abiathar's 
arrival  with  the  ephod  enabled  him  to  con- 
sult Jehovah's  wuL  By  his  presence  also 
David  had  now  the  approval  of  the  priest- 
hood. 

Vers.  7,  8. — It  was  well-nigh  a  hopeless 
matter  to  hunt  David  as  long  as  he  remained 
on  the  borders  of  the  desert  of  Judah,  but 
once  shut  up  in  a  town  his  capture  was  in- 
evitable. When  Saul,  therefore,  heard  that 
David  was  at  Eeilah,  he  said,  God  hath  de- 
livered him  into  my  hand.  The  Syriac, 
Chaldee,  and  Vulgate  translate  in  the 
same  way,  probably  as  the  nearest  equiva- 
lent to  the  Hebrew,  while  the  Septuagint 
has  a  different  reading— «oM.  The  Hebrew 
phrase  ia  a  very  strong  one ;  literally,  "  God 
hath  ignored  him,"  hath  treated  him  as  ■ 
stranger,  and  so  let  him  fall  "into  my 
hand."    Possibly  Saul's  metaphor  was  taken 


OH.  xxin.  1 — 13.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


48t 


from  the  popular  language,  and  no  attempt 
should  be  mads  to  get  rid  of  unusual  expres- 
sions, as  if  they  were  false  readings.  By 
entering  into  a  town  that  hath  gates  and 
bars.  Either  the  people  of  a  waUed  town 
would  give  up  David  rather  than  expose 
tiemselves  to  the  horrors  of  a  siege  (2  Sam. 
XX.  21,  22),  or,  if  they  stood  by  him,  its 
capture  would  be  a  mere  matter  of  time. 
David,  it  seems,  would  have  run  the  risk, 
but  happily  was  prevented. 

Vers.  9  — 13.  —  Saul  secretly  practised 
mischief.  This  phrase  is  correctly  trans- 
lated "  devised  evil  "  in  Prov.  iii.  29 ;'  xiv. 
22.  There  is  no  idea  of  secrecy  in  the 
Hebrew  verb,  which  literally  means  "to 
work  in  metals,"  "  to  forge."  Saul's  pur- 
pose was  open  enough,  and  when  David 
heard  of  it  he  tells  Abiathar  to  bring  the 
ephod,  and  then  offers  earnest  prayer  to 
God  for  counsel  and  advice.  In  nis  prayer 
hia  two  questions  are  put  inversely  to  the 


logical  order,  Imt  In  accordance  with  theli 
relative  importance  in  David's  mind,  and  n« 
ground  exists  for  altering  the  text.  But 
when  the  ephod  was  brought  forward  the 
questions  were  of  course  put  in  their  lomoal 
sequence.  To  the  first  question,  "  Will 
Saul  come  down  to  besiege  Keilah ! "  the 
answer  was,  "He  will."  To  the  second, 
"  Will  the  citizens  of  Keilah  deliver  me  and 
my  men  into  the  hand  of  Saul  ? "  the  answer 
also  was,  "  They  wilL"  Whereupon  he  and 
his  followers,  now  increased  to  600  men, 
withdrew,  and  went  whithersoever  they 
could  go.  Literally,  "they  went  about 
whither  they  went  about,"  i.  e.  without  any 
fixed  plan,  as  chance  or  their  necessities 
dictated.  As  David  was  once  again  at  large, 
Saul  had  no  longer  any  reason  for  besieging 
Keilah,  especially  as  its  citizens  had  pre- 
ferred his  side,  as  that  of  the  more  powerful, 
to  gratitude  for  the  safety  of  their  liyat  end 
property. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vera.  1 — 6. — Deferenee  to  the  Divine  will.  The  facte  m»— 1.  David,  being  to- 
formed  of  the  inroads  of  the  Philistines  against  Keilah,  seeks  counsel  of  God.  1, 
Being  directed  to  go  against  them,  he  finds  his  men  in  doubt  of  the  safety  of  the 
enterprise.  3.  Hence,  to  satisfy  them  he  makes  further  inquiry  of  the  Lord,  and  is 
again  directed  to  go,  with  promise  of  victory.  Acting  on  these  instructions,  he  saves 
Keilah.  The  moral  degeneracy  of  Saul  seems  to  have  been  accompanied  with  some 
degree  of  inefficiency  of  government,  by  reason  of  which  portions  of  the  country 
were  still  exposed  to  incursions  of  the  Philistines.  The  subsequent  conduct  of 
Keilah,  bad  enough  as  it  was  in  itself  (ver.  12),  would  lead  us  to  infer  that  the 
people  who  sought  David's  interposition  were  patriotic  men  not  resident  in  the  city. 
Possibly  David's  reputation  for  energy  and  courage  had  been  sustained  of  late  by 
the  manner  in  which  he  had  developed  his  few  resources  in  defence  against  the  wiles 
and  force  of  his  personal  foe,  and  hence  it  would  be  natural  for  oppressed  neigh- 
bours to  seek  his  aid  on  an  emergency.  The  narrative  relates  how  he  met  the  demand 
on  his  intervention,  and  with  what  result.  It  brings  out  a  fine  truth  bearing  on  both 
public  and  private  liEe. 

I,  The  habit  of  defeeenck  to  the  Divine  will  is  a  nbcessabt  and  valuablbi 
ELEMENT  IN  LIFE.  It  is  remarkable  how,  without  choice  of  his  own,  David  had  been 
.  forced  into  a  position  of  isolation  and  danger.  There  perhaps  never  was  a  life, 
except  that  of  our  Saviour,  in  which  habitual  submission  to  a  supreme  will  was  more 
conspicuous.  The  critical  position  in  which  he  found  himself  when  urged  to  make 
•var  on  Philistine  plunderers  brought  out  into  more  public  view  a  condition  of  mind 
habitual  in  private  life.  His  unwillingness  to  take  the  step  without  being  sure  of 
the  will  of  God  was  a  revelation  to  those  who  sought  his  services  of  what  was  con- 
stant in  his  experience.  The  question  was  not,  Can  I  gain  wider  reputation,  or  win 
Israel  to  my  standard  ?  Is  it  the  will  of  God,  was  the  first  and  last  thought  Bavid'i 
conception  of  life  was  that  which  becomes  every  Christian.  Whether  our  lot  be  kingly 
or  lowly,  our  calling  public  or  private,  it  should  be  a  primary  thought  with  us  that 
God  has  a  will  of  his  own  as  to  what  manner  of  persons  we  ought  to  be,  and  what 
line  of  conduct  we  should  adopt  in  the  most  common  affairs  of  our  life ;  for  every 
action,  and  word,  and  spirit  possesses  in  God's  sight  a  moral  character  derived  from 
the  motive  in  which  it  originates  and  the  final  result  to  which  it  is  made  subservient. 
Our  great  business  is  to  form  an  estimate,  by  a  study  of  God's  character  and  provi- 
dence and  of  our  own  position  and  capabilities,  of  what  he  would  regard  as  a  pure 
and  righteous  course,  and  then  striva,  as  demands  u«  mode  on  ns,  to  translate  that 

lUM.  »» 


484  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh,  xxin,  1—18, 

into  onr  actual  deeds  and  temper.  There  is  abundant  scope  for  this  habitual  defer- 
ence to  God's  will  in  the  demands  which  come  upon  us  from  all  quarters.  By  reason 
of  the  strong  interaction  of  various  tendencies  within  us,  and  the  opposing  claims  of 
what  seem  to  be  benevolence  and  prudence,  we  may,  like  David,  find  ourselves  in  ar 
ambiguous  position,  and  it  is  at  such  junctures  especially  that  the  habitual  deferenca 
will  manifest  its  valuable  presence.  The  difference  between  a  really  good  man  and 
one  of  formal  godliness  comes  out  in  this,  that  the  one  always  feels  as  though 
another  and  higher  will  was  present  and  supreme  over  his  own,  while  the  other  only 
thinks  of  that  superior  will  on  special  occasions  when  paiiifi;!  events  fill  him  with 
fear.  This  habitual  deference  is  partly  owing  to  the  fact  that  a  correct  view  is  taken 
of  life.  David  understood  his  vocation  in  the  world.  He  had  h  part  to  perform  in 
the  great  Messianic  purpose.  Although  his  vision  of  the  future  unfoJdings  of  that 
purpose,  varying  in  distinctness  at  different  periods  (Ps.  ii. ;  cf.  Ps.  Ixxii.),  was  not 
of  details,  yet  he  had  faith  enough  in  its  reality  and  grandeur  to  induce  the  con- 
viction that  every  step  of  his  daily  course  was  in  some  way  associated  with  its 
realisation.  And  in  like  manner  the  humblest  Christian  is  permitted  to  believe  that 
he  has  a  similar  vocation  in  the  world,  as  a  member  of  Christ's  mystical  body. 
Hence  we,  as  members  of  Christ's  body,  have  no  raison  cPitre  apart  from  habitual 
deference  to  the  will  of  Christ.  And  as,  by  the  varied  experience  of  life,  this  defer- 
ence deepens,  so  its  effect  on  our  general  character  is  more  conspicuous.  It  induces 
a  sobriety  of  judgment,  for  haste  and  rashness  are  due  to  self-will;  it  creates  a 
refined  susceptibility  of  spirit  by  which  moral  perfections  are  quickened  and  the 
existence  of  evil  is  discerned  from  afar;  and  it  gives  zest  and  carefulness  in  use  of 
means  to  ascertain,  in  cases  of  diflSculty,  what  is  the  perfect  will  of  God. 

II.  The  manifest  approval  of  God  in  ant  case  of  difficulty  oe  febil  is  an  all- 
sufficient  ENCOUBAGBMENT  TO  A  BINCEEB  MAN.  David's  position  was  still  One  of 
embarrassment  and  danger.  He  was  potentially  king,  but  could  not  avow  it.  He 
was  loyal  to  Saul,  though  strongly  tempted  by  his  persecutions  to  rise  in  open 
rebellion.  He  was  assured  by  the  anointing  and  by  Samuel's  sanction  and 
encouragement  that  a  great  future  was  awaiting  him,  and  yet,  like  many  since 
his  time,  he  had  to  bear  all  the  pains  and  sorrows  of  the  outcast.  The  agony 
of  feeling  expressed  in  the  Psalms  can  be  understood  only  as  we  remember  his 
call  to  a  holy  work  and  the  consciousness  of  innocence.  The  recent  experience 
at  Nob  caused  him  to  feel  how  incidentally  others  might  be  compromised  in 
his  procedure,  even  when  undertaking  useful  service.  But  all  fear,  all  sorrow, 
every  feeling  of  uneasiness  as  to  consequences,  disappeared  when  God  recognised 
him  by  an  answer  to  the  official  inquiry  of  Gad  or  Abiathar.  The  fact  of  the 
inquiry  on  his  behalf  is  very  important  (Num.  xxvii.  18 — 21 ;  Judges  xx.  26 — 28). 
That  one  or  both  of  these  after  the  slaughter  of  Nob  sought  counsel  for  David  was  a 
declaration  in  most  emphatic  form  that  he  was  the  coming-  king.  God  thus  by  his 
servants  openly  sanctioned  him,  and  hence  his  soul  was  encouraged  to  brave  any 
danger,  to  bear  any  consequences,  so  long  as  God  approved  (Ps.  Ivi.  11).  It  is  the 
assured  approval  of  God,  obtained  in  diverse  ways  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
case,  that  emboldens  Christians  in  courses  of  extreme  difficulty  and  peril.  _  The 
apostles  feared  not  Jewish  or  Roman  power  when  they  had,  after  the  ascension  of 
Christ,  received  the  inward  and  outward  testimony  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  the  Divine 
character  of  the  cause  they  professed.  The  same  spirit  is  created  in  others  when 
caUed  to  go  forth  to  heathen  lands,  or  to  wage  war  with  jEearful  evils  at  home.  Let 
the  youth,  the  sire,  the  statesman,  the  parent,  the  merchant,  and  the  pastor  only  hear 
the  word  "  go,"  at  once  the  soul  may  take  courage  and  assert  its  strength. 

III.  The  means  by  which  God  affobds  guidancb  to  his  people  vary  in  different 
AGES.  David  now  is  guided  in  his  public  capacity  as  the  coming  king  by  prophet  or 
by  priest  using  the  ephod.  As  a  private  man  he  depended  for  the  ordinary  course 
of  life  on  the  more  private  and  unexpressed  guidance  which  God  insures  to  all  his 
faithful  children.  'The  means  by  which  his  public  course  was  directed  were  unlike 
the  more  ancient  and  the  more  modem.  From  the  beginning  of  human  history  we  have 
to  distinguish  between  the  communications  which  God  may  have  given  to  men  for 
their  personal  comfort  and  use  and  that  which  was  designed  to  reveal  the  fact  of  hia 
purposes  of  mercy  to  the  world  and  gradually  unfold  their  scope,  although  in  lom* 


OB.  xxra.  1—18.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  430 

instances,  as  in  the  case  of  Abraham  (Qen.  xv.  1),  the  personal  and  general  might 
coincide.  The  guidance  granted  to  the  patriarchs  for  the  unfolding  of  the  redemp- 
tive purposes  was  chiefly  in  form  of  visible  or  audible  manifestations,  a  method  well 
■uited  to  a  primitive  life  without  religious  literature,  precedents,  fixed  regulations, 
and  oflScial  teachers,  and  needing  greatly,  in  the  midst  of  visible  surroundings  and 
material  tendencies,  to  be  impressed  with  the  reality  of  the  unseen  power.  To  Israel 
in  the  desert  the  guidance  and  spiritual  impressment  was  given  by  the  visible  pillar 
of  cloud  and  of  fire,  and  by  the  stupendous  signs  on  Mount  Sinai  which  accompanied 
the  communications  to  Moses  for  their  benefit.  The  Urim  and  Thummim  of  the 
high  priest  were  chiefly  employed  during  the  years  subsequent  to  Moses,  thus 
largely  dispensing  with  the  irregular  visible  display.  In  the  prophets  Samuel,  Gad, 
and  others  after  them  a  more  spiritual  method  came  into  use,  God  making  known  his 
will  to  the  people  by  some  spiritual  manifestation  to  or  elevation  of  the  prophet's 
spirit.  In  Christian  times  the  personal  prophetic  medium  reached  its  culmination  in 
Christ  and  his  apostles,  who,  out  of  the  fulness  of  the  Spirit  that  dwelt  in  them,  gave 
forth  such  teaching  and  guidance  in  action  as  the  Church  required.  Thus  in  divers 
manners  God  has  spoken  for  the  guidance  of  the  Church.  We  have  to  consult  the 
"  living  oracles  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  16)  for  our  guidance  as  a  Church  of  Christ  in  reference 
to  the  general  principles  and  the  manifold  details  involved  in  establishing  "the 
kingdom  "  (Isa.  viii.  20 ;  John  v.  20 ;  Acts  xvii.  11).  As  individual  Christians,  besides 
acting  in  unison  as  a  Church  for  the  common  objects  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  we 
may  seek  guidance  daily  by  private  use  of  the  same  means  as  those  enjoyed  privately 
by  David. 
IV.  The  highest  qualities  of  thk  ebligioub  chabaotbb  may  be  associated  with 

THE  MOBE  ORDINARY  AND  PRACTICAL,  and  when  80  associated   THEY   GIVE  VALUE   AND 

COMPLETENESS  to  them.  It  is  a  too  frequent  belief  in  the  world  that  a  man  absorbed 
in  the  pursuit  of  the  highest  religious  vocation  and  distinguished  by  the  loftiest 
spiritual  aspirations,  such  as  are  revealed  in  the  Psalms  and  in  David's  life,  becomes 
thereby  one-sided  in  development,  and  fails  by  neglect  in  the  detailed  and  minor 
moralities  of  life.  A  saint  is  synonymous  with  a  moody,  unpractical  man,  too  mnch 
occupied  with  spiritual  realities  to  be  careful  of  little  things.  David's  conduct  in 
the  affairs  of  Keilah  is  a  refutation  of  this  false  conception.  The  narrative  brings 
out  his  full-orbed  religion,  and  in  this  he  may  be  considered  as  a  fit  representative 
of  the  well-developed  Christian.  1.  The  line  of  conduct  pursued  with  reference  to 
Keilah,  taken  in  historic  connection  with  his  call  to  service,  brings  out  a  remarkable 
combination  of  high  and  ordinary  qualities.  With  his  consciousness  of  high 
mission  was  joined  a  patient  endurance  of  bitter  trials  as  a  consequence  of  tiie 
very  position  to  which  Providence  was  calling  him.  Not  a  word  of  complaint 
and  distrust  escapes  his  lips  during  this  weary  hiding  from  his  foe,  although  in 
his  agony  he  was  constrained  to  cry,  "  How  long,  O  Lord  I "  Then  there  was  that 
beautiful  self-reserve,  lest  by  any  impetuous  act  he  should  seem  to  forestall  the 
ways  of  God  and  force  on  the  final  issue — as  seen  in  his  unwillingness  to  annoy  or 
embarrass  Saul  and  press  him  to  a  conflict  by  an  attack,  without  royal  commis- 
sion, on  the  Philistines.  This  following  and  not  going  before  appears  also  in  his 
using  the  oflScial  means  of  guidance  only  when  Providence  had  placed  them  clearly 
in  his  way,  and  not  by  privately  enticing  Gad  and  Abiathar  to  join  his  company. 
But  while  intent  on  these  high  spiritual  objects,  there  was  a  generous  disinterested- 
ness in  relieving  the  troubles  of  others,  even  at  a  time  when  his  own  sorrows  were 
multiplied,  for  he  spared  not  himself  when  Keilah  was  oppressed.  Nor  did  he  feel 
for  them  alone,  since  the  second  inquiry  of  the  Lord  (ver.  4)  was  evidently  dictated 
by  a  tender  consideration  for  men  whose  faith  was  unequal  to  his  own.  And, 
finally,  all  this  also  associated  with  a  wonderful  tenderness  for  his  personal  enemy, 
based  on  a  recognition  of  his  kingly  office,  and  more  so  on  pity  for  a  character  once 
hopeful,  but  now  fast  on  the  way  to  ruin.  Never,  perhaps,  were  the  precepts  of  the 
New  Testament  with  respect  to  personal  enemies  (Matt.  v.  38 — 44)  more  truly 
exemplified  in  combination  with  so  utter  a  detestation  of  the  sins  that  tended  to 
frustrate  the  spiritual  ends  for  which  Israel  existed  in  the  world.  2.  Taking,  then, 
the  conduct  of  David  and  the  special  qualities  indicated  therein  as  a  basis,  we  may 
tunvmarise  the  qualities  which  seem  to  enter  into  a  well-developed  religious  charader. 

F  F  2 


136  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oH.  zxm.  1—lt, 

(1)  Recognition  of  a  high  vocation  tn  life,  associated  with  Qod's  merciful  purposei 
toward  mankind.  No  man  is  great  whose  energies  do  not  in  their  results  aim  mt 
something  beyond  himself ;  nor  is  that  a  high  style  of  character  which  is  governed 
by  aspirations  terminating  with  the  material  and  temporal  wants  of  mankind.  As 
David  was  conscious  of  a  vocation  in  life  which  linked  his  whole  existence  with  the 
advancement  of  the  highest  spiritual  interests  of  the  world,  and  with  the  highest 
material  as  naturally  included  m  the  spiritual,  so  every  truly  religicns  man  believes 
and  rejoices  to  know  that  his  business  m  life  lies  outside  his  fleeting  earthly  occupa- 
tion and  possessions,  and  in  fact  coincides  with  that  for  which  Christ  came  into  the 
world.  What  tone  and  power  the  Church  would  have  in  the  world  if  all  her  mem- 
bers duly  realised  for  what  end  Christians  exist  I  A  lofty  ideal  always  gives  power 
and  elevation  to  actual  life ;  and  no  higher  ideal  can  be  set  before  us  than  that  which 
ia  the  normal  vocation  of  every  one  of  Christ's  disciples.  (2)  Submission,  to  God^s 
ways  and  times.  The  realisation  of  the  ideal  before  David  was  by  a  process  which 
seemed  to  run  counter  to  the  dictates  of  human  wisdom.  The  great  scope  of  a 
religious  ideal,  while  it  expands  the  intellect  and  fills  the  imagination  with  the  glow- 
ing colours  of  future  good,  also  makes  a  present  demand  on  the  more  sober  and  less 
brilliant  qualities  of  the  soul.  The  course  of  nature  and  the  progress  of  spiritual 
forces  are  determined  by  primary  principles  of  government  and  a  combination  of 
incidental  and  final  issues  which  in  their  entirety  are  comprehensible  alone  to  God, 
as,  indeed,  they  received  their  co-ordination  from  him.  A  mind  that  forms  a  just 
estimate  of  itself,  and  regards  the  outworking  of  the  powers  of  the  kingdom  of  God 
as  the  visible  index  of  an  infinite  secret,  will  bow  in  loving  submission  to  all  the 
methods  and  seasons  appointed  by  God  in  bringing  on  the  setting  of  his  Eling  on  the 
holy  hill  of  Zion.  (3)  Gowfidenee  in  God  in  spite  of  adverse  events.  The  key  to 
David's  life  when  fleeing  nom  cave  to  cave,  and  through  all  the  lowly  submission 
to  years  of  waiting,  was,  as  so  often  expressed  in  the  Psalms,  trust  im  the  Lord. 
The  trusting  power  of  our  nature  is  large,  but  unfortunately  has  been  injured  in  its 
development  by  the  suspicions  created  in  our  intercourse  with  untruthful,  selfish  men. 
There  is  a  danger  of  importing  this  impaired  confidence  from  the  secular  to  the 
spiritual  sphere,  and  practically  treating  God  as  though  he  were  one  of  us  (Jer.  xv. 
18).  There  is  a  spiritual  heroism  in  believing  in  God  against  hope  (Bom.  iv.  17 — 21 ; 
Heb.  xi.).  The  religious  trust  is  not  founded  on  knowledge  of  things,  either  as  to 
their  intrinsic  nature  or  their  correlation,  but  on  the  fact  that  God  is  over  all  and 
is  tTtte  to  his  word.  What  some  would  call  unreasoning  fanaticism  is  the  soul's 
rational,  loving  homage  to  the  wisdom  that  never  errs,  the  goodness  that  ever 
blesses,  and  the  power  that  works  all  things  to  its  own  ends.  History  justifies  the 
faith  of  God's  people.  "They  are  dead  which  sought  the  young  child's  life" 
(Matt.  ii.  20).  "He  shall  live,"  and  "upon  himself  shall  his  crown  flourish,"  was 
predicted  of  the  most  despised  and  reviled  (Ps.  Ixxii.  15 ;  cxxxii.  18 ;  Isa.  liii.  3)  ;  and, 
m  a  modified  sense,  it  will  hold  true  of  all  who  endure  and  are  faithful  to  the  end 
(Bev.  Hi.  21).  (4)  Kindliness  towards  the  weak  and  the  oppressed.  The  kindly  feel- 
ing which  prompted  an  efEort  to  save  Keilah,  although  not  personally  interested, 
and  which  sought  support  for  the  weak  faith  of  doubting  men  by  a  second  inquiry  of 
the  Lord  (vers.  2 — 4),  is  but  an  illustration  of  the  humane  spirit  of  true  religion 
when  properly  developed.  The  virtues  of  submission  and  confidence,  which  find 
exercise  toward  God  as  their  object,  are  supplemented  by  those  which  bear  on  the 
sorrows  of  men.  The  loftiest  spiritual  aspirations — of  the  severest  purity,  of  the 
widest  range  of  vision,  and  of  intensest  gaze  on  the  realisation  of  a  spiritual  salva- 
tion for  man — were  combined  in  Christ  with  the  tenderest  and  the  most  considerate 
regard  for  the  weaknesses  and  woes  of  men,  and  did,  directly  or  indirectly,  during 
a  brief  sojourn  on  earth,  more  than  anything  else  to  alleviate  temporal  suffer- 
ings and  finally  break  the  bonds  of  social  and  political  oppression  (Luke  iv.  18). 
3.  The  attainment  of_  this  well-developed  personal  religion  is  vnthin  reach  of  all. 
The  character  of  David  was  not  supernatural,  but  the  outgrowth  of  a  mental  and 
moral  constitution,  under  the  carefully-cherished  influences  of  such  religious  privi- 
leges as  fell  to  his  lot.  The  position  of  each  one  of  us  is  in  the  main  that  of  David : 
we  have  our  natural  temperament,  whicn  may  determine  the  prominence  of  this  over 
that  virtue    we,  as  CtuistiaiiB,  bave  reoaivad  our  solemn  call  by  One  greater  than 


m.  xxin.  1—18  ]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  487 

Samuel ;  we,  in  oar  private  or  public  sphere,  haye,  u  the  business  of  our  life,  the 
maintenance  of  a  theocracy  more  blessed  and  wide  in  its  influence  than  that  foi 
which  David  lived  j  the  Divine  truth  for  our  instruction  and  admonition  embraoM 
more  than  he  was  wont  to  meditate  on  by  day  and  night  j  and  it  is  our  privilege  to 
wait  on  the  Lord  daily  for  both  strength  and  wisdom.  A  nature  less  capacious  than 
that  of  David's,  and  called  to  a  department  of  service  for  God  less  conspicuous  to 
the  public  eye,_may,  by  corresponding  diligence  in  self-culture,  attain  to  a  sym- 
metry of  Christian  excellence  akin  to  that  of  David,  and  embracing  all  the  qualities 
we  have  just  sketched.  Every  man  is  a  well-developed  Christian  when  such  a 
nature  as  he  happens  to  possess  is  brought,  in  all  its  tendencies  and  developments, 
entirely  under  the  sway  of  the  Christian  spirit.  A  knowledge  of  our  constitutional 
tendencies  should  be  accompanied  by  special  guarding  of  those  forme  of  tempera- 
ment which  imperil  symmetry  of  character.  Occasional  reviews  of  our  vows  and  of 
the  goodness  and  mercy  of  our  God  will  prompt  to  a  renewed  and  fuller  consecra- 
tion, which  will  not  fail  to  develop  patience  in  worse  trials  possibly  than  those  at 
David,  and  confidence  in  God  despite  the  most  adverse  of  circumstances. 

Ver.  6 — 12. — Muinterjjretation  and  miscalculation.  The  facts  are — 1.  The  moral 
position  of  David  at  Keilah  is  strengthened  by  the  presence  of  Abiathar  with  tha 
ephod.  2.  Saul,  believing  David  to  be  shut  up  in  the  city,  prepares  a  force  to  lay 
siege  to  Keilah.  3.  David,  aware  of  this,  has  recourse  to  the  ephod,  and  asks  through 
Abiathar  whether  Saul  was  really  coming,  and  whether,  in  case  he  came,  the  men 
of  Keilah  would  give  him  up  to  Saul.  4.  He  receives  an  afiBrmative  reply  to  each 
inquiry..  We  have  here  two  men  moving  in  opposite  lines  and  under  totally  diverse 
principles,  yet  each  making  reference  to  God  in  relation  to  his  own  conduct — a  fair 
illustration  of  the  intelligent  and  the  ignorant  use  made  of  religions  language  and 
sentiments  in  human  affairs.  And  while  David  in  the  deep  earnestness  of  his  soul  seeks 
through  the  appointed  means  to  know  the  will  of  God,  and  Saul  in  his  infatuation  con- 
cludes God  to  be  on  his  side,  the  Eternal  reveals  his  knowledge  of  the  secret  tendencies 
of  men  and  his  tender  regard  for  the  upright  in  heart.  The  actual  conduct  of  Saul 
and  the  hypothetical  conduct  of  the  men  of  Keilah  suggest  the  misinterpretation  of 
conduct  and  the  miscalculation  consequent  thereon.  No  doubt  the  action  of  an 
energetic  man  at  the  head  of  a  band  of  followers  might  cause  uneasiness  to  a 
monarch  whose  hold  on  the  people  was  not  very  strong,  and  consequently  the  move- 
ment of  David,  viewed  at  a  distance  and  considered  irrespective  of  his  known  cha- 
racter, might  suggest  the  thought  of  an  attempt  to  ingratiate  himself  with  the 
nation,  and  gain  a  position  from  which  a  blow  might,  with  greater  chance  of  success 
be  struck  at  the  throne.  Saul's  interpretation  of  the  attack  on  the  Philistines,  and 
consequent  entry  into  Keilah,  was  either  that  David  was  carrying  on  a  freebooting 
expedition  from  mere  love  of  plunder  and  exploit,  or  that,  under  cover  of  aiding  the 
oppressed,  he  was  entering  upon  active  hostilities  against  himself.  He  could  not 
conceive  of  such  an  act  as  compatible  with  friendliness  to  himself,  and  called  forth 
by  pure  regard  for  the  honour  and" freedom  of  Israel,  patriotic  hostility  to  the  national 
foe,  generous  sympathy  for  the  weak,  and  readiness  to  benefit  sufferers,  even 
though  in  so  doing  a  man  should  pursue  a  course  open  to  the  possibility  of  being 
misunderstood.  'The  Saul  of  this  date  was  not  the  Saul  who  once  (ch.  xi.  1 — 8),  with 
large-hearted  patriotism  and  generous  impulse,  rescued  the  men  of  Jabesh  from  the 
power  of  Nahash  the  Ammonite.  Hence  his  misinterpretation  of  David's  conduct. 
But  thought  and  action  are  closely  allied,  and  a  false  view  of  things  is  the  basis  of 
a  miscalculation  of  the  results  of  action  when  we  proceed  to  carry  out  a  purpose. 
So  reversely  did  Saul  now  read  all  the  lessons  of  the  past  few  years  in  the  life  of 
David  and  himself  as  to  comfort  himself  with  the  belief  that  God,  in  the  order  of 
his  providence,  was  now  shutting  up  David  in  a  cily  in  order  that  Saul  might  take 
and  slay  him.  This  phenomenon  of  a  morally  diseased  nature  is  worthy  the  study  of 
Christian  men,  and  may  well  make  the  resolutely  impenitent  to  stand  aghast  at  their 
possible  madness.  Quern  Deus  vult  perdere.  Miserably  did  Saul  misnalculate  the 
course  of  events.  God  does  not  act  for  men  because  their  wishes  are  made  a  Bubsti- 
tute  for  knowledge.  Generalising  the  truth  involved  in  the  case  of  Saul  and  Dayid, 
we  mav  notice — 


438  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xxui.  1— It 

I.  That  MISINTEErHETATION  AND  MISCALCULATION  ABE  COMMON   IN  THE  AFFAIRS   0> 

MKN.  It  18  a  truism  that  men  make  mistakes  ;  but  making  mistakes  is  not  always 
identical  with  misinterpretation  of  human  conduct,  and  the  false  reckoning  proceed- 
ing therefrom.  There  is  a  too  prevalent  opinion  among  certain  classes  of  men  that 
they  do  understand  their  fellows,  and,  by  the  exercise  of  keen  observation,  can  avoid 
the  error  of  referring  actions  to  wrong  motives.  On  the  other  hand,  there  are  in- 
genuous minds  that  imagine  that  no  one  will  ever  think  of  referring  their  conduct  to 
an  origin  other  than  that  which  is  so  clear  and  pure  to  their  own  conscience.  Such 
persons  need  to  be  instructed.  The  question  may  be  raised  whether,  even  in  the 
most  holy  and  blessed  society  of  intelligent  beings,  there  is  ever  a  sufficient  capacity 
in  one  mind  to  unravel  and  ascertain  perfectly  the  secret  springs  of  action  in  others. 
We  each,  some  time  or  other,  have  to  bear  the  frown  and  condemnation  of  our  fellow- 
creatures,  because  what  we  do  is  not  associated,  in  their  judgment,  with  the  motives 
which  are  clear  in  our  consciousness ;  and  in  so  far  as  they  have  to  calculate  on  the 
issue  of  the  conduct  misjudged,  error  is  inevitable.  The  Bible  affords  notable  in- 
stances of  misinterpretation  and  miscalculation.  We  have  seen  how  Hannah's  heart 
was  misread  by  Eli  (ch.  i.  14).  The  Apostle  Paul  was  supposed  by  false  brethren  to 
display  zeal  for  Christ  for  reasons  utterly  alien  to  his  nature.  The  rejection  of 
Christ  by  the  Pharisees  was  the  practical  form  of  their  interpretation  of  his  words 
and  deeds.  Some  of  the  bitterest  trials  of  private  life  consist  in  generous,  true 
hearts  having  to  bear  the  consciousness  that  suspicion  and  distrust  are  meted  out  to 
them  when,  were  all  known,  love  and  confidence  would  abound.  In  like  manner 
the/alse  reckonings  of  men  are  manifold.  Every  one  calculates  amiss  when  he  has 
laid  a  false  foundation  in  a  partial  or  wrong  reading  of  character.  True  prophecy, 
in  relation  to  what  will  come  of  the  conduct  of  those  we  criticise,  can  only  proceed 
from  a  just  estimate  of  their  moral  position.  Saul  was  a  false  prophet  when  he 
predicted  that  God  would  now  deliver  David  into  his  hand.  No  laws  exist  for  bring- 
ing events  to  pass  so  that  they  shall  harmonise  with  our  estimate  of  men.  "  God 
hath  forsaken  him,"  may  be  said  of  a  David ;  but  the  false  judgment  of  his  desert 
will  not  destroy  the  loving-kindness  which  endureth  for  ever.  On  the  basis  of  theii 
interpretation  of  Christ's  character  and  conduct  men  esteemed  him  "  smitten  of  God 
and  afflicted,"  and  calculated  that  the  silent  tomb  would  put  an  end  to  IjIs  influence 
in  the  world.  Those  who  contend  with  a  holy,  Christ-loving  people,  whose  spiritual 
principles  are  not  appreciated,  forget  that  they  are  embarked  in  a  war  against  the 
mightiest  forces  that  operate  in  the  universe. 

II.  That  MOST  Of  THE  MISINTEBPRETATI0N8  AND  MISCALCULATIONS  OF  LIFB  ABE  TO 

BE  EEFERHEDTO  A  DOUBLE  ORIGIN.  The  source  of  these  evils  is  partly  intellectual 
and  partly  moral.  Saul  understood  not  David  and  miscalculated  the  issue  of  his 
entering  Keilab  because  of  his  defective  knowledge  of  human  nature  and  of  the 
order  of  Providence.  In  his  case,  however,  apart  from  radical  narrowness  of  mental 
range,  his  mind  was  injured,  with  respect  to  the  normal  exercise  of  his  intellect,  by 
the  moral  disturbance  consequent  on  his  dreadful  alienation  from  God.  He  furnishes 
a  typical  instance  of  what  may  be  regarded  as  the'  power  of  the  moral  state  over  the 
intellectual  faculties — fearfully  suggestive  of  what  demented,  shrivelled  beings  men 
may  become  should  they  in  another  life  still  be  under  the  domination  of  a  masterful 
aversion  to  God.  The  liability  of  every  man  to  fall  into  the  evils  of  misinterpret- 
ation should  induce  attention  to  the  twofold  cause  in  ourselves.  The  intellectual 
cause  is  often  seen  in  a  radically  defective  knowledge  of  human  nature  and  its  possi- 
bilities ;  in  a  structure  in  the  mind  of  rigid  lines  of  conduct,  based  on  a  narrow 
experience ;  and  in  a  partial  acquaintance  with  the  actual  facts  connected  with  the 
case  on  whirl  j  judgment  is  exercised  and  reckonings  are  made.  The  moral  cause  is 
often  more  subtle  in  operation,  and  therefore  more  difficult  of  detection  ;  but  fre- 
quently it  appears  in  the  morally  Avrong  act  of  applying  our  limited  power  to  ques- 
tions not  fairly  within  their  reacli,  in  the  obstinate  tendency  to  make  the  possibly 
imperfect  governing  principles  of  our  own  life  the  infallible  tests  by  which  all  con- 
duct is  estimated,  in  the  embittered  spirit  with  which  we  contemplate  tiie  course  of 
events,  and  in  the  active  presence  of  envy,  jealousy,  suspicion,  and  selfishness.  As 
a  rule,  moral  causes  have  more  influence  in  determining  our  judgments  of  conduct 
and  character,  and  in  calculating'  the  issues  of  action,  than  intelleotnaL     It  is  easy  to 


CH.  xxui.  1— 13.J  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  m 

believe  what  we  wish,  and  to  see  evil  where  we  cherish  ill-will.  A  very  pure,  lo\  iiii^ 
soul  will  avoid  errors  where  others  of  superior  intellect  will  fail ;  for  purity  and  love 
will  hold  the  will  back  from  judgment  on  uncertain  data,  and  will  also,  by  a  sort  of 
moral  intuition,  recognise  goodness  where  less  spiritual  natures  would  not  discriminate. 

III.    That  THE    EVILS   INCIDENT  TO  MISINTEEPRETATIONS   AND   MISOALCDLATIONS  ARE 

OF  BOTH  SHORT  AND  LONG  DURATION.  The  evils  are  twofold — those  afEeoting  the 
injured  and  those  attaching  to  the  wrong-doer.  David  and  Saul  suffered  by  Saul's 
errors.  It  is  true  some  of  the  evils  afEect  both  for  the  same  time,  such  as  the  mutual 
distrusts,  the  alienations,  the  loss  of  co-operation  which  inevitably  attend  the  mis- 
reading of  character  and  conduct;  and  it  is  impossible  to  estimate  the  grievous  loss 
to  the  world  arising  from  this  source.  But  in  instances  such  as  that  of  David  and 
our  Saviour,  and  of  all  truly  good,  the  injury  on  their  side  is  soon  removed ;  for 
Prox'idence  so  orders  events  that  what  was  hidden  becomes  revealed,  and  their  right- 
eousnoss  shines  forth  as  the  light,  and  their  judgment  as  the  noon-day  (Ps.  xxxvii. 
28 — 40).  The  day  of  judgment  will,  to  many,  be  a  day  for  lifting  up  their  head 
with  joy.  On  the  other  hand,  in  so  far  as  we  are  governed  by  the  tendencies  which 
induce  wrong  judgments,  so  far  and  so  long  our  whole  nature  is  impaired  and  debased. 
Indeed,  the  sum  total  of  our  mental  and  moral  wealth  is  lessened  for  ever  by  the 
indulgence  in  wrong  habits  of  this  class ;  for  we  can  never  become  the  intellectually 
and  morally  perfect  beings  we  should  be  had  no  energy,  no  faculty  been  perverted 
and  abused.  No  amount  of  growth  and  development,  after  years  of  defective  mental 
action,  can  overtake  the  position  due  to  a  healthful  advance  from  the  first.  But 
especially  will  the  evils  be  of  long  duration  in  the  case  of  those  who,  by  persistent, 
persecuting,  false  judgments,  seek  to  harass  and  wound  the  children  of  God.  The 
shame  and  the  remoree  of  having  bruised  a  tender  heart  or  misjudged  a  holy  cha- 
racter cannot  easily  die  out.  Saul's  anguish  of  spirit  consequent  on  his  sin  against 
David  survived  David's  injury. 

General  lessons: — 1.  If  we  would  escape  undesirable  judgments  we  should  avoid, 
as  much  as  possible,  ambiguous  actions  and  the  appearance  of  evil.  2.  Nevertheless, 
in  the  cause  of  humanity  we  ought  to  be  ready  to  act,  even  though  men,  not  knowing 
our  feelings,  may  misinterpret  us.  3.  We  should  hold  our  judgment  in  strong  reserve 
when  but  partial  knowledge  is  within  reach,  even  though  plausible  reasons  appear  to 
urge  a  criticism.  4.  Proper  weight  should  always  be  allowed  for  the  modifying 
influences  of  education,  habit,  and  range  of  experience.  5.  We  may  take  consolation 
in  the  knowledge  that  God  weighs  conduct  in  reference  to  its  intention,  and  that  he 
rules  events  so  as  to  vindicate  the  just.  6.  If  ever  we  have  wronged  another  by 
harsh  and  wicked  judgment,  we  are  bound  to  make  some  amend  by  word  or  deed. 

Undeveloped  tendencies.  The  second  topic  suggested  by  this  section  is  evidently 
that  involved  in  the  predicted  conduct  of  the  men  of  Keilah  under  the  circumstances 
specified  in  the  inquiry  of  David.  The  service  rendered  by  David  to  Keilah  was 
such  as  gave  him  a  just  claim  to  their  gratitude.  No  doubt  zeal  was  abundant  in 
expressing  their  obligation  to  him,  and  judging  from  appearances  one  might  suppose 
that  the  men  would  be  quite  prepared  to  befriend  him  in  case  of  need.  In  the  early 
overflowings  of  gratitude  for  favours  received  men  are  wont  to  be  strong  and 
lavish  in  the  expression  of  personal  attachment  and  readiness  to  return  kindness  for 
kindness ;  and  most  certainly  the  men  of  Keilah,  had  they  then  been  questioned  as  to 
the  possibility  of  their  ever  casting  aside  one  who  had  so  generously  befriended  them 
in  a  time  of  sore  distress,  would  each  have  felt  inclined  to  say,  "  Is  thy  servant 
a  dog,  that  he  should  do  this  thing?  "  But  there  was  more  in  their  complex  human 
nature  than  they  themselves  imagined,  and  the  sentiments  ruling  their  will  just  then 
and  creating  agreeable  words  and  kind  intentions  might,  under  new  conditions, 
subside  and  give  scope  for  the  play  of  a  difEerent  set  of  tendencies,  kept  by  the 
present  auspicious  events  in  abeyance.  David  appears  to  have  surmised  the  exist- 
ence within  their  hearts  of  weaknesses  which  would  not  bear  the  strain  of  the  tests 
that  must  be  created  by  his  sojourn  in  their  city,  and  hence,  not  to  be  misled  in  so 
important  a  matter,  he  calla  for  the  priest  and  makes  special  inquiry  as  to  whether 
in  case  Saul  should  come  against  the  city,  these  men,  now  so  grateful  and  devoted, 
would  deliver  him  up.  The  answer  wbici,  David  received  from  the  Searcher  of  b««rt» 


440  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  mil.  1—13. 

was  to  the  effect  that,  should  they  be  brought  to  the  test,  they  would  develop  tend- 
encies which  gave  no  sign  of  present  existence,  and  which  if  charged  on  them  would 
probably  be  emphatically  repudiated.  Thus  do  we  see  how  there  may  dwell  in  men, 
unconsciously  to  themselves,  latent  tendencies  which,  though  repressed  and  rendered 
by  present  surroundings  inoperative,  are  so  real  and  patent  as,  under  conditions  yet 
to  be  created,  to  become  the  determinant  powers  in  regulating  conduct. 

I.  The  existence  op  undeveloped  tendencies  is  a  genbbal  fact  in  human  life. 
It  is  a  truth  that  as  we  find  ourselves  in  daily  life  we  each  possess  a  complex  nature 
in  which  an  inextricable  interweaving  of  thought  and  feeling  is  the  prominent 
feature.  Every  idea  and  feeling  that  has  become  an  item  stored  in  memory  becomes 
a  power  in  the  subsequent  course  of  our  inner  experience,  even  though  not  distinctly 
traceable.  There  are  certain  fundamental  dispositions  by  which  the  great  lines  of 
action  are  decided,  and  minor  feelings  or  sentiments  which  are  tributary  to  them  as 
servants  and  prompters.  But  experience  proves  that  all  contained  within  our  nature 
cannot  operate  at  once,  and  wliich  of  the  inner  forms  of  activity  may  be  brought  into 
exercise  at  any  given  moment  depends  on  the  influences  brought  to  bear  and  the 
laws  of  association  thereby  set  in  operation.  The  tendency  to  shrink  from  pain  and 
conflict  found  no  occasion  to  indicate  its  presence  when  the  entry  of  a  victorious 
David  into  Keilah  aroused  sentiments  of  joy  and  gratitude.  It  is  possible  for  a  tend- 
ency to  be  apparently  annihilated  by  the  constant  demand  on  a  feeling  or  sentiment 
antagonistic  with  its  nature.  Hence  men  may  often  carry  within  them  possibilities 
of  action  while  ignorant  of  their  reality,  and  they  may,  therefore,  be  induced  to  make 
professions  and  undertake  obligations  without  reckoning  on  what  may  be  aroused 
within  when  .circumstances  require  the  fulfilment  of  the  obligations.  Theories  of 
conduct  are  held  which  may  be  belied  by  the  hidden  man  of  the  heart  when  his 
unhappy  hour  for  development  comes.  Are  we  not  all  now  and  then  startled  by 
the  uprising  from  the  unfathomed  deeps  of  our  nature  of  a  hideous  form  which  lets 
us  see  just  enough  of  its  unholy  self  to  create  distrust  and  fear  that  other  powers 
of  evil  are  there  waiting  to  appear  in  actual  life?  The  precautions  employed  in 
educating  youth  and  the  care  bestowed  on  enforcing  public  sentiment  proceed  on  the 
belief  that  the  germs  of  ruin  in  young  and  old  only  await  nourishment  in  order  to 
gain  a  destructive  ascendancy.  Nor  is  the  fact  confined  to  what  is  evil.  There  are 
latent  tendencies  to  good — to  truthfulness,  gentleness,  generosity,  chivalrous  consider- 
ation, kindliness,  and  kindred  virtues — which  by  reason  of  circumstances  do  not 
always  find  expression.  There  is  a  tender  place  in  the  hardest  heart,  though  not 
often  touched.  Have  we  not  seen  a  word,  an  allusion,  draw  out  feelings  not  sup- 
posed to  have  existence  ?  And  in  many  a  Christian  there  is  much  more  germinal 
goodness  than  is  developed  in  outer  life.  Christ  shocked  the  complacent  Pharisees 
by  assuring  them  of  the  latent  wickedness  of  their  hearts  (Matt,  zxiii.  25 — 28 ;  Mark 
vii.  21 — ^23),  and  the  Apostle  Paul  urged  Timothy  to  "  stir  up  the  gift "  bestowed  on 
him  (2  Tim.  i.  6). 

II.  The  becognition  of  the  existence  of  latent  tendencies  is  of  practical 
IMPOBTANCB  IN  ALL  DEPABTMENTB  OF  LIFE.  Our  course  through  life  is  not  regulated 
simply  by  what  is  known.  A  recognition  of  the  unknown  or  at  least  undeveloped 
forces  of  our  own  nature  ought  to  exercise  considerable  influence  in  the  conduct  we 
daily  pursue.  1.  In  our  association  with  men.  David  clearly  recognised  the  fact  of 
certain  undeveloped  tendencies  in  the  men  of  Keilah,  and  he  discreetly  dealt  with 
that  unknown  factor  by  endeavouring  to  find  out  whether  it  would  come  into  ascend- 
ancy. It  should  be  a  maxim  with  us  that  there  is  far  more  in  the  men  we  have  to 
do  with  than  appears  in  overt  act  and  uttered  sentiment,  and  this,  without  degenerat- 
ing into  a  painful  suspicion  and  cruel  distrust,  will  enable  us  often  to  escape  being 
placed  within  their  power;  and  also,  if  our  intention  is  to  draw  out  their  better 
qualities,  will  stimulate  to  that  end.  2.  In  our  professed  allegiance  to  Chriit.  It 
should  be  our  rule  to  watch  and  govern  ourselves  in  his  name  on  the  supposition 
that  there  lie  within  na  on  the  one  hand  secret  tendencies  which,  under  favourable 
conditions  of  temptation,  may,  at  least,  embitter  our  life  by  a  fearful  strnggla  for 
the  mastery,  and  possibly,  in  consequence  of  lack  of  resolution  and  forethought,  for 
the  time  mar  our  character ;  and  on  the  other  hand  tendencies  germinal  repressed,  and 
■oaicely  eonaoioiu,  -which,  it  we  bring  to  bear  on  our  heart  the  warm  Ught  OC  his  truth, 


oa.  xxin.  1—18.]  THB  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  441 

wil]  expand  and  assume  in  our  outward  life  permanent  forms  of  usefulness  and 
beauty.  3.  In  our  taork/or  Christ.  Both  the  kind  and  character  of  Christian  work 
are  influenced  by  our  recognition  of  the  less  manifest  tendencies  of  human  nature. 
It  is  noticeable  how  constantly  Christ  spake  to  the  hidden  thoughts  and  feelings  of 
men  rather  than  to  the  questions  they  raised  and  the  attitude  they  professed  to 
assume.  A  preacher  may  often  efEect  most  by  directing  his  eSort  toward  some 
unuttered  and  even  deliberately-suppressed  sentiment  of  his  hearers.  In  so  far  as 
our  persistence  in  Christian  work  is  concerned  we  have  to  consider  not  merely  the 
value  of  the  impulses  and  principles  that  make  us  earnest  during  the  day  of  pros- 
perity, but  what  weaknesses  are  inherent  in  us  that  may  develop  themselves  in 
unwelcome  proportions  when  trials  and  adversities  threaten.  The  men  of  Eeilah 
could  sympathise  with  and  swear  by  the  "  anointed"  when  no  thought  of  Nob  was 
present.  We  may  count  on  this  undeveloped  factor  as  one  of  our  best  allies  in 
Christian  work.  Beneath  all  the  vices  and  superstitions  of  heathenism  and  all  the 
shams  and  scepticism  of  modern  civilisation  there  lies  the  hidden,  slumbering  sense  of 
God  and  immortality. 

III.  It  is  God's  perfect  knowledge  of  all  the  undeveloped  tendencies  of  lifk 

THAT  EBNDEE8  HIS  GOVERNMENT  SO  STRONG  AND  HIS  PROVISION  FOR  MAN's  REDEMPTION 

so  WISE.  This  is  included  in  the  broad  truth  that  there  is  nothing  hidden  from  his 
sight.  According  to  Ps.  cixxix.  every  incipient  force — chemical  and  mechanical, 
moral  and  spiritual — in  every  point  of  space,  through  all  the  ages,  has  been  and  still 
is  as  clear  to  the  eye  of  the  Eternal,  and  as  traceable  in  all  its  endless  and  intricate 
developments,  as  is  the  mighty  sun  that  sheds  its  light  on  our  earth.  It  is  this  know- 
ledge of  the  undeveloped  which  lies  at  the  foundation  of  prophecy,  and  renders  it 
possible  that,  notwithstanding  the  developments  resulting  from  adverse  human  wills, 
the  great  end  for  whic^  Christ  lived  and  died  shall  at  last  be  attained.  The  warnings 
and  admonitions,  "  here  a  little  and  there  a  little,"  for  the  guidance  of  our  conduct ; 
the  form  and  variety  of  the.promises ;  the  ordinances  of  religion  ;  the  special  features 
of  the  redemptive  work  effected  by  Christ — all  these  are  adapted  to  the  possibilities, 
and  not  merely  to  the  present  actualities,  of  human  life.  "  He  knoweth  our  frame. 
Hence  the  reasonableness  of  submitting  our  reason  to  his  revelations. 

IV.  It  is  our  wisdom,  in  all  times  or  doubt,  to  have  recourse  to  the  means  of 
ASCERTAINING  God's  KNOWLEDGE  OF  THINGS.  No  doubt  David  speculated  on  the  pro- 
bable course  of  the  men  of  Keilah  should  they  ever  be  brought  to  decide  between 
grateful  attachment  to  him  and  the  frown  of  Saul,  and  his  general  acquaintance  with 
human  nature  may  have  inclined  him  to  believe  in  their  treachery  when  under  the 
influence  of  fear.  But  as  it  was  a  question  of  his  personal  safety,  and  involved  in 
that  a  question  also  of  ultimately  realising  the  great  purposes  of  a  Messianic  king- 
dom, he  wisely  sought  a  solution  of  all  doubts  by  a  recourse  to  the  available  meani 
of  putting  himself  in  possession  of  God's  knowledge  with  reference  to  this  particular 
matter.  The  knowledge  which  God  has  of  the  secret  powers  of  the  universe  does 
in  efEect  become  ours  when  in  any  instance  he  condescends  to  make  us  acquainted 
with  the  result  in  which  they  will  issue.  A  really  wise  man  in  seasons  of  uncertainty, 
when  important  interests  are  at  stake,  whether  temporal  or  spiritual,  will  not  rest 
with  speculations  on  what  may  be  ;  but  will,  like  David,  inquire  of  the  Lord,  so  as 
to  regulate  his  present  action  according  to  God's  knowledge  of  what  is  inevitable. 
The  means  of  ascertaining  God's  knowledge  may  vary  with  the  case  in  hand ;  it  may 
be  by  laying  the  candid  mind  open  to  direct  Divine  illumination,  or  by  devoting 
special  attention  to  the  monitions  of  Providence,  or  by  consulting  the  "  lively  oracles  " 
which  are  to  us  the  voice  of  God  on  great  moral  and  religious  matters.  In  one 
respect  we  are  all  in  a  position  analogous  to  that  of  David  ;  for  there  are  intricate 
and  hidden  powers  at  Work  within  and  without  which,  when  fully  developed  by  the 
new  circumstances  that  may  arise,  may  have  the  effect  of  delivering  us  bound  to  a 
condemnation  far  more  terrible  than  any  Saul  could  pass  on  a  captive  David.  Now 
it  is  a  serious  question  to  each  whether  this  one  enemy  will  ever  gain  power  over  us, 
and  by  what  means  its  dominion  can  be  escaped.  In  a  case  of  such  importance 
we  cannot  afford  to  trust  to  speculation  and  humanly-grounded  hope.  We  are 
permitted  to  inquire  of  God,  who  in  his  word  and  in  the  redemption  provided  in 
Ghrist  has  put  ua  in  possession  of  his  knowledge  of  the  u:ideveloi>ed  tendencies  of  sin 


MS  THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxra.  1—18 


in  human  nature,  by  assuring  us  that  under  certain  conditions — our  following  oul 
own  independent  course — we  shall  come  into  condemnation  on  the  day  of  judgment 
and  that  under  other  conditions — our  self-surrender  to  Christ  for  pardon  and  renewd 
— we  shall  be  not  only  free  from  that  woe,  but  shall  rise  to  sit  on  thrones  of  honour 
and  power  (2  Tim.  ii.  10—12). 

Practical  lessons: — 1.  Inasmuch  as  the  great  issues  of  life  are  determined  by  th« 
nrastery  of  one  set  of  principles  over  another,  it  is  very  important  to  seek  the  expul- 
sion or  entire  suppression  of  latent  evil  tendencies  by  the  careful  nurture  of  ten- 
dencies of  opposite  character,  for  the  strength  of  principles  is  in  proportion  to  their 
exercise.  2.  In  so  far  as  tendencies  to  evil  lie  within  us,  we  should  avoid  unnecessary 
exposure  to  influences  that  may  draw  them  into  activity  ;  and,  reversely,  we  should 
seek  those  conditions  of  life  that  will  aid  the  development  of  the  good.  3.  Caution 
should  be  exercised  lest  we  be  misled  in  our  estimate  of  what  we  can  do  in  resisting 
evil  inclinations  by  basing  our  calculation  on  circumstances  hitherto  helpful;  for  the 
men  of  Keilah,  in  the  flush  of  David's  achievement,  and  not  yet  threatened  by  Saul, 
were  like  Peter,  who  could  fearlessly  avow  fidelity  to  Christ  while  he  was  present  to 
inspire  and  cheer.  4.  The  fact  that  in  the  emergencies  of  their  life  God  gave  specific 
replies  to  the  inquiry  of  his  chosen  servants,  because  they  were  instruments  of 
working  out  the  great  Messianic  purpose,  is  encouragement  to  believe  that  he  will 
give  heed  to  every  one  whose  life  is  devoted  to  the  same  issue,  and  who  is  equallr 
sincere  in  prayer. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOEa 

Vers.  1—6.  (S&.Jtsn:B,  Keilab.)— Public  spirit.  " So  David  saved  the  inhabitants 
of  Keilah  "  (ver.  5).  Another  step  in  advance  was  now  made  by  David.  Whilst 
Saul  (in  addition  to  alienating  the  prophets,  and  well-nigh  exterminating  the  priests) 
failed  to  afEord  adequate  protection  to  his  subjects,  David  was  called  to  defend  them 
against  the  incursions  of  the  Philistines.  This  was  doubtless  the  chief  purpose  for 
which  he  was  recalled  from  Moab  to  Judah.  And  he  fulfilled  it,  in  obedience  to  the 
direction  of  God,  which  he  sought  and  received  through  Abiathar,  who  had  come 
down  to  him  "  with  an  ephod  in  his  hand."  "  For  his  conscience  and  his  assurance 
of  faith,  as  well  as  for  the  certainty  and  success  of  the  whole  undertaking,  he  needed 
the  Divine  authorisation ;  if  he  had  not  the  sanction  of  the  theocratic  king,  he  must 
have  that  of  God  himself,  since  the  question  was  of  a  matter  important  for  the 
people  of  God  and  for  the  affairs  of  God's  kingdom  in  Israel — war  against  Israel's 
hereditary  foe  "  (Erdmann).     His  public  spirit  was — 

I.  Ikdicativb  of  a  noble  disposition.  Some  men  are  unduly  concerned  about 
their  own  convenience,  safety,  interest,  and  refuse  to  look  beyond  them.  Others 
render  public  services  from  selfish  motives.  But  the  truly  public-spirited  man,  like 
David,  possesses — 1.  An  intense  desire  for  the  welfare  of  the  people,  to  whom  by 
Divine  providence  he  is  united  by  special  ties,  not  contrary  to,  out  closer  and  more 
immediately  affecting  him  than  those  which  unite  him  to  all  mankind.  2.  Genuine 
sympathy  with  the  distresses  of  the  weak,  the  injured,  and  the  imperilled  (ver.  1). 
Their  condition  fills  his  heart  with  generous  impulses,  and  makes  him  forget  his  own 
troubles.  3.  Supreme  concern  far  "  God^s  kingdom  and  righteousness,"  which  in- 
spires him  with  zeal  against  evil-doers,  and  (along  with  his  unselfish  regard  for  his 
people)  makes  him  willing  to  undergo  labour,  conflict,  sacrifice,  suffering,  and  death. 
"  Be  of  good  courage,  and  let  us  play  the  men  for  our  people,"  &c.  (2  Sam.  x.  12). 

II.  Directed  by  the  Divine  word  (vers.  2,  4)  in — 1.  General  principles,  such  as 
are  contained  in  the  commandment,  "  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself " 
(Levit.  xix.  18),  and  others  of  a  similar  nature  (Gal.  vi.  10 ;  Phil.  ii.  4).  In  order 
that  our  love  to  the  whole  human  race  (included  in  the  commandment  in  its  widest 
sense)  may  be  real  and  effectual,  it  must  begin  by  the  exercise  of  love  toward  those 
who  are  nearest  to  us  and  have  the  first  claim  upon  us  (Ps.  cxxii.  6 — 9  ;  cxxxvii.  5, 
6 ;  Luke  xiii.  34  ;  ixiv.  47  ;  Eom.  ix.  3).  2.  Particular  precepts  pertaining  to  the 
varied  relationships,  capabilities,  and  needs  of  men,  as  rulers,  subjects,  &c.  3. 
Joined  with  numerous  promises  and  encouragements  to  the  performance  of  duty.  If 
public  spirit  in  the  form  of  patriotism  is  not  expressly  enifined  in  the  New  "Testa- 


'H.  MUL 1—13.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  448 

ment,  it  is  not  without  reason.  "  It  was  worthy  of  the  wisdom  of  onr  great  Legis- 
iatoT  to  decline  the  express  inculcation  of  a  principle  so  liable  to  degenerate  into 
•xcesa,  and  to  content  himself  with  prescribing  the  virtues  which  are  sure  to  develo; 
it,  as  far  as  is  consistent  with  the  dictates  of  universal  benevolence  "  (B.  Eall), 

III.  Opposed  by  prudbntial  feabs.  "  David's  men  said  unto  him,  Behold,  we  are 
afraid  here  in  Judah,"  &o.  (ver.  3).  They  were  not  of  the  same  mind  as  himself, 
had  not  a  proper  sense  of  their  obligation,  were  unduly  concerned  about  their  own 
safety,  and  full  of  doubt  and  fear.  But  he  was  not  disheartened  nor  deterred.  And 
on  a  further  revelation  of  the  Divine  will  they  were  (as  others  often  are) — 1.  Per- 
suaded that  their  opposition  was  wrong.  2.  Convinced  that  their  fears  were  ground- 
less. 3.  Induced  to  accompany  their  leader  in  a  brave  and  generous  enterprise  (ver. 
6).  One  man  imbued  with  strong  faith  and  public  spirit  thus  overcomes  the  opposi- 
tion of  many,  and  converts  them  into  zealous  helpers. 

IV.  Pboductivb  op  important  consequences.  The  hand  of  God  was  with  them, 
and — 1.  Injustice  was  punished,  the  public  enemy  defeated,  and  the  prey  taken  from 
the  mighty.  2.  Those  who  were  in  the  utmost  peril  were  saved.  3.  All  the  people 
were  taught  where  to  look  for  their  deliverer.  In  seeking  the  good  of  others  David 
found  his  own  honour,  and  received  a  Divine  testimony  to  his  royal  destination. — ^D. 

Vers.  1 — 12.  (Hareth,  Eeilah.) — Answers  to  prayer.  Inquiry  of  the  Lord  by 
Urim  and  Thummira  really  meant  prayer  in  which  Divine  direction  was  sought  in  a 
particular  manner  (see  ch.  xiv.  19,  36).  It  was  made  by  David  soon  after  the  arrival 
of  Abiathar,  on  three  several  occasions  (vers.  2,  4, 10), — on  the  last  of  them  by  two 
separate  questions, — and  in  each  case  a  definite  answer  was  received.  "  God  showx 
great  care  for  David,  instructing  him  now  by  prophets  (ch.  xxii.  6),  and  now  bj 
Urim  and  Thummim  "  (Grotius).  "  That  which  in  the  olden  Jewish  times  was  the 
prerogative  of  a  few  becomes  in  Christian  days  the  privilege  of  the  many.  Chrisl 
makes  all  his  faithful  followers  'kings  and  priests  imto  God.'  And  much  of  the 
sacred  symbolism  that  gathered  around  the  ancient  priesthood  now  gathers  in  another 
form  around  the  believer  in  Christ.  Mere  symbols  have  given  place  to  true  spiritual 
power.  The  Spirit  of  God  which  once  underlay  the  symbols,  and  spake  through 
them  to  the  devout  mind,  now  communicates  directly  with  the  heart,  and  needs  ni' 
material  intervention  "  ('  Bible  Educ.,'  iv.  38).  Those  who  seek  g^dance  of  God  in 
a  right  spirit  never  fail  to  obtain  it,  especially  in — 

I.  Perplexity  concerning  the  knowledge  of  duty.  Asking,  "  Shall  I  go  ?  "  (ver. 
2)  they  receive,  perchance,  the  definite  answer,  "  Go ; "  not,  indeed,  by  an  audible 
voice,  but  by  meana  of — 1.  The  elevating,  calming,  and  enlightening  of  their  mind 
through  communion  with  God,  and  more  particularly  by  the  purifying  of  their  mora  t 
nature  from  carnal  and  selfish  afEections  by  his  indwelling  Spirit,  which  enable 
them  to  see  "  what  the  will  of  the  Lord  is."  "  Our  notions  resemble  the  index  and 
hand  of  the  dial ;  our  feelings  are  the  hidden  springs  which  impel  the  machine ;  witli 
this  difiEerence,  that  notions  and  feelings  react  on  each  other  reciprocally"  (Coleridge) 
"  The  understanding  resembles  not  a  dry  light,  but  admits  a  tincture  of  the  will  anfl 
the  passions,  which  generate  their  own  system  of  truth  accordingly  "  (Bacon).  And 
when  the  heart  (which  is  the  soul's  eye)  is  pure  we  see  God  (Prov.  xxviii.  5 ;  Matt. 
V.  8  ;  John  vii.  17).  2.  A  clear  understanding  of  the  meaning  of  the  vrritten  word, 
and  of  its  application  to  the  circumstances  in  which  they  are  placed.  As  by  thai 
word  thoughts,  impressions,  and  purposes  are  tried,  in  order  that  it  may  be  proved 
whether  they  are  of  God,  so  by  the  same  word  they  are  formed  and  directed  (Isa. 
viii.  20 ;  John  xvi.  13).  3.  A  correct  judgment  of  what  is  right  and  most  expedient, 
accompanied  by  an  inward  assurance  of  the  Divine  approbation,  "  If  any  of  you 
lack  wisdom,  let  him  ask  of  God,"  &c.  (James  i.  6  ;  Ps.  xxv.  9). 

II.  Difficulty  arising  from  hindrances  to  the  performance  of  duty.  "  David 
inquired  of  the  Lord  yet  again  "  (ver.  4).  The  obstacles  placed  in  the  way  of  duty, 
especially  by  friends,  ought  to  lead  to  renewed  consideration  and  prayer,  and  these 
are  often  followed  by— 1.  Strong  confirmation  of  .he  conviction  previously  enter- 
tained. "Arise,  go  down  to  Keilah."  2.  Increased  co?y?£Z«»ce  of  success.  "  I  will  give 
the  Philistines  into  thine  hand."  3.  Entire  removal  of  the  difficulty.  "  David  and 
his  men  went."    It  appears  to  have  been  chiefly  for  their  satisfaction  that  the  second 


M4 


THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  xxni.  14 — 29 


inqniiy  was  made.    Whilst  we  should  endeavonr  to  persuade  men  to  adopt  a  righf 
conrse,  we  ought  above  all  things  to  look  to  God  to  dispose  them  to  walk  therein. 

in.  Danoeb,  which  sometimes  occurs  on  the  fulfilment  of  duty  (vers.  7-^12). 
"In  the  deed  of  deliverance  itself  lies  the  seed  of  new  sufEering."  Saul  misinterprets 
events  (ver.  7),  like  other  men  blinded  by  sin  and  "  using  the  name  of  God  when 
God  is  farthest  off  from  them,"  confidently  calculates  on  seizing  David,  levies  war, 
and  openly  devotes  himself  to  the  execution  of  his  wicked  purpose.  But  David  is 
warned ;  he  has  also,  probably,  reason  to  suspect  the  fidelity  of  the  citizens  of  Keilah, 
and  again  inquires  of  the  Lord.  He  does  so  with  much  fervour,  calling  him  the 
"  Lord  God  of  Israel,"  and  humbly  acknowledging  himself  to  be  his  servant ;  and 
the  answers  ho  obtains  afford  him — 1.  Foresight  of  the  perilous  events  of  the  future. 
"  He  will  come  down. "  2.  Insight  into  the  hidden  purposes  of  men.  "  They  will 
deliver  thee  up."  We  may  often  ascertain  more  of  flie  secret  thoughts  of  men  by 
communion  with  God  than  by  consultation  with  men  themselves.  3.  Guidance  for 
the  frustration  of  ungrateful  and  evil  intentions,  and  escape  from  every  danger. 
"  David  and  his  men,  &o."  (ver.  13).  How  perfect  is  the  knowledge  which  God  pos- 
sesses of  al]  things  !  How  sure  is  the  guidance  which  he  affords  to  those  who  seek 
him  I  How  safe  are  they  who  make  him  their  Rock  and  their  Fortress  I  In  the  midst 
of  all  his  troubles  David  can  sing  of  "his  marvellous  loving-kindness  in  a  fenced 
city ; "  u  ha  does  in  Ps.  xzzi. :  "Li  thee,  0  Jehovah,  have  I  found  refug*." 

"  See  Jndah's  promised  king  bereft  of  all ; 
Driven  out  an  exile  &om  the  face  of  SauL 
To  distant  caves  the  lonely  wanderer  flies, 
To  seek  that  peace  a  tyrant's  frown  denieib 
His  soul  exults  ;  hope  animates  his  lays  ; 
The  sense  of  mercy  kindles  into  praise  ; 
And  wUds  familiar  with  the  lion  s  roar 
Bing  with  ecstatic  sounds  unheard  befon  "  (Oowp«i|i  Si 


EXPOSITION. 


S.vTTiJ  pintsTTrr  r  f  Datid  ts  the  wildkb- 
nbssofZiph  (vers.  14 — 28).  Vers.  14, 16. — 
Strong  holds.  Natural  fortresses  in  the  woods 
and  mountains  are  meant,  and  places  diffi- 
cult of  access.  The  wilderness  of  Ziph.  This 
lay  to  the  south  of  Hebron,  upon  the  edge  of 
the  great  desert  of  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  65). 
Saul  Bought  him  every  day.  The  pursuit 
was  maintained  constantly,  with  men  always 
spying  David's  movements,  and  ready  to  re- 
port to  Saul  any  opportunity  of  seizing  him  ; 
but  apparently  there  was  no  body  of  men  at 
present  perpetually  in  quest  of  him.  In  a 
wood.  Many  rightly  regard  this  as  a  proper 
name.  Horesh,  and  as  the  same  place  as  the 
mountain  mentioned  in  ver.  14 ;  for,  as 
Gonder  remarks  ('Tent  "Work,'  ii  89),  "a 
moment's  refloction  will  convince  any  travel- 
ler that,  as  the  dry,  porous  formation  of  the 
plateau  must  be  unchanged  since  David's 
time,  no  wood  of  trees  can  then  have  flour- 
ished over  this  unwatered  and  sun-scorched 
region." 

Vers.  16 — 18.  —  Jonathan  .  .  .  wont  to 
David  into  the  wood.  To  Horesh,  as  in  ver. 
]  5.  This  visit  suggests  two  things  :  the  first, 
that,  after  the  scene  in  ch.  xxii.  8,  Saul  was 
estranged  firom  his  son,  and  treated  him 
harshly,  regarding  him  as  a  fellow-conspira- 
tor with  David  ;  the  second,  that  there  was 


a  growing  conviction,  not  only  in  Jonathan's 
mmd,  but  generally,  that  Jehovah  had  trans- 
ferred the  kingdom  from  Saul  to  David, 
and  that  consequently  David's  final  suc- 
cess was  inevitable.  He  strengthened  his 
(David's)  hand  in  God.  Such  a  visit,  and 
the  expression  of  Jonathan's  strong  con- 
viction that  Jehovah  was  with  David,  must 
necessarily  have  had  a  powerful  moral  effect 
upon  his  mind.  Under  such  trying  circum- 
stances David  must  often  have  been  tempted 
to  despair ;  but  the  assurance  of  Jonathan's 
unbroken  love  forhim,and  the  knowledge  that 
he  and  many  more  regarded  him  as  chosen  by 
God  to  be  Israel's  king,  would  revive  his  cour- 
age and  make  him  content  to  bear  the  hard- 
ships of  his  present  lot.  I  shall  he  next  unto 
thee.  Had  he  not  been  killed  in  Mount 
Gilboa,  it  seems  that,  unlike  Ishbosheth, 
Jonathan  would  have  resigned  all  claim  to  the 
crown.  But  the  feeling  must  often  have  dis- 
tressed David,  that  the  kingdom  could  be- 
come his  only  by  dispossessing  his  true  and 
unselfish  friend.  Nor  would  such  a  regret  be 
altogether  removed  by  Jonathan's  ready  ac- 
quiescence in  it  as  God's  wiU,  though,  as  next 
to  him,  and  beloved  as  he  deserved,  his  posi- 
tion as  the  king's  Mend  would  have  been  a 
not  unenviable  one.  Still,  to  be  second  where 
by  right  of  inheritance  he  should  have  been 


ra.  xxm.  14—89.]        THE  FIRBT  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


4tt 


first  would  hare  been  a  veiy  trying  lot,  and 
it  was  better  for  Jonathan  that  he  shonld 
die  a  soldier's  death,  even  granting  that  ha 
would  have  felt  a  lively  joy  in  David's  snc- 
cess  and  the  glory  of  his  empire.  But  their 
love  was  to  be  axposed  to  no  vicissitudeg, 
and  the  two  frienas  parted  never  to  meet 
again — David  remaining  at  Horesh,  while 
Jonathan  returned  to  his  home  at  Gibeah. 

Vers.  19,  20. —The  Ziphites.  Rather, 
"some  Ziphites,"  or  "people  of  Ziph,"  as 
there  is  no  article.  They  tell  Saul  that 
David  was  hiding  in  the  fastnesses  of  the 
wild  region  in  their  neighbourhood,  and 
especially  in  the  hill  of  Hachilah,  a  ridge 
that  ran  along  eastward  of  Maon.  Conder 
recognises  it  in  the  long  ridge  called  El 
EOlah,  ronning  out  of  the  Ziph  plateau 
towards  the  Dead  Sea  desert  It  lay  on  the 
Bonth  of  Jeahimon,  or  rather  "  on  the  right 
hand  of  the  desert."  Jeshimon  is  not  a 
proper  name,  but  means  any  desert  (Ps.  evil. 
4  ;  Isa.  xliiL  19),  though  it  is  used  specially 
of  the  desert  of  Sinai  in  Deut.  xxziL  10,  and 
of  that  of  Jndah  here  and  in  Num.  zzl  20  ; 
zziiL  28.  Conder  ('  Handbook,'  p.  218) 
calls  it  "the  dreary  desert  which  extends 
between  the  Dead  Sea  and  the  Hebron 
mountains.  It  is  called  Jeshimon,  or  '  Soli- 
tude,' in  the  Old  Testament,  and  'wilderness 
of  Judea'  in  the  New  (Matt,  iii,  1).  It  is 
a  plateau  of  white  chalk,  2000  feet  lower 
than  the  watershed,  and  terminated  on  the 
east  by  cliffs  which  rise  vertically  from  the 
Dead  Sea  shore  to  a  height  of  about  2000 
feet.  The  scenery  is  barren  and  wild  beyond 
all  description.  The  chalky  ridges  are  scored 
by  innumerable  torrents,  and  their  narrow 
crests  are  separated  by  broad  fiat  valleys. 
Peaks  and  knolla  of  fantastic  forms  rise 
suddenly  from  the  swelling  downs,  and  mag- 
nificent precipices  of  ruddy  limestone  stand 
np  Kke  fortress-walls  above  the  sea.  Kot 
a  tree  nor  a  spring  is  visible  in  the  waste, 
and  only  the  desert  partridge  and  the  ibex 
are  found  ranging  the  solitude.  It  was  in 
this  pathless  desert  that  David  found  refuge 
from  Saul's  persecution,  and  the  same  has 
been  a  place  of  retreat  from  the  days  of 
Christ  to  the  present  time."  The  Ziphites 
assure  Saul  that  from  their  knowledge  of 
this  region  they  shaU  be  able,  if  he  come  in 
force,  so  to  guide  him  as  that  David  must 
fall  into  his  hands. 

Vers.  21 — 23. — ^Te  have  compassion  on 
me.  There  is  something  pitiable  in  Saul's 
answer.  He  had  brooded  over  his  rejection 
from  being  king,  and  the  many  indications 
that  David  was  to  be  his  successor,  till  he 
had  become  the  prey  of  abject  melancholy. 
He  evidently  regarded  himself  as  a  wronged 
and  injured  man,  while  David  to  his  diseased 
imagination  was  ever  conspiring  against  him 
and  plotting  his  murder. .  With  much  pro- 


lixity he  snconragei  them  still  to  keep  a 
close  watch  npon  all  David's  movements,  n 
as  to  know  hia  plaoe  where  his  haunt  ii. 
Literally,  "his  place  where  his  foot  will  be," 
the  place  whither  he  goes  for  rest  and  refage. 
The  reason  he  gives  for  this  long  and  close 
observation  of  David's  doings  is  that  it  is  told 
him  that  he  dealeth  very  snbtilly.  That  is, 
according  to  Saul's  information,  he  behaved 
with  the  utmost  prudence,  ever  keeping  a 
careful  look-out  against  surprise,  and  usmg 
much  skill  to  conceal  hia  movements  and  to 
provide  for  his  escape  from  danger.  Finally, 
they  are  to  return  with  the  certainty— with 
trustworthy  and  accurate  information,  and 
then  Saul  will  gather  his  forces  and  search 
David  ont  throughout  all  the  thousands  of 
Jndah.  These  are  the  larger  divisions  of  the 
territory  of  the  tribe  (Num.  L  16;  x.  4), 
throughout  which  Saul  will  hunt  for  him 
till  he  has  got  him  into  his  power. 

Ver.  24. — WhUe  the  Ziphites  were  con- 
ferring with  Saul  and  gathering  information 
David  had  moved  about  six  miles  to  the 
south  of  Ziph,  and  was  in  the  wilderness 
of  Uaon.  This  town  is  still  called  Main, 
and  occupies  a  conical  hill,  whence  Bobinson 
('Bibl.  Res.,'  ii.  433)  counted  no  less  than 
nine  cities  belonging  to  the  hill  country  of 
Jndah.  Conder  ('Tent  Work,'  it  90)  calls 
it  a  great  hump  of  rock.  In  the  plain  on 
the  south  of  Jeshimon.  Literally,  "in  the 
'Arabah  to  the  right  of  the  desert"  The 
'Arabah  was  the  name  of  the  low-lying 
desert  tract  extending  along  the  valley  of 
the  Jordan  from  the  lake  of  Gennesareth  to 
the  Dead  Sea.  Maon  lay  upon  the  edge  of 
this  depression,  in  the  southern  portion  of 
the  Jeshimon  or  Solitude. 

Vera.  25,  26. — He  came  down  Into  a  rook. 
Hebrew,  sela'^  a  cliff  or  precipice.  In  the 
next  verse  it  is  described  as  a  mountain,  on 
one  side  of  which  was  David  and  his  men, 
in  fall  view  of  Saul  and  his  army  on  the 
other.  But  as  Saul's  forces  were  much  more 
numerous,  they  were  preparing  to  separate, 
and  so  enclose  David,  while  he  made  haste. 
The  word  expresses  anxiety  and  fear,  and 
may  be  tran^ated,  "And  David  sought 
anxiously  to  go  from  before  the  face  of 
Saul."  Gender's  description  of  the  spot 
('  Tent  Work,'  u.  91)  sets  the  whole  scene 
most  vividly  before  us.  It  is  as  follows: — 
"Between  the  ridge  of  El  Kfllah  (the  ancient 
hill  of  Hachilah)  and  the  neighbourhood  of 
Maon  there  is  a  great  gorge  called  '  the 
Valley  of  Rooks,'  a  narrow  but  deep  chaam, 
impassable  except  by  a  detour  of  many  miles, 
so  that  Saul  might  have  stood  within  sight 
of  David,  yet  quite  unable  to  overtake  his 
enemy ;  and  to  this  " cliff  of  division"  the 
name  MalSky  now  applies,  a  word  closely 
approaching  the  Hebrew  MaMekoth.  The 
neighbourhood  is  seamed  with  many  tarrest 


44« 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  zxni.  14 — 2& 


beds,  but  there  is  no  other  place  near  Haon 
where  cliffs  such  as  are  to  be  inferred  from 
the  word  sela'  can  be  fonnd.  It  seems  to  me 
pretty  safe,  therefore,  to  look  on  this  gorge 
as  the  scene  of  the  wonderful  escape  of  David, 
due  to  a  sudden  Philistine  invasion,  which 
terminated  the  history  of  his  hair-breadth 
escapes  in  the  south  country."  This  cliff 
in  ver.  28  is  called  Sela-Hammahlekoth, 
"  the  cliff  of  divisions,"  or  "of  separations," 
ha/m  representing  the  Hebrew  article.  Many 
other  derivations  have  been  suggested,  but 
the  above,  which  alone  agrees  with  the  ordin- 
ary meaning  of  the  Hebrew  verb,  is  proved 
to  be  right  by  Mr.  Condor's  researches.  They 
enable  us  also  to  correct  some  small  errors. 
Thus  David  did  not  come  down  into  a  rock, 
but  "to  the  cliff,"  the  sela  or  precipitous 
gorge  described  above.  Nor  did  he  "descend 
the  rock"  (Erdmann)  "in  order  to  conceal 
himself  in  the  low  land,  or  in  the  caves  at 


its  base,"  but  ha  went  to  it  as  being  an 
impassable  barrior  between  him  and  hia 
pursuers.  But  "he  hasted  anxionslj  t» 
get  away"  (ver.  26),  because  Saul  would 
divide  his  army  into  two  parts,  and  so 
David  would  only  have  the  advantage  oi 
the  few  miles  of  detour  which  Saul  must 
make.  But  for  the  news  of  the  Philistine 
invasion  his  final  escape  would  have  been 
almost  hopeless.  The  ordinary  notion  that 
David  and  his  men  were  concealed  &om  the 
sight  of  Saul  by  an  intervening  mountain 
is  disproved,  not  only  by  no  such  mountain 
existing,  but  also  by  the  clause,  "Saul  and 
his  men  w'ere  surrounding  David  and  his 
men  "  (ver.  28).  They  h^  them  in  sight, 
and  were  forming  in  two  divisions,  so  as  to 
pass  the  gorge  at  the  two  ends  and  close 
upon  the  flanks  of  David's  small  band  oi 
followers. 
Terse  29  belongs  to  thg  next  chapter. 


HOMILETIC& 

Verg.  13— -18.— i>e«p«»i«gr  torrowa  and  new  encowragement.  The  facts  ten — 1. 
David,  deeming  it  unsafe  to  remain  in  Keilah,  goes  forth  with  his  men  in  uncertainty 
as  to  their  destination.  2.  Saul,  forbearing  to  march  against  Keilah,  seeks  in  vain  to 
capture  David  in  the  wilderness  of  Ziph.  3.  While  David,  fully  aware  of  Saul's  evil 
intent,  remains  in  the  wilderness,  he  is  Comforted  by  a  visit  from  Jonathan,  who 
expresses  his  confidence  in  David's  future  supremacy  and  renews  with  him  a  cove- 
nant of  friendship.  It  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  features  in  David's  life  that  he 
never  hesitated  to  follow  the  indications  of  the  will  of  (rod,  however  humiliating  to 
himself,  and  apparently  adverse  to  tlie  attainment  of  the  objects  dearest  to  his  heart. 
This  obedience  is  the  natural  outcome  of  the  full  trust  in  the  Lord  so  amply 
expressed  in  the  Psalms.  To  exchange  the  comforts  of  an  anticipated  sojourn  in 
Eeilah  for  a  rough  and  unsettled  life  in  the  moxmtainous  district  of  Ziph  was  a  new 
trial  to  the  faith  already  highly  strained.  But  the  obedience  was  speedily  followed 
by  the  occurrence  of  an  event  full  of  interest  and  encouragement,  and  the  narrative 
of  this  section  thus  furnishes  us  with  one  of  the  most  suggestive  instances  on  record 
of  the  providential  alleviation  of  sorrows  incident  to  the  path  of  duty.  The  con- 
nected truths  here  conveyed  may  be  set  forth  as  follows: — 

I.  Deepening  sorrows  mat  follow  on  manifest  tokens  of  God^  favour  and 
TENDER  CARE.  No  one  could  doubt  but  that  the  response  given  to  David's  inquiry  at 
Keilali  was  clear  evidence  to  himself  and  others  that  he  was  the  chosen  servant  of 
God,  and  the  character  of  the  reply  to  bis  prayer  was  proof  that  the  tender  care  of 
Jehovah  was  keeping  him  from  the  rage  and  cruelty  of  Saul.  We  can  thus  under- 
stand the  strong  expressions  of  confidence  in  God  and  gratitude  for  his  mercy  to  be 
found  in  the  psalms  of  this  period ;  and  yet  the  anguish  of  spirit  and  heaviness  of 
heart  which  also  are  manifest  in  portions  of  those  psalms  are  to  be  accounted  for 
only  by  the  fact  that  the  loving-kindness  thus  shown  was  accompanied  by  the  per- 
mission of  continued  and  almost  unendurable  sorrows.  No  sooner  had  David  been 
delivered  from  the  hand  of  Saul  at  Keilah  than  he  found  himself,  if  possible,  worse 
ofE  than  before  entering  Keilah,  an  outcast  and  fugitive,  hiding  daily  for  his  life 
amidst  the  wilds  of  the  rugged  wilderness  of  Ziph.  It  is  a  riddle  which  the  un- 
spiritual  mind  can  never  solve,  but  which  becomes  increasingly  simple  and  beautiful 
to  those  who  enter  into  the  spirit  of  our  Saviour's  mission  on  earth — that  the  sorrowi 
of  life  often  deepen  when  God  is  putting  honour  on  his  servants  by  preparing  them 
for  a  more  pure  and  blissful  fellowship  with  himself,  and  for  a  higher  grade  of 
spiritual  service.  Our  Saviour  was  the  "beloved  Son,"  the  object  of  the  Fither'i 
complacent  love,  and  his  work  for  the  benclit  of  mankind  was  one  of  sufEeiing, 


CH.  XXIII  14—29.]         THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  BAliUEL.  4lf 

ghame,  and  death.  In  his  case  we  see  how  the  higher  the  service,  th«  wider  its  range, 
and  the  more  pure  and  blissful  its  issue,  the  deeper  were  its  sorrows.  To  him  there 
was  no  contrariety  between  the  bitterness  of  the  cnp  provided  and  the  love  un^  peak- 
able  and  unmeasured.  Not  every  one  is  fitted  to  enter  fully  into  the  higher  foi  m  of 
service.  Many  sons  of  Zebedee  long  for  the  honour  apart  from  the  cost.  The  lof '  ier 
views  of  the  Apostle  Paul  enabled  him  to  regard  the  manifold  sorrows  of  his  lifo  ;>9 
an  honourable  and  to-be-coveted  participation  of  the  sufEerings  of  CSirist.  The 
power  of  spiritual  service  lies  not  in  knowledge,  not  in  culture  of  mere  intellect,  but 
m  more  perfect  purity  of  spirit  and  a  high  development  of  the  spiritual  powers  of 
faith,  love,  and  free,  cheerful  absorption  of  will  in  the  will  of  God ;  and  such  is 
human  nature  at  its  best,  that  only  tribulation,  it  may  be  increasing  tribulation,  can 
so  check  our  unspiritual  tendencies  as  to  enable  us  to  serve  God  on  the  highest  plane. 
A  rough  and  rugged  wilderness  may  fall  to  our  lot  not  only  while  God  loves  and  cares 
for  us,  but  possibly  as  a  further  means  of  developing  in  us  those  high  spiritual 
qualities  which  in  days  to  come  will  fit  us  to  minister  psalms  of  comfort  and  cheer 
to  the  saints  of  God,  and  occupy  positions  of  influence  in  the  invisible  Church  corre- 
sponding in  the  spiritual  sphere  to  that  held  by  David  in  Israel  when  h«  swayed  a 
royal  sceptre  over  the  land. 

II.  Pkovidencb  brings  special  solace  in  seasons  of  increasing  sorrows.  What 
though  David  exchange  the  prospective  comfort  of  a  stay  in  Keilah  for  a  fugitive 
life  in  the  wilderness,  what  though  his  heart  for  the  moment  find  it  "  too  hard  "  to 
solve  the  strange  problem  of  his  chequered  course  ;  just  then  that  same  Providence 
which  directed  his  steps  from  Keilah  was  mercifully  operating  in  the  heart  of  the 
noblest  man  at  the  court  of  Saul  to  bring  him  sweetest  consolalion.  There  are  many 
lines  of  influence  at  work  under  the  unifying  hand  of  God  for  the  defence  and 
guidance  of  his  people  ;  and  though  in  his  first  feeling  of  disappointment  on  leaving 
Keilah  David  could  only  see  one  line,  the  subsequent  appearance  of  Jonathan  where 
he  least  expected  him  made  it  clear  that  others  were  in  existence  and  found  their 
centre  in  God.  God  never  really  impoverishes  those  who  trust  and  serve  him.  Ouj 
course  when  faithftj  is  one  of  progressive  enrichment,  and  will  be  till  we  enter  on 
the  perfected  inher'^snce  above.  It  is  contrary  to  the  laws  of  a  spiritual  life  for  a 
true  servant  of  God  o  be  worse  off  to-day  than  yesterday.  The  ordinary  springs  of 
comfort  open  to  Ih  jd — meditation  on  God's  past  faithfulness,  the  conviction  that 
he  was  working  out  i  high  and  Divine  purpose,  and  the  pouring  out  of  his  heart  in 
prayer— were  now  OTpplemented  by  the  presence  and  love  of  his  dearest  earthly 
friend.  And  so  God  never  takes  away  what  seems  to  be  a  good,  and  never  lays  any 
new  burden  on  us  bat  that  he  gives  us  a  corresponding  blessing.  Abraham  sorrowed 
for  kindred  in  a  distant  home,  but  had  God  for  his  portion  and  exceeding  great 
reward.  Our  health  fails,  our  material  possessions  vanish,  or  our  loved  ones  die,  and 
we  turn  our  hearts  more  truly  and  passionately  toward  him  who  never  fails,  who 
is  an  everlasting  portion,  and  who  "gathers  into  one"  the  living  and  dead.  Oh, 
blessed  discipline  I  How  tenderly  the  great  Father  cares  for  his  sorrowing  ones  ! 
With  what  precision  does  he  follow  them  "whithersoever"  in  the  order  of  duty  thi,y 
go,  to  raise  up  streams  in  the  desert  and  cause  them  to  feel,  as  the  Apostle  Paul  in 
his  sorrows  felt,  that  God  is  able  to  supply  all  their  need  and  never  ^does  forsake  his 
saints. 

III.  In  the  unfolding  of  the  general  purposes  of  God's  kingdom  there  is  a 
subordination  of  service  in  which,  however,  the  higher  is  dependent  fob  com- 
PLETEST  effectiveness  ON  THE  LOWER.  In  Israel  at  that  time  God's  merciful  pur- 
poses toward  mankind  were  being  wrought  out  through  the  agency  of  servants  occu- 
pying in  the  execution  of  the  Divine  will  positions  of  relative  subordination.  Samuel, 
David,  Jonathan  were  each  working  out  the  same  results.  But  the  part  which 
Jonathan  played  in  the  sum  of  events  comprised  in  the  period  covered  by  the  history 
was  inferior  to  that  of  David.  As  a  spiritual  man  he  had  his  work  to  do,  and  it  wag 
as  important  in  its  place  as  was  that  of  Samuel  and  of  David  ;  yet  we  can  see  how 
wisely  he  formed  an  estimate  of  his  position  and  service  for  the  one  great  end,  when 
he  re"-arded  David  as  superior  in  calling  and  in  the  honours  and  responsibilities  he 
would  have  to  bear.  Jonathan  by  visiting  David  and  ministering  to  his  comfort 
recognised  this  unity  and  diversity  of  service.     And  it  is  instructive  to  notice  how 


448  THK  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [oh.  xxm.  14— S9. 

in  the  Bpiritnal  servloe  which  unites  na  those  who  are  snpposed  to  hold  inferior 
positions,  and  certainly  do  not  carry  so  heavy  responsibilities,  are  able  to  render 
most  important  aid  to  others  above  them  in  these  respects.  David  was  relatively 
the  greater  man,  and  yet  David  needed  the  spiritual  encouragement  and  support 
which  Jonathan  was  able  to  a£Eord;  and  Jonathan,  by  strengthening  " his  hand  in 
God,"  was  for  the  time  so  far  the  benefactor  and  the  superior.  The  unity  and 
gubordination  of  spiritual  service  is  a  truth  applicable  to  the  world  as  a  whole, 
and  to  the-  part  taken  by  any  of  us  at  particular  stages  of  its  histoiy.  There  is  to 
be  at  last  "  a  glorious  Church,  not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing ' 
(Ephes.  V.  27),  and  things  are  to  be  gathered  together  in  one  in  Christ  (t&u2.  i.  10). 
This  unity  of  result  is  to  be  the  product  of  all  the  manifold  influences  and  agencies 
which  God  is  pleased  to  employ  through  the  whole  course  of  time, — ^from  the  first  to 
the  last  man, — as  truly  as  the  complete  temple  is  the  product  not  of  the  more  promi- 
nent toilers,  but  of  the  totality  of  workers,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  first  to 
last.  As  every  separate  ray  of  light  and  drop  of  dew  is  necessary,  and  therefore  of 
value,  in  the  totality  of  vegetation  we  witness — as  the  vegetation  would  be  less 
perfect  were  any  one  of  these  to  be  absent  from  the  process,  so  there  is  need,  in  con- 
verting the  Divine  idea  of  salvation  into  the  grand  reality  indicated  in  the  New 
Testament,  for  every  small  as  well  as  great  spiritual  influence,  and  the  most  perfect 
fruition  of  the  great  thus  becomes  dependent  on  the  action  of  other  influence  inferior 
to  itself.  Abraham,  Moses,  David,  Isaiah,  and  Paul  were  respectively  great  in  faith- 
fulness, wisdom,  devotion,  fervour,  and  zeal,  yet  the  educating  influence  of  their 
lives  is  in  the  same  line,  and  is  ultimately  strengthened  by  association  with  the  holy 
patience  of  a  despised  Lazarus  and  the  large  liberality  of  a  poor  widow.  Men  do 
not  see  the  inierlaoings  of  spiritual  agencies.  The  influence  exerted  by  Jonathan's 
counsel  and  friendship  on  the  man  chosen  to  do  so  wonderful  a  work  for  all  time 
raises  the  thought  whether  in  the  main  the  great  results  achieved  by  some  whose 
names  are  prominent  may  not  be  closely  allied  to  the  influences  exerted  by  others 
unknown  to  fame.  There  are  doubtless  great  revelations  yet  to  be  made  in  reference 
to  the  interdependence  of  the  forces  of  the  spiritual  world.  We  do  not  as  yet  see  the 
full  bearings  of  the  prayers  of  the  lowly  on  the  raising  up  of  distinguished  workers 
and  their  enrichment  with  spiritual  power.  The  devoted  missionary,  the  successful 
pastor,  the  great  teacher  and  leader  of  men,  may  therefore  owe  much  of  their  peculiar 
spiritual  usefulness  to  the  untraceable  influence  of  prayers  ofEered  by  the  obscure. 
This  principle  helps  to  explain  the  great  stress  laid  in  the  Bible  on  the  prayers  of 
ordinary  Christians,  and  thus  enables  us  to  see  how  after  all  a  poor  afflicted  child  of 
God  may  be  an  unconscious  strengthener  of  persons  unknown  by  name. 

IV.  A   TBUE   SPIBITDAL  PERCEPTION   RECOGNISES    THIS    UNITT  AND    SUBORDINATION, 

AND  SEEKS  TO  GIVE  EFFECT  TO  IT.  The  actions  and  words  of  Jonathan  sprang  from 
his  distinct  recognition  of  the  fact  that  David,  though  greater  than  himself,  w«8 
inspired  by  the  same  aim,  and  longed  for  the  realisation  of  Israel's  glory.  _  He  could 
not  bless  Israel  by  a  virtuous  reign ;  it  was  denied  him  to  be  in  Zion  a  king  typical 
of  the  Messiah  ;  but  he  could  strengthen  the  heart  of  him  who  was  destined  to  that 
honour ;  and  with  -unparalleled  magnanimity  and  self-denial,  with  utter  absorption 
in  Israel's  good,  and  cheerful  submission  to  the  manifest  will  of  God,  he  contributed 
his  part  toward  the  final  issue.  It  is  a  question  whether  amidst  our  modern  religious 
parties  we  sufBciently  realise  the  unity  and  subordination  of  our  work  for  Christ. 
The  narrowness  of  our  isms  is  not  healthful  in  itself,  and  it  tends  to  rob  the  great 
body  of  workers  of  much  of  the  sympathy  and  large-hearted  prayer  that  would  un- 
consciously to  themselves  make  them  strong  in  God.  What  elevation  of  thought 
and  grandeur  of  life  should  we  more  uniformly  attain  to  could  we,  like  Jonathan, 
put  into  practice  the  feeling  that  our  prayers  and  sympathies,  in  going  forth  for  all 
who  labour  for  Christ,  and  especially  for  those  who  are  called  to  bear  the  strain  of 
high  and  perilous  service,  are  our  contribution  to  the  one  great  enterprise  which  from 
first  to  last  has  filled  the  heart  of  Christ  and  is  absorbing  the  best  energies  of  his 
Church  I 

V.  ThB   BEST    FORM   OF  SERVICE  WE   sometimes  can  render  to  QoD  is  to  INSPIBl 

WITH  oouRAQB  tha  hearts  of  those  who  do  A  work  to  which  wb  are  not  called. 
Jonathan  was  not  called  to  be  a  king,  but  he  served  God  by  inspiring  the  heart  of 


OH.  xxm.  14—89.  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUBL.  Ml 

Dayid  with  oonrage  amidst  his  aorrowB  and  cares.  The  narrative  implies  that  the 
friends  conversed  freely  on  the  situation  and  prospects  of  David.  Doubtless  Jona- 
than, besides  assuring  David  of  his  own  belief  in  God's  purposes  and  his  personal 
allegiance,  would  also  press  upon  him  the  fact  of  Israel's  need,  the  past  care  of  God, 
the  anointing  by  Samuel  and  its  significance,  the  historic  trials  of  patriarchs,  the  high 
purposes  of  Borrow  and  patience,  the  honour  of  being  chosen  to  serve  and  to  wait, 
and  the  grand  issue  when,  in  some  as  yet  unknown  manner,  the  best  Messianic 
hopes  of  the  nation  would  be  realised.  He  knew  that  David's  need  was  quiet  trust 
in  God,  and  with  the  tenderness  and  love  of  a  true  friend  he  diverted  his  thoughts 
away  from  Saul  and  the  sorrows  of  a  fugitive  life  to  the  everlasting  Befuge. 
"Strengthened  his  hand  in  God."  Noble  man!  noble  service  I  There  are  in  the 
lives  of  many  of  God's  servants  seasons  when  their  wisdom,  strength,  courage,  and 
patience  are  taxed  almost  beyond  endurance.  "  Heart  and  flesh  fail.  What  they 
need  is  faith  in  God.  To  move  on  in  the  dark,  to  toil  when  success  seems  hopeless, 
to  hold  on  though  dangers  thicken,  to  hope  when  events  are  adverse — this  was  the 
case  of  David,  and  often  that  of  missionaries,  pastors,  parents,  and  others  called  to 
high  and  arduous  service.  How  such  men  long  for  the  inspiring  word,  the  signifi- 
cant sign  of  sympathy,  the  reminder  of  the  truth  well  known  I  The  history  of  the 
Church  is  full  of  such  instances.  "  "Who  is  sufficient  for  these  things  ?  "  "  Could  ye 
not  watch  with  me  one  hour  ?  "  Angels  came  and  cheered  the  heart  which  men  left 
to  bear  the  unutterable  burden.  Following  the  example  of  Jonathan  and  of  the 
angels,  we  each  may  do  something  to  inspire  with  new  faith  and  hope  those  who  feel 
the  pressure  of  care  and  toil  for  Christ ;  we  may  do  it  by  our  words  of  cheer,  by  our 
assured  sympathy,  by  our  fervent  prayer,  and  by  hearty,  free  co-operation  in  the 
enterprise  which  absorbs  their  energy. 

Practical  lessons : — 1.  We  should  seek  the  evidence  of  our  being  blessed  with  the 
favour  of  God  in  the  unquestionable  spiritual  blessings  he  has  conferred  on  us  in  the 
past,  in  the  fact  of  our  being  led  by  him  and  not  by  our  own  choice,  and  in  the 
answer  of  a  good  conscience  to  his  claim  on  our  obedience  and  love,  and  not  in  the 
presence  or  absence  of  easy  circumstances.  God's  chosen  ones  have  often  known 
the  pains  of  wilderness  life.  2.  We  may  be  sure  that  before  troubles  become  so 
manifold  as  to  destroy  the  end  for  which  God  has  called  us  into  his  service  some 
appropriate  aid  will  come,  not  to  relieve  us  of  all  care,  but  to  fortify  us  for  duty; 
for  he  will  not  sufEer  us  to  be  tempted  above  that  we  are  able  to  bear.  3.  It  should 
inspire  every  Christian  worker  amidst  his  toils  that  he  is  daily  borne  on  the  heart  of 
many  who,  though  unseen  and  unknown  by  name,  are  friends  in  Christ.  4.  Honour 
is  due  to  every  one  who  by  prayer  or  kindly  word  contributes  to  the  sum  of 
Christian  effort.  5.  True  religious  sympathy  will  lead  us  to  rejoice  in  the  superior 
service  to  which  others  are  called,  and  will  devise  new  means  of  aiding  their  progress. 
6.  There  are  seasons  in  the  religious  life  when  calm  trust  in  God,  in  the  absence  of 
favouring  circumstances,  is  almost  our  sole  duty ;  and  when  we  are  strengthened  in 
this  respect  we  shall  be  able  to  possess  our  souLs  in  patience  till  the  desire  of  onr 
heart  is  attained  (Luke  xxi.  14 — 19). 

Vers.  19 — 29. — The  unobserved  side  of  life.  The  facts  are — 1.  The  Ziphites  send 
to  Saul,  offering  their  services  to  secure  David  if  only  he  will  come  to  their  country 
in  pursuit  of  him.  2.  Saul,  indulging  in  pious  language,  thanks  the  Ziphites  for 
their  sympathy,  and  promises  to  comply  with  their  request  when  properly  informed 
of  David's  movements.  3.  Going  in  pursuit  of  David  in  the  wilderness  of  Maon, 
Saul  encompasses  him  with  his  men.  4.  At  this  critical  juncture  Saul  is  called  away 
to  repel  an  invasion  of  the  Philistines,  whereupon  David  seeks  refuge  in  Engedi. 
This  brief  narrative  is  full  of  suggestion  of  profitable  topics,  such  as  the  intense 
zeal  of  men  in  sinful  courses,  its  reasons  and  its  issue ;  the  pernicious  influence  of 
local  jealousy  in  determining  the  bearing  of  men  towards  others ;  the  blindness  and 
folly  of  combinations  of  men  against  the  quietly-developing  purposes  of  God ;  the 
power  of  the  love  of  gain,  leading,  as  it  does,  men  to  adopt  a  course  of  evil  from 
wliich  others  shrink;  the  causes  of  the  indifference  or  aversion  of  sections  of  the 
cunimunity  to  the  governing  and  advancing  sentiment  of  a  nation,  as  seen  in  the 
attitude  of  the  £phites  contrasted  with  the  general  feeling  in  relation  to  Saul  and 
1  SAM.  •  e 


450  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxiii.  14—29. 

David;  the  moral  causes  of  disregard  for  thejsigns  of  the  times;  the  tendency  to  cover 
up  deeds  of  wrong  under  the  plea  of  patriotism  and  loyalty ;  the  degree  to  which 
religious  forms  of  speech  and  professions  of  sanctity  may  survive  the  utter  decay  of 
vital  godliness ;  and  the  moral  uses  of  protracted  trouble  to  the  children  of  God.  But 
leaving  these,  we  may  generalise  the  most  prominent  teaching  in  the  following 
way : — 

I.  Theke  is  an  impoetant  unobserved  side  of  life  which  must  be  taken  into 
ACCOUNT  IN  fohming  A  PBOPEE  ESTIMATE  OF  coNDDOT.  In  this  Section  we  have  a 
record  of  facts  as  they  appeared  to  an  observer.  The  acts  of  the  Ziphites  are 
recorded,  and  not  the  reasons  from  which  they  proceeded.  Our  knowledge  of  men 
compels  us  to  believe  that  there  were  intellectual  and  moral  causes  of  the  active  zeal 
against  David  which  they  alone  of  all  Israel  manifested ;  but,  so  far  as  the  narra- 
tive itself  informs  us,  their  conduct  may  have  been  inspired  by  loyalty  to  a  recog- 
nised king.  Thus,  also,  Saul's  conduct  as  here  described  is  only  that  which  appears 
to  the  casual  observer.  There  is  nothing  wrong  in  a  monarch  endeavouring  to 
capture  a  subject  who  holds  a  strong  position  by  the  aid  of  armed  men ;  nor  is  there 
anything  but  an  appearance  of  piety  in  imploring  the  Divine  blessing  on  men  who 
express  in  tangible  form  their  sympathy  with  his  troubles.  Again,  the  conduct  of 
David  as  here  recorded  embraces  only  that  side  of  life  on  which  men  can  gaze,  for 
he  here  appears  as  one  acting  as  though  his  entire  safety  depended  alone  on  his  ex- 
ertions, and  not  on  any  other  power.  The  inner,  religious  side  of  his  life  is  not 
noticed.  And,  finally,  the  acta  of  the  Philistines  are  narrated  as  they  would  appear 
to  a  historian — simply  as  the  movements  of  men  bent  on  some  of  the  ends  common 
to  the  warlike  and  restless,  no  reference  being  made  to  the  over-ruling  power  which 
silently  worked  on  the  inner  side  of  life,  causing  their  action  to  synchronise  with  the 
perilous  position  of  David.  What  is  thus  true  of  the  Ziphites,  Saul,  David,  and  the 
Philistines,  as  their  acts  are  set  forth  in  the  history,  is  also  true  of  all  men  whose 
deeds  are  recorded  in  history,  and  of  every  individual  in  the  prosecution  of  his  daily 
course.  The  main  purpose  of  history  is  to  state  fact  in  such  a  connection  as  to 
show  the  dependence  of  one  on  the  other.  There  is  always  presupposed  a  vast 
area  of  life,  which  furnishes  the  immediate  moral  causes  of  what  appears  in  the  field 
of  human  observation.  In  so  far  as  historians  profess  to  trace  actions  back  to  their 
governing  principles,  and  thus  reveal  th^  other  and  inner  side  of  life,  they  become 
philosophers,  and  must  not  expect  the  same  deference  for  their  conclusions  as  for 
their  statements  of  fact.  The  Ziphites  would  have  Saul  think  that  their  zeal  was  the 
oflEspring  of  a  cherished  patriotism  and  loyalty,  whereas  there  is  reason  for  believing 
that  .other  causes  were  chiefly  in  operation.  It  is  the  characteristic  of  sacred  history 
that  sometimes  it  gives  an  authoritative  record  of  the  inner  life,  assigning  the  true 
causes  of  the  actions  described.  The  practical  use  of  the  fact  that  there  is  an  unob- 
served side  of  life  is — 1.  To  induce  more  care  vdth  respect  to  our  unobserved  life. 
When  we  believe  that  there  is  more  real  life  lived  within  than  without,  that  the 
causes  and  germs  of  things  are  all  nurtured  beyond  human  observation,  that  the 
moral  value  of  what  is  observed  is  determined  by  the  quality  of  what  is  unobserved, 
tnd  that  though,  like  the  Ziphites,  we  may  seem  to  do  only  what  may  possibly  pro- 
ceed from  worthy  motives,  God  looks  at  the  actual  spring  of  conduct — then  shall  we 
be  more  earnest  in  seeking  a  pure  heart,  an  unobserved  life  which  shall  be  accept- 
able to  God.  2.  To  regulate  our  judgment  of  human  actions.  The  knowledge 
that  there  is  an  unobserved  side  of  conduct  cannot  but  induce  caution  in  our  estimate 
of  character.  The  apparent  loyalty  of  a  Ziphite  and  the  pious  language  of  a  Saul 
may  be  the  expression  of  a  good  or  of  an  evil  condition  of  the  unobserved  life.  Our 
own  deceitful  hearts  tell  us  how  possible  it  is  to  appropriate  virtues  to  ourselves  before 
others  when  in  our  deepest  consciousness  we  know  that  no  just  claim  can  be  made 
to  them.  On  the  other  hand,  as  it  would  be  unjust  to  infer  that  because  in  this  his- 
torical section  there  is  simply  a  record  of  David's  exertions  to  escape  Saul,  therefore 
he  was  destitute  of  the  pious  trust  which  seeks  refuge  in  God  (Ps.  liv.),  so,  in  view- 
ing the  outward  life  of  men,  we  must  not  conclude  that  that  is  all ;  for  in  the  unob- 
■erved  life,  spent  concurrently  with  the  observed,  there  may  be  a  devout,  holy  trust 
in  God  which,  beyond  all  human  view,  sustains  and  strengthens  the  entire  man. 
There  ia  a  VMt  demand  on  our  pity  and  sympathy  in  the  life  which  underlies  many 


OH.  xxin  14—29.]  THE  FIBST  fiOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  i61 

a  calm  and  brave  endurance  of  toil  and  care ;  and  beneath  many  a  fair  exterior  thera 
is  a  secret  second  life  deserving  scorn  and  indignation. 

II.  Antaqonism  to  religion  is  usually  traceable  to  moral  oaubsb.  Althongh 
the  record  does  not  state  the  reasons  for  the  conduct  of  the  Ziphites,  we,  taking  it  in 
connection  with  the  entire  history  of  the  period,  may  approximately  arrive  at  their 
real  nature.  Remembering  that  these  men  belonged  to  a  nation  whose  very  exist- 
ence was  dne  to  the  predominance  in  public  affairs  of  religious  considerations,  that 
government  with  them  was  a  question  of  allegiance  to  God  as  well  as  to  man,  that 
the  national  life  of  their  own  period  had  been  one  in  which  religious  principles  had 
become  increasingly  prominent  in  public  affairs,  that  they  were  well  aware  of  Satd's 
recognition  as  king  on  the  understanding  that  he  acted  in  subordination  to  the  higher 
principles  of  which  Samuel  was  the  assertor,  that  it  was  within  their  knowledge  that 
Samuel  and  the  high  priest  Abiathar  had  disowned  Saul  and  favoured  David,  and 
that  David's  prowess  had  been  distinctly  approved  of  God  and  beneficial  to  the 
nation,  while  his  holy,  beautiful  life  was  in  striking  contrast  with  the  life  which 
had  secured  the  slaughter  of  the  priests  at  Nob,  alienated  the  head  men  of  his 
own  tribe,  and  become  an  occasion  of  sorrow  to  the  land  —  it  follows  from  all 
this  that  these  men  could  not  have  set  themselves  against  the  most  renowned 
and  honoured  man  of  their  own  tribe  unless  they  were  under  the  influence  of 
motives  sufiBoiently  strong  to  overbear  the  evidence,  on  the  one  side,  of  David's 
integrity  and  recognition  by  God,  and,  on  the  other,  of  Saul's  debasement  and 
rejection.  That  they  did  not  reason  and  act  in  harmony  with  facts  admitted 
arose  from  two  circumstances.  1.  That  David  was  now,  and  for  some  time  had 
been,  an  outlaw,  isolated  and  sorrowful,  a  fact  seemingly  inconsistent  with  the 
previous  honours  conferred  upon  him  by  God,  and  with  the  continued  sanction  of 
Samuel  and  Abiathar.  2.  That  lack  of  sympathy  with  the  holy  aspirations  of  David 
and  jealousy  against  one  of  their  own  tribe  induced  them  to  take  his  present  unfor- 
tunate position  as  disproof  of  any  value  to  be  attached  to  the  earlier  evidences  of  his 
being  a  chosen  servant  of  God.  We  have  in  this  case  an  illustration  of  the  an- 
tagonism of  men  towards  Christ  while  he  was  on  earth,  and  towards  Christianity 
in  the  present  age.  In  the  case  of  our  Saviour  there  was  the  most  clear  and  con- 
vincing evidence  that  he  was  the  Anointed,  resembling  that  of  David's  call.  Only 
resort  to  the  absurd  supposition  that  he  was  influenced  by  Beelzebub  could  afford  an 
appearance  of  logical  consistency  in  disputing  his  Messiahship.  But  a  further  point 
of  resemblance  arises ;  for  the  Pharisees  construed  the  lowly  life,  the  unostentatious 
bearing,  the  manifest  sorrows,  in  fact,  the  strange  delay  in  rising  to  complete 
dominion,  as  inconsistent  with  their  idea  of  what  became  an  Anointed  of  the  Lord. 
Moreover,  as  with  the  Ziphites,  so  with  the  Pharisees ;  there  was  a  moral  ofience 
because  of  Christ's  insistence  on  internal  holiness,  and  they  were  averse  to  the  kind  of 
government  over  men  which  he  alone  cared  to  establish.  But  as  aversion  to  holiness 
and  jealousy  of  distinction  are  strong  principles  of  action,  the  Pharisees,  like  the 
Ziphites,  could  not  await  the  development  of  events ;  they  must  needs  take  active 
measures  to  capture  and  destroy  One  who  had  proved  by  his  deeds  of  power  the 
greatest  benefactor  of  the  age.  In  the  case  of  modern  antagonism  to  Christianity 
we  find  the  same  causes  at  work  under  analogous  conditions.  Given  the  existence  of 
a  Supreme  Being,  interested  in  the  spiritual  condition  of  his  creatures  and  free  to 
act  for  their  welfare,  and  given,  also,  as  can  be  well  established  to  every  mind  free 
from  preconceived  ideas  on  the  impossibility  of  the  supernatural,  the  veracity  of  the 
evangelical  records,  we  have  then  a  body  of  evidence  concerning  the  supernatural 
origin  and  character  of  Christianity  as  clear  as,  and  much  fuller  than,  the  evidence  to 
the  Hebrews  of  David's  selection  through  Samuel  and  distinct  approval  by  God  ; 
and  this  becomes  overwhelming  when  taken  in  conjunction  with  that  wondrous  life 
which  no  other  hypothesis  can  possibly  explain.  Yet  men  seek  to  set  aside  this 
evidence  because,  forsooth,  it  does  not  fall  in  with  their  conception  of  what  a  revela- 
tion from  God  to  man  should  be  ;  much  after  the  model  of  the  Ziphites,  who  could  not 
believe  a  wandering,  sorrowful  outlaw  to  be  the  coming  king,  notwithstanding  that 
some  earlier  events  seemed  to  point  in  that  direction.  No  doubt  in  many  theoretioal 
objectors  to  Christianity  there  is  a  positive  aversion  more  or  less  pronounced  to 
the  inward  holiness  and  entire  submission  of  heart  and  intellect  and  will  wbicb 

O  G  2 


452  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMDEL.  [oh.  xxiii.  14—29, 

Christ  makes  the  invariahle  condition  of  being  his  subjects,  and  this  perverts  th« 
judgment. 
III.  Strono  faith  in  God  is  the  proper  complement  o»  the  most  babnest 

EXKBTION,  AND    IS   A  POWER    IN    BRINGING    ABOUT    THE  DESIRED    RESULT.      Confining 

our  attention  to  this  narrative,  we  should  conclude  that  David  not  only  strove  with 
all  his  energy  to  avoid  a  conflict  with  Saul,  but  that  he  was  conscious  that  success 
rested  entirely  on  his  exertions.  But  there  was  an  unobserved  side  of  David's  con- 
duct of  which  the  narrative  says  not  a  word.  The  fifty-fourth  Psalm  reveals  that 
other  side,  and  we  there  learn  that  though  he  strove  to  escape  as  though  everything 
depended  on  his  skill  and  discretion,  yet  he  trusted  in  God  as  though  hope  were  alone 
to  be  found  in  him.  This  double  life  is  well  known  to  every  child  of  God.  What- 
ever metaphysical  questions  may  be  started  concerning  it,  as  a  fact  it  is  unquestion- 
able. Faith  is  a  power  acting  in  the  unseen,  spiritual  sphere  concurrently  with  our 
exertions  in  the  visible,  material  sphere.  Both  are  real  powers  in  God's  government 
of  man.  We  are  apt  to  under-estimate  faith  because  we  do  not  see  its  incidence ;  or 
we  are  disposed  to  doubt  its  utility  because  we  cannot  trace  the  intricate  operations 
by  which  events  are  brought  to  pass.  It  is  some  aid  to  our  faith  to  remember  that 
the  Divine  energy  is  immanent  in  every  mind  and  in  every  ultimate  force,  and  can 
cany  out  millions  of  lines  of  action  concurrently  for  definite  ends  as  readily  as  we 
by  concentration  can  carry  out  one  to  a  single  end.  God  does  rule  among  the  armies 
of  heaven  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  His  control  of  men's  movements  is 
evidently  not  a  mere  general  survey  of  hard,  rigid  lines  of  force  originally  set  in 
motion,  but  the  free  exercise  of  his  personal  energy  on  the  deepest  springs  of  human 
action,  so  as  to  insure  a  concurrence  of  events  at  such  times  and  places  as  may  sub- 
servo  some  advantage  to  those  whose  lives  are  moving  in  harmony  with  his  holy 
purposes.  God  becomes  a  reality  to  us  in  so  far  as  we  believe  this  and  act  on  the 
belief.  Our  Christian  enterprises,  private  conflicts  with  sin  and  sorrow,  and  daily 
occupations  should  be  pursued  with  all  zeal,  and  yet  with  all  faith  in  the  need  and 
certainty  of  God's  help.  If  we  wish  men  to  be  moved,  money  to  be  raised  for 
Christ's  service,  hindrances  to  religion  to  be  overcome,  and  events  to  be  brought 
about  for  which  we  have  not  the  adequate  means,  there  is  no  presumption,  but  rather 
there  is  profound  wisdom  and  piety,  in  asking  God  to  exercise  his  boundless  power 
for  the  glory  of  his  name.  "  When  the  Son  of  man  cometh  "  to  visit  his  Churches, 
as  when  once  he  walked  among  the  seven  golden  candlestickB  (Eev.  i.  13 — 17), 
"  shall  he  find  faith  on  the  earth  "?  (Luke  xviii.  8). 

General  considerations: — 1.  It  is  worthy  of  consideration  how  far  the  outward 
life  observed  by  men  is  a  genuine  expression  of  the  inner,  and  to  what  extent  our 
secrets  are  holy  and  lawful.  2.  A  study  of  the  intellectual  and  moral  causes  of  un- 
belief, as  manifested  by  various  grades  of  intellect  and  during  many  centuries,  would 
furnish  instruction  and  warning  to  the  tempted.  3.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  the  extreme 
development  of  man's  activity  in  all  departments  of  life  and  the  insistence  on  per- 
sonal effort  have  withdrawn  the  attention  of  Christians  too  much  from  the  great 
part  which  faith  in  God  is  ordained  to  play  in  the  government  of  th*  world  and 
salvation  of  men. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  13,  14. — BamSt  wanderings  in  the- wilderness.  "And  SanI  songht  him 
every  day,  but  God  delivered  him  not  into  his  hand  "  (ver.  14).  From  the  time  of 
his  leaving  Gath  tiU  his  return  (oh.  xxvii.  2)  David  dwelt  in  the  following  places 
successively — 1.  The  cave  of  Adullam.  2.  Mizpeh  of  Moab.  3.  The  forest  of  Hareth. 
4.  Eeilah.  5.  The  wilderness  of  Ziph  (Hachilah,  Horesh).  6.  The  wilderness  of 
Maon.  7.  Bn-gedi.  8.  "The  hold"  (ch.  xxiv.  22).  9.  The  wilderness  of  Paran  (oh. 
zxv.  2).  10.  The  wilderness  of  Ziph  again.  The  period  over  which  his  wanderings 
in  these  places  extended  is  not  stated,  but  it  was  probably  upwards  of  five  years  ; 
"  and  the  time  that  David  dwelt  in  the  country  of  the  Philistines  was  a  year  and  four 
months  "  (ch.  xxvii.  7).  Like  the  joumeyings  of  the  people  of  Israel  (the  events  ef 
which  "were  written  for  our  admonition"),  they  resemble,  in  some  respects,  th« 
course  of  all  God's  servants  through  the  present  world  to  "  the  everlasting  kingdom 
•I  •«  Loid  and  Saviour  Jesos  Christ"    '"Thou  tellest  my  wanderings :  put   ' 


PH.  xxin.  14—29.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  4H 


mr  tears  into  thy  bottle !  are  they  not  in  thy  book  ?  "  (Ps.  Ivi.  8).  Begard«d  _ 
ally  they  were  a  scene  of — 1.  Bitter  hostility.  "  Saul  aonght  him  every  day."  And 
ao  long  as  the  servanta  of  the  g^eat  King  are  "  in  the  world  "  they  are  objects  vf  th« 
hatred  and  opposition  of  "  the  prince  of  this  world  "  and  "  the  children  of  diso- 
bedience" (Ephes.  ii.  2;  Gal.  i.  4),  because  "they  are  not  of  the  world."  The 
hostility  which  is  directed  against  them  is  unreasonable  and  unrighteous,  but  real 
and  deep ;  sometimes  fierce  and  violent,  and  never  ceases.  2.  Outward  dittreu. 
David  was  hunted  like  "  a  partridge  on  the  mountains  "  (ch.  xxvi.  20),  "  wandered 
in  deserts  and  mountains  and  caves  of  the  earth,"  sometimes  (like  the  Son  of  man) 
"  had  not  where  to  lay  his  head,"  suffered  hunger  and  thirst  and  continual  hardship, 
was  separated  from  "  lover  and  friend,"  and  lived  in  the  midst  of  extreme  peril. 
Others  are  more  highly  favoured,  but  none  can  escape  the  ordinary  sorrows  of  life ; 
some  are  "greatly  afflicted,"  and  not  a  few  suSer  reproach  and  persecution  for 
Christ's  sake.  "  We  must  through  much  tribulation  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  " 
(Acts  xiv.  22).  8.  Inward  conflict,  temptation,  care,  depression,  grief,  and  fear, 
such  as  are  described  in  the  psalms  which  refer  to  David's  wanderings,  and  are  full 
of  imagery  derived  therefrom.  "  His  sanctified  genius  did  not  give  forth  its  perfect 
fragrance  till  it  was  bruised  in  God's  chastening  hand.  It  was  the  storm  of  afflio- 
tion  that  awoke  the  full  harmonies  of  David's  harp"  (Binnie).  And  these  are 
echoed  in  the  experience  of  the  servants  of  God  in  every  age.  4.  Divine  proteetioit 
and  instruction,  by  means  of  providential  occurrences,  the  prophetic  word,  and  the 
inward  teaching  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  "  God  delivered  him  not  into  his  hand."  "  Out 
of  these  great  experiences  in  David's  sorrowful  life  of  the  grace  and  power,  wisdom 
and  justice,  mercy  and  goodness  of  God,  was  developed  in  him,  and  through  him  in 
his  people,  that  intelligence  of  faith  and  theological  knowledge  which  we  see  in 
the  Psalms  and  the  prophetical  writings  "  (Erdmann).  And  still  higher  privileges 
than  of  old  are  now  conferred  on  the  people  of  God.  6.  Soured  devotion.  His  harp 
was  his  constant  companion  in  his  wanderings,  and  mingling  with  its  tones  in  every 
place,  his  voice  rose  up  to  God  in  prayer  and  praise,  making  every  plaoe  a  temple. 

"  Serene  he  sits  and  sweeps  the  golden  lyre, 
And  blends  the  prophet  a  with  the  poet's  fire. 
See  with  what  art  he  strikes  the  vo^  strings, 
The  Grod,  his  theme,  inspiring  what  he  sings  "  (Lowth). 

"  Whether  it  be  tne  Divine  excellences,  or  the  deep-toned  voice  of  penitence,  or  the 
longing  of  the  soul  after  God,  the  rejoicing  in  the  light  of  his  countenance,  or  thanks- 
giving for  his  mercies,  in  short,  every  emotion  of  tte  renewed  heart  finds  adequate 
expression  in  the  Book  of  Psalms "  (J.  Duncan).  It  is  "  the  poetry  of  friendship 
between  God  and  man  "  (Herder).  6.  Active  service.  For  during  his  wanderings  he 
was  called  to  render. special  service  (ver.  2),  and  in  the  latter  part  of  them  continually 
afEorded  protection  to  his  people  (ch.  xxv.  16).  "None  of  us  liveth  to  himself."  We 
are  the  Lord's  servants,  and  must  serve  him  in  faithful  and  diligent  labour  en  behalf 
of  other*.     7.  Necessary  preparation  for  future  service,  honour,  and  loy 

'.'  Oh  spread  thy  covering  wings  around, 
Tfll  all  our  wanderings  cease,  • 

And  at  our  Father's  loved  abode 
Our  souls  arrive  in  peace. "  A 

Vers.  15—18.  (Hobbsh,  in  the  wilderness  of  Ziph.)— ^Ai?  heneftt  qftrve/riendship. 
"And  Jonathan  .  .  .  strengthened  his  hand  in  God"  (ver.  16).  The  friendship  of 
Jonathan  for  David  here  stands  in  contrast  not  only  to  the  hatred  of  Saul,  but  also 
to  the  ingratitude  of  the  citizens  of  Keilah,  and  the  treachery  of  the  Ziphites  (ver. 
19).  The  benefit  of  it,  which  had  been  long  enjoyed  by  David,  was  even  more 
fully  than  ever  experienced  by  him  now,  when  he  left  Keilah  with  his  600  men, 
wandered  hither  and  thither,  and  "  abode  in  a  mountain  (Hachilah)  in  the  wilderness 
of  Ziph."  He  was  exposed  to  the  persecution  of  Saul,  who  sought  to  destroy  him 
by  every  means  in  his  power  (ver.  14),  driven  from  one  stronghold  to_  another,  able 
to  procure  only  a  precarious  subsistence,  anxious,  fearful,  and  sometimes  ready  to 
link  in  doubt  and  despondency.     "  Just  at  this  moment  Jonathan,  as  though  led  by 


4M  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oH.  xxm.  14—29. 

God,  made  his  way  to  him  in  tlie  thickets  of  the  forest  (literally,  Horesh),  and  coa- 
Boled  him  as  if  with  words  and  promises  from  God  himself  "  (Bwald).  He  did  not 
accompany  the  force  in  pursuit  of  David  (ver.  15),  but  came  from  Gibeah.  Hia 
peculiar  and  trying  position  made  it  impossible  for  him  to  do  more  for  his  friend 
than  hold  this  secret  interview  with  him,  without  altogether  breakirig  with  his  royal 
father,  and  openly  incurring  the  charge  of  disobedience  and  rebellion.  Never  was 
friendship  more  faithfully  shown  ;  never  did  it  render  more  valuable  service.  Well 
might  the  blind  man,  when  asked  what  he  thought  the  tun  was  like,  reply,  "  Like 
friendship."     Its  benefit,  as  received  by  David,  was — 

I.  Opportune.  "A  friend  loveth  at  all  times;"  but  his  kindly  ofBces  are  pecu- 
liarly grateful  and  beneficial  in  a  time  of  need;  as,  e.  g.,  in — 1.  Physical  distress, 
affliction,  homelessness,  privation,  peril  of  liberty  or  life.  2.  Mental  anxiety,  lone- 
liness, diijcouiBgement,  depression,  when  the 

"  Light  is  low, 
When  the  blood  creeps,  and  the  nerre*  prick 
And  tingle  ;  and  the  heart  is  sick, 
And  all  the  wheels  of  Being  slow." 

8.  Spiritnal  trial,  temptation,  failing  faith  hope  and  patience ;  fai  view  of  the  pros- 
perity of  the  wicked,  the  patience  of  Heaven,  the  delay  of  promised  good.  At 
such  a  time  how  unspeakably  precious  is  a  true  friend  1  His  countenance  is  like 
sunshine  breaking  through  thick  clouds.  "  Friendship  is  the  only  point  in  human 
affairs  concerning  the  benefit  of  which  all  with  one  voice  agree.  There  is  nothing 
so  suited  to  our  nature,  so  well  adapted  to  prosperity  or  adversity.  I  am  not  aware 
whether,  with  the  exception  of  wisdom,  anything  better  has  been  bestowed  on  man 
by  the  immortal  gods.  And  they  seem  to  take  away  the  sun  from  the  world  who 
withdraw  friendship  from  life  "  (Cicero).  "  Refuge  failed,"  &o.  (Pa.  cxlii.  4 ;  Matt, 
ixvi.  40,  56). 

II.  Adapted  to  the  most  pressing  need.  "  And  strengthened  his  hand  in  God, 
i.  e.  strengthened  his  heart  not  by  supplies,  or  by  money,  or  any  subsidy  of  that 
kind,  but  by  consolation  drawn  from  his  innocence  and  the  promises  of  God  "  (Keil). 
"Exhorted  him  to  put  confidence  in  God"  (Dathe).  He  stren^hened  him  Dy — 1. 
Hi»  genial  preteiice,  especially  since  his  visit  was  expressive  of  his  fidelity,  confidence, 
and  sympathy,  and  made  with  much  effort,  self-denial,  and  risk.  "  They  that  fear 
thee  will  be  glad  when  they  see  me  "  (Ps.  cxtx.  74  ;  Prov.  xxvii.  17).  "  Whom  when 
Paul  saw,"  &c.  (Acts  xxviii.  15  ;  2  Cor.  vii.  7).  "  When  I  ask  myself  whence  it  is 
that  I  feel  this  joy,  this  ease,  this  serenity  when  I  see  him — it  is  because  it  is  he,  it  is 
because  it  is  I,  I  answer;  ai.J  that  is  all  that  I  can  say"  (Montaigne).  2.  His 
encouraging  uwrds-  "Fear  not"  ("the  keynote  of  Jonathan's  address"),  &c.,  in 
which  he  assured  him  of — (1)  Preservation  from  threatening  danger,  doubtless 
pointing  him  to  the  Divine  protection.  (2)  Exaltation  to  the  highest  dignity :  "  Thou 
wilt  be  king  over  Israel ;  pointing  him  to  the  Divine  purpose,  which  had  been 
plainly  declared,  and  could  not  fail  to  be  fulfilled.  He  had  already  intimated  (ch. 
XX.  15),  and  now  explicitly  asserted,  his  faith  in  that  purpose.  What  ground  was 
there  for  David's  fear  f  (3)  His  anticipation  of  continued  and  intimate  association 
with  him  when  he  should  sit  on  the  throne,  all  claim  to  which  he  willingly  renounced 
for  his  sake,  and  in  obedience  to  the  will  of  God.  (4)  The  conviction  of  Saul  him- 
self that  he  would  prevail.  If  Saul  believed  it,  why  should  David  doubt  ?  What 
more  ho  said  is  not  recorded.  But  this  was  admirably  adapted  to  strengthen  iis 
heart  and  hand.  "  It  is  difficult  to  form  an  adequate  conception  of  the  courage,  the 
spiritual  faith,  and  the  moral  grandeur  of  this  act.  Never  did  man  more  completely 
clear  himself  from  all  complicity  in  guilt  than  Jonathan  from  that  of  his  father. 
And  yet  not  an  undutiful  word  escaped  the  lips  of  this  brave  man  "  (Edersheim). 
8.  Sis  renewed  covenant  vdth  him  (en.  xviii.  3  ;  xx.  16, 17,  42),  in  which,  whilst  he 
pledged  his  own  faithful  love  and  service,  he  drew  forth  the  expression  at  his  faith 
m  his  future  destiny  as  well  as  of  his  fidelity  to  himself  and  his  house ;  and  both 
appealed  to  God  as  witness. .  The  intercourse  of  friends  is  peculiarly  beneficial  when 
it  u  sanctified  by  their  common  recognition  of  the  presence  of  Ood,  and  their  commoB 
darotion  to  bis  wilL     "Next  to  the  immediate  goidanca  of  Ghid  by  hia  Spiriti  tha 


ca.  xxin.  14—29.]         THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  451 

counsel  and  eTicoaragement  of  virtuous  and  enlightened  friends  afford  the  most 
powerful  aid  in  the  encounter  of  temptatioit  and  in  the  career  of  duty. "  It  was  th« 
ULSt  tim*  David  and  Jonathan  met. 

"  0  heart  of  fire  I  misjudged  by  wilful  maa, 

Thou  flower  of  Jesse's  race  t 
What  woe  wag  thine,  when  thou  and  Jonathas 

Last  greeted  face  to  face  t 
He  doomed  to  die,  thou  on  ns  to  impress 
The  portent  of  a  bloodstained  holiness  "  ('  Lyra  Apoctolica  y 

TIL  Endubitjg.  The  influence  of  their  meeting  continued  long  afterwards,  and 
produced  abundant  fruit  (ch.  xxiv.  7  ;  xxvi.  9).  "  The  pleasures  resulting  from  the 
mutual  attachment  of  kindred  spirits  are  by  no  means  confined  to  the  moments  of 
personal  intercourse ;  they  diffuse  their  odours,  though  more  faintly,  through  the 
seasons  of  absence,  refreshing  and  exhilarating  the  mind  by  the  remembrance  of  the 
past  and  the  anticipation  of  the  future.  It  is  a  treasure  possessed  when  it  is  not 
employed  ;  a  reserve  of  strength,  ready  to  be  called  into  action  when  most  needed  ; 
a  fountain  of  sweets,  to  which  we  may  continually  repair,  whose  waters  are  inex- 
haustible" (R.  Hall).  "If  the  converse  of  one  friend,  at  one  interview,  eives 
comfort  and  strengthens  our  hearts,  what  may  not  be  expected  from  the  contmnal 
supports,  daily  visits,  and  powerful  love  of  the  Saviour  of  sinners,  the  covenanted 
Friend  of  believers  I"  (Scott).— D. 

Vers.  19 — 23.  (The  hill  op  Hachilah.) — Treachery.  One  of  the  most  painful 
of  the  af&ictions  of  David  (suspicion,  hatred,  calumny,  ingratitude,  &c.)  was  trea- 
chery, such  a.3  he  experienced  at  the  hands  of  some  of  the  people  of  Ziph.  They 
were  men  pt  his  own  tribe,  had  witnessed  his  deUverance  of  Keilah  from  the  common 
enemy,  were  acquainted  with  his  character  and  relations  with  Saul,  and  might  have 
been  expected  to  sympathise  with  him  when  he  sought  refuge  in  their  territory.  But 
"  those  who  should  have  rallied  around  him  were  his  enemies  and  betrayers."  They 
had  "a  panoramic  view  of  the  country  from  Tell-Zif,  and  could  see  from  thence 
David's  men  moving  about  in  the  desert ;  "  went  and  informed  the  king  that  he  was 
hiding  himself  "  in  strongholds  in  the  wood  (Horesh),  in  the  hill  of  Hachilah  (south  of 
Tell-Zif,  which  is  four  miles  south-east  of  Hebron),  on  the  right  hand  of  the  desert ;  " 
urged  him  to  come  down  and  accomplish  his  desire,  and  promised  to  deliver  David 
into  his  hand.  This  new  affliction  came  upon  him  almost  immediately  after  he  had 
been  encouraged  by  the  visit  of  Jonathan,  and  in  it  we  see — 

I.  An  exhibition  of  human  depkavitt.  There  can  be  no  doubt,  after  what  had 
taken  place,  about  the  motives  by  which  they  were  actuated.  Underneath  their 
apparent  "compassion"  for  Saul  (ver.  21)  lay  hatred  of  David,  aversion  to  his  prin- 
ciples, and  the  "  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  departing  from  the  living  God,"  which  exists 
in  all  ages,  and  manifests  itself  in  an  endless  variety  of  ways  (Ps.  xiv. ;  Bom.  iii. 
10;  Heb.  iii.  12).  It  appears  in — 1.  Vnfeeling  faithlessness ;  indiSemnce  to  the 
claims  of  close  relationsliip,  superior  worth,  and  valuable  service ;  deficiency  of  com- 
passion for  the  needy  and  unjustly  persecuted ;  voluntary  misuse  of  advantages,  and 
abuse  of  trust.  2.  Subtle  selfishness,  making  some  temporal  good  its  chief  aim; 
for  its  sake  doing  injury  to  others,  eagerly  seeking  the  favour  of  the  wealthy  and 
powerful,  and  disguising  itself  under  professions  of  loyalty  and  public  service; 
running  "  greedily  after  the  error  of.  Balaam  for  reward  "  (Jude  11  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  14, 
15).  3.  Ungodly  zeal.  "  Any  one  at  that  time  in  Israel  who  feared  God  more  than 
man  could  not  lend  himself  to  be  made  a  tool  of  Saul's  blind  fury.  God  had  already 
manifestly  enough  acknowledged  David"  (Delitzsch).  Saul  knew  that  it  was  the 
purpose  of  God  that  David  should  be  king  (ver.  17),  notwithstanding  his  pious  lan- 
guage (ver.  21),  and  the  men  of  Ziph  participated  with  him  in  his  endeavour  to  defeat 
that  purpose.  Their  character  is  described  in  Ps.  Liv., '  The  DivLue  Helper  againal 
ungodly  adversaries  '  (see  inscription)  : — 

"  O  God,  by  thy  name  save  me. 
And  in  thy  might  iudge  my  causik 


4C6  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUBL.         [OB.  Tini.  14—29. 


For  strangers  hare  risen  np  against  me, 
And  violenf  men  have  sought  after  my  lift; 
They  hare  not  set  God  before  them." 

They  were  ttrangtrs  "  not  by  birth  or  nation,  but  as  to  religion,  Tirtne,  oompaisloii, 
and  humanity  "  (Chandler)  ;  and  in  calling  them  such  "  there  is  a  bitter  emphasis  as 
well  as  a  gleam  of  insight  into  the  spiritual  character  of  the  true  Israel "  (Bom.  ii. 
28,  29 ;  ix.  6). 

II.  An  bxpebiencb  of  sbvbrb  trial  often  endured  by  good  men,  who  "  for  right- 
eousness' sake  "  are  betrayed  by  false  friends,  and  even  those  "  of  their  own  house- 
hold" (Matt.  X.  36),  in  whom  they  have  put  confidence.  The  trial — 1_.  Causes 
intense  suffering  ;  grieves  more  than  the  loss  of  earthly  possessions,  and  inflicts  a 
deeper  wound  than  a  sword  (Ps.  Iv.  12).  2.  Becomes  an  occasion  of  strong  tempt- 
ation; to  indulge  a  spirit  of  revenge,  to  doubt  the  sincerity  of  others,  to  refrain 
fi'om  endeavour  for  the  general  good  as  undeserved  and  vain  (Ps.  cxvi.  11).  But 
when  regarded  aright — 3.  Constrains  to  fervent  prayer  and  renewed  confidence  in 
the  eternal  and  faithful  Friend. 

"  0  God,  hear  my  prayer; 
Give  ear  to  the  words  of  my  mouth. 
Behold,  God  is  my  Helper, 
The  Lord  is  the  Upholder  of  my  soul "  (Ps.  Ut.  2,  4). 

IIL  A  FOEBSHADOWINQ  OF  Mbssiah's  SUFFERINGS,  for  the  afflictions  of  David  on 
the  way  to  the  throne  of  Israel  were  ordained  to  be  a  type  of  "  the  sufferings  of 
Christ,  and  the  glory  that  should  follow."  "  He  came  unto  his  own,  and  his  own 
received  him  not,"  was  persecuted  by  the  rulers  of  the  nation,  and,  after  escaping 
many  treacherous  designs  of  his  enemies,  was  betrayed  by  Judas  (the  only  Judsan 
among  the  twelve)  "  into  the  hands  of  sinners."  And  his  betrayal  wa^  necessary 
to — 1.  The  completeness  of  his  expe/rience  as  the  chief  of  sufferers.  2.  The  setting 
forth  of  his  example  of  spotless  holiness  and  quenchless  love.  3.  The  perfection  of 
his  Sympathy  as  the  Succourer  of  the  tempted.  "  It  became  him,"  &c.  (Heb.  ii.  10, 
18).  "  The  end  of  Christ's  incarnation  was  that  he  might  draw  up  into  his  own 
experience  all  the  woes  and  temptations  of  humanity,  to  draw  around  him  all  the 
swathings  of  our  imperfect  nature,  and  make  our  wants  his  own,  till  not  a  cry  could 
go  up  from  it  which  had  not  first  come  into  his  own  consciousness  "  (Sears). — D. 

Vers.  24 — 28.  (The  wilderness  of  Maon.) — A  marvellotts  escape.  "Therefore 
they  called  that  place  Sela-hammahlekoth  " — the  cliff  of  separations  (ver.  28).  It 
seemed  as  if  at  length  Saul  was  about  to  accomplish  his  purpose.  Led  by  the 
treacherous  Ziphites,  he  went  down  to  the  hill  of  Hachilah,  from  which  David  had 
withdrawn  to  "  the  wilderness  of  Maon,  in  the  plain  on  the  south  of  the  desert."  In 
his  further  pursuit  (ver.  26)  there  was  but  a  short  distance  between  them — Saul  stand- 
ing on  a  ridge  of  Hachilah,  David  on  a  rock  or  precipice  in  Maon ;  but  a  deep  chasm 
separated  them  from  each  other.  And  when  "  Saul  and  his  men  were  encircling 
David  and  his  men  to  seize  them,  and  David  was  sore  troubled  to  escape  "  (ver.  26), 
"  there  came  a  messenger  unto  Saul,  sajang,  Haste  thee,  and  come ;  for  the  Philistines 
have  invaded  the  land."  Thus  his  purpose  was  suddenly  and  effectually  defeated. 
The  escape  of  David  suggests,  concerning  the  dealings  of  God  with  his  servants, 
thaX— 

I.  Hb  sometimes  suffers  them  to  be  beduced  to  severe  straits.  Danger  is 
imminent,  the  enemy  exults,  their  own  wisdom  and  strength  are  unavailing,  and  they 
•re  full  of  anxiety  and  dread.  They  have  no  resource  but  to  betake  themselves  to 
"  the  Bock  of  Israel ; "  if  he  should  fail  them  they  are  lost ;  and  it  is  to  constrain 
them  to  seek  refuge  in  bim  that  they  are  beaten  off  from  every  other  (see  ch.  viL  12). 

II.  He  never  SDFrERS  them  to  continue  therein  without  help.  Although  the 
space  that  separates  them  from  destruction  be  narrow,  it  is  impassable ;  for  the  in- 
visible hand  of  God  is  there,  and  the  enemy  cannot  go  a  step  further  than  he  permits. 
"  He  shall  cover  thee  with  his  feathers,"  &c.  (Ps.  xci.  4).  Sometimes  nothing  more 
can  be  done  than  to  "  stand  still  and  see  the  salvation  of  the  Lord  ;  "  if  an  effort  to 
escape  must  be  made,  it  is  still  he  who  saves,  and  to  him  we  must  ever  look  in  faith 


OH.  xxm.  14—29.]        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  481 

and  prayer.  "  What  doth  not  prayer  overcome  and  conquer  ?  What  doth  not  resist- 
ance drive  back  when  accompanied  by  distrust  of  self  and  trust  in  God?  And 
in  what  battle  can  he  be  conquered  who  stands  in  the  presence  of  God  with  an 
earnest  resolve  to  please  him  ?  (Scupoli).  "  When  I  cry  unto  thee,  then  shall  mine 
enemies  turn  back,    &c.  (Ps.  Ivi.  9). 

III.  He  often  delivers  them  at  the  moment  of  thbib  gebatbst  peril.  He 
does  so  both  in  temporal  calamity  and  in  spiritual  trouble,  labour  and  conflict.  At 
the  point  of  despair  deliverance  comes  (Micah  vii.  8).  And  thereby  his  interposition 
is  rendered  more  apparent,  the  designs  of  the  enemy  are  more  signally  frustrated,  and 
the  gratitude  of  his  servants  is  more  fully  excited.  "  David  was  delivered  at  the  last 
hour,  it  is  true ;  but  this  never  strikes  too  late  for  the  Lord  to  furnish  in  it  a  proof  to 
those  that  trust  in  him  that  his  word  is  yea  and  amen  when  it  says,  '  I  will  never 
leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee ' "  (Krummacher). 

IV.  He  makes  use  of  various  and  unexpected  means  fob  thkib  deliverance 
(ver.  27).  Who  could  have  predicted  the  arrival  of  such  a  message  ?  The  incursion 
of  the  Philistines  was  the  natural  result  of  the  course  pursued  by  Saul  in  levying 
war  (ver.  8),  going  out  to  seek  the  life  of  David  (ver.  16),  and  leaving  the  country 
unprotected ;  but  the  message  came  at  the  opportune  moment  by  the  overruling 
providence  of  God.  His  resources  are  boundless ;  he  employs  his  enemies  for  the 
preservation  of  his  friends,  diverts  their  attention  to  other  objects,  and  impels  them 
to  spend  their  strength  in  conflict  with  each  other.  "  The  Lord  knoweth  how  to 
deliver  the  godly  out  of  temptations"  (2  Pet.  ii.  9). 

V.  His  interposition  on  their  behalf  should  be  gratefully  recorded  ;  as  it 
was  in  the  name  which  was  given  to  the  spot,  and  still  more  fully  in  the  psalm 
ending 

"  With  willing  mind  will  I  sacrifice  unto  thee; 
I  will  give  thanks  to  thy  name,  O  Jehovah,  for  it  is  good. 
For  out  of  all  distress  hath  he  delivered  me, 
And  upon  mine  enemies  hath  mine  eye  seen  its  desire  "  (Ps.  Ilv.  8,  9\,        IX 

Vers.  16 — 18. — Sweet  ctmnsd  in  time  of  need.  I.  The  discouragement  of  David. 
The  citizens  cf  Keilah,  after  he  had  with  his  good  sword  delivered  them  from  the 
Philistine  marauders,  were  so  ungrateful,  perhaps  so  much  afraid  of  sharing  the  fate 
of  the  city  of  Nob  at  the  hand  of  Saul,  that  they  were  ready  to  betray  the  son  of 
Jesse  and  surrender  him  to  the  king.  From  this  danger  he  no  sooner  escaped  than 
the  people  of  Ziph — though  he  did  not  compromise  them  by  entering  their  town,  but 
encamped  in  a  wood — were  not  only  willing,  but  eager,  to  reveal  his  hiding-place. 
And  the  pursuit  was  hot.  "  Saul  sought  him  every  day."  To  add  to  the  danger, 
David  had  with  him  600  armed  men — too  many  to  be  easily  concealed,  but  too  few 
to  encounter  the  force  which  Saul  led  against  him,  and  which  was  numbered  by 
thousands.  It  was  therefore  a  critical  time  for  David ;  and  his  poetic,  sensitive 
nature  felt  the  ingratitude  and  injustice  more  keenly  than  he  dreaded  the  actual 
peril,  so  that  he  began  to  be  quite  chagrined  and  disheartened.  The  Apostle  Paul 
had  a  similar  tendency  to  depression.  He  felt  ingratitude  and  calumny  most  acutely, 
and  was  more  cast  down  by  these  than  by  any  of  the  physical  sufferings  and  mortal 
risks  that  befell  him.  But  Paul  was  like  David  too  in  his  quick  susceptibility  to 
words  of  kindness,  and  in  drawing  strength  from  fellowship  with  congenial  minds. 

II.  The  friend  in  time  of  need.  St  Paul  tells,  "When  we  were  come  into 
Macedonia,  our  flesh  had  no  rest,  but  we  were  troubled  on  every  side ;  without  were 
fightings,  within  were  fears.  Nevertheless  God,  who  comforteth  those  that  are  cast 
down,  comforted  us  by  the  coming  of  Titus."  In  like  manner  did  God  comfort 
David  amidst  fightings  and  fears  by  the  coming  of  Jonathan.  This  noble-minded 
prince  cheered  the  fugitive  in  the  forest  of  Ziph — 1.  By  showing  to  him  a  getierous 
human  affection.  This  was  love  indeed,  which  clave  to  David  in  exile  as  closely  as 
ever  it  bad  done  when  he  was  in  the  sunshine  of  public  favour,  and  which  was 
willing  to  run  great  risks  for  the  dehght  of  clasping  band  in  hand  and  talking  face 
to  face.    Here  was  genuine  friendship,  which  is  perhaps  more  rare  than  love.    Cynics 

KInt  oat  that  the  celebrated  friendslupB.  as  of  David  and  Jonathan  in  the  Bible,  and 
mum  and  PyiMaa  the  Pythagoreana  m  Greek  itoiy,  belong  to  "the  herais  tatk 


4W  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.       [oh.  zxui.  li— 2». 

simple  period  of  the  world ; "  and  they  allege  that  these  cannot  be  reproduced  in  th« 
sophisticated  society  of  modem  times.  There  is  something  in  this,  though  it  is  not 
absolutely  true.  The  tone  of  "  In  Memoriam  "  may  be  too  intense  for  most  of  ns, 
but  it  is  not  incomprehensible.  That  is  a  rare  and  lofty  friendship  which  prefers 
another  in  honour  above  ourselves.  From  the  early  days  of  David's  promotion 
Jonathan  augured  his  advancement  to  the  throne,  and  took  generous  delight  in  the 
prospect.  He  still  retained  and  openly  expressed  the  same  feeling.  David  would 
be  king,  and  he,  his  friend  and  brother,  would  share  his  joy  and  stand  at  his  right 
hand.  It  was  not  to  be  so.  But  we  see  David,  when  established  on  the  throne, 
looking,  if  we  may  so  speak,  for  Jonathan.  "  And  David  said,  Is  there  yet  any  that 
is  left  of  the  house  of  Saul,  that  I  may  show  him  kindness  for  Jonathan's  sake  ? " 
(2  Sam.  ix.  1).  2.  By  lifting  his  thoughts  to  God.  It  was  not  possible  or  proper 
for  Jonathan  to  levy  troops  and  lead  them  to  the  help  of  his  friend  against  the  king 
his  father.  But  he  did  what  he  could,  and  did  the  best  thing  possible  in  such  a  case, 
when  he  animated  the  faith,  and  hope  of  David  in  the  promise  and  providence  of 
God.  He  referred  to  the  Divine  purpose  as  no  secret,  but  revealed,  and  known 
to  Saul  himself,  though  he  struggled  -against  it.  The  counsel  of  the  Lord  must 
stand.  How  could  David  doubt  it  ?  But  David  did  sometimes  doubt  and  fear,  and 
he  is  not  alone  in  the  weakness.  Sarah  had  the  promise  of  God  that  her  son  should 
be  Abraham's  heir  and  successor,  and  yet  she  was  uneasy  lest  he  should  be  dis- 
possessed or  hurt  by  the  son  of  Hagar.  Jacob  at  Bethel  got  a  promise  that  he  and 
his  posterity  would  possess  the  land  on  which  he  lay,  yet  when  he  returned  to  it  he 
was  quite  alarmed  lest  Esau  should  destroy  his  family  and  himself.  And  so  also 
many  persons  who  have  eternal  life  in  the  gospel  and  in  the  sure  provision  of  grace 
by  Christ  Jesus  grow  faint  and  raise  foreboding  questions :  What  r£  God  forget  me  ? 
What  if  I  perish  after  all  ?  The  best  thing  that  a  friend  can  do  for  such  a  doubtei 
is  to  show  him  that  God  cannot  lie  and  cannot  be  defeated .  For  his  name's  sake  he 
will  do  as  he  has  said.     So  one  may  strengthen  the  weak  hands  of  another  in  God. 

III.  Thoughts  suggested  by  the  meeting  in  the  wood.  1.  The  value  of  an 
early  friendship  in  the  fear  of  God.  It  is  in  youth  that  the  strongest  friendships 
are  formed,  and  permit  interchanges  of  criticism  and  correction  that  are  not  so  palat- 
able when  years  have  increased  our  reserve,  and  perhaps  our  obstinacy.  This  is 
especially  true  of  the  moral  and  religious  aspect  and  use  of  friendship.  Old  men,  even 
when  they  are  on  terms  of  cordial  personal  regard,  do  not  easily  exchange  spiritual  con- 
fidences. But  young  friends  can  do  so ;  and  never  do  they  put  the  bond  between  them 
to  better  use  than  when  they  warn  each  other  of  moral  risks  and  snares,  and  encourage 
one  another  to  trust  in  God.  2.  The  great  part  which  secondary  personages  in  his- 
tory may  play.  David  takes  a  primary  or  front  place  in  sacred  story ;  but  he  was 
much  indebted  to  the  kindly  help  of  others  who  take  a  less  conspicuous  rank — e.  g., 
Jonathan  encouraging  him  in  the  wood,  and  Abigail  turning  him  back  from  hasty 
bloodshedding.  Again  we  pass  on  in  thought  to  the  Apostle  Paul,  who  fills  a  very 
high  place  in  the  Christian  annals,  but  was  much  helped  by  men  and  women  in  quite 
a  secondary  position.  Himself  tells  us  so,  joyfully  acknowledging  his  obligation  to 
such  as  Aquila  and  Prisoilla,  Mary,  Urbane,  Timothy,  Epaphroditus,  John  Mark, 
Luke,  and  Aristarchus.  These  Christians  did  direct  work  for  the  Lord  ;  but  perhaps 
did  their  best  piece  of  service  when  they  helped  Paul,  and  encouraged  his  hand  in 
God.  So  is  it  at  all  times  with  the  greatest  men  in  both  Church  and  State.  They 
owe  much  to  others  who  are  far  less  known  than  themselves,  if  known  at  all.'  A 
sympathetic  wife,  a  faithful  friend,  a  humble  helper,  quite  incapable  of  taking  the 
conspicuous  position  or  doing  the  public  work,  supplies  a  strengthening,  restoring 
element  in  hours  of  discouragement  or  weariness,  and  so  does  much  to  preserve  a 
notable  career  from  failure.  In  fact  every  great  man  draws  up  into  his  thought 
and  work  the  cogitations  of  many  minds,  the  desire  of  many  hearts,  the  faith  or 
fortitude  of  many  spirits ;  and  the  efforts  and  sympathies  of  many  combine  in  the 
results  which  are  associated  with  his  name.  3.  The  uncertainty  that  friends  who 
part  will  meet  again  on  earth.  '  "  They  two  made  a  covenant  before  the  Lord,"  and 
parted,  little  knowing  that  each  was  taking  the  last  look  of  his  friend.  Their 
thoughts  were  of  days  to  come,  when  they  should  not  need  to  meet  by  stealth.  They 
would  be  always  together  by  and  by — ^take  counsel  together  fight  side  by  side 


CH.  xxiY.  1 — 22.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


459 


against  the  enemies  of  Israel,  do  exploits  for  their  nation,  and  re-establish  the  wor- 
sliip  of  Jehovah  and  the  honour  of  his  sanctuary.  The  elevation  of  one  would  ba 
the  elevation  of  both ;.  and  the  spirit  of  jealotisy  which  now  darkened  the  court 
and  the  kingdom  would  give  place  to  generous  coniidence  and  love.  So  they  pro- 
posed ;  but  God  disposed  otherwise.  Jonathan  never  saw  David  again.  Death 
broke  their  "fair  companionship,"  and  the  elevation  of  David  was  bedewed  with 
tender  sorrow  for  his  friend,  "the  comrade  of  his  choice,  the  human-hearted  man  he 
loved."  There  is  one  Friend,  only  one,  from  whom  we  cannot  be  severed.  Oh, 
what  a  Friend  we  have  in  Jesus  1  especially  helpful  to  us  in  cloudy  days  and  seasons 
of  distress.  He  comes  to  us  when  we  are  in  the  wood,  perplexed,  embarrassed,  cast 
down.  Let  us  tell  all  our  straits  and  misgivings  to  him.  This  Friend  will  never 
die.  And  not  even  our  death  can  break  the  friendship  or  separate  us  from  the  love 
of  Christ— F. 

EXPOSITION. 

David  in  thb  Wildbbnkbs  of  Enqedi  (oh.  xxiii.  29— xxit.). 


CHAPTEK  XXIV. 

David  spares  Saul's  life  in  a  oave 
(vers.  1 — 7).  Ver.  1. — The  wilderness  of 
£n-gedi.  Finding  no  safety  on  the  western 
side  of  the  desert  of  Judahj  where  the  Ziph- 
ites  were  ever  watching  his  movements, 
David  now  boldly  crossed  this  arid  waste, 
and  sought  shelter  in  the  remarkable  oasis 
of  En-gedi,  on  the  shore  of  the  Dead  Sea. 
The  word  may  signify  either  the  Fountain 
of  Luck  or  the  Kid's  Spring,  the  latter  being 
the  meaning  of  the  name  Ain-Jadi,  which 
it  still  bears.  In  2  Chron.  x,x.  2  it  is 
identified  with  Hazazon-Tamar,  the  Palm- 
Wood,  an  ancient  seat  of  the  Amorites,  and 
evidently  famous  from  of  old  for  its  fertUity 
(Gen.  xiv.  7).  Conder  ('Tent  Work,'  iL  126) 
describes  the  country  over  which  David  would 
have  to  travel  as  almost  impassable,  so  that 
in  four  and  a  half  hours  of  hard  riding  he 
and  his  party  advanced  only  six  miles,  so  deep 
were  the  valleys  which  they  were  obliged  to 
cross.  From  a  lofty  peak  on  their  way  the 
view  was  most  extraordinary.  On  every 
side  were  other  ridges,  equally  white,  steep, 
and  narrow ;  their  sides  seamed  by  innumer- 
able torrent-beds,  their  summits  sharp  and 
rugged  in  outline.  Not  a  tree  was  visible, 
and  the  whole  region  was  like  the  dry  basin 
of  a  former  sea,  scoured  by  the  rains,  and 
washed  down  in  places  to  the  hard  founda- 
tion of  metamorphic  limestone  which  under- 
lies the  whole  district.  But  the  desert  once 
crossed,  "there  is  no  scene,"  he  says,  "more 
vividly  impressed  on  my  memory  than  that 
of  this  magnificently  rocky  and  savage  pass, 
and  the  view  from  the  spring  below."  He 
had  encamped  on  •  plateau  upon  the  top  of 
the  cliffs,  which  rise  to  a  height  of  2000  feet 
above  the  Dead  Sea ;  and  1340  feet  below  him 
the  warm  spring  of  En-gedi,  83°  P.,  rises 
from  tmder  a  great  boulder,  and  dashing 
down  the  rest  of  the  descent,  flows  across  the 
plidn  at  the  foot  of  the  clifEs,  which  is  about 


half  a  mile  square.  All  around  are  the  mini 
of  ancient  gardens  and  thickets,  among  which 
he  saw. the  beautiful  black  grackles  with 

fold-tipped  wings,  bulbuls,  and  thrushes, 
olomon  seems  to  have  delighted  in  the 
spot,  and  to  have  covered  the  hiUs  with 
vines ;  for  he  compares  his  beloved  to  a 
"  cluster  of  camphire  in  the  vineyards  of  ■ 
En-gedi "  (Cant,  i  14).  Neither  palm  nor 
vine  is  to  be  found  there  now,  but  there  ia 
still  a  rich  vegetation,  and  groves  of  trees, 
According  to  Thomson  ('  The  Land  and  the 
Book,'  p.  602)  the  sides  of  the  ravines  lead- 
ing to  En-gedi  are  full  of  natural  and  arti- . 
ficial  caves  and  sepulchres. 

Ver.  2. — Chosen.  See  on  this  word  ch. 
ix.  2.  The  rocks  of  the  wild  goats.  Ap- 
parently this  was  the  proper  name  of  some 
cliffs  near  En-gedi,  so  called  from  their  being 
frequented  by  the  ibex,  or  Syrian  chamois, 
an  animal  which,  according  to  Thomson 
(p.  603)  is  stiU  found  there.  It  shows  Saul's 
pertinacious  hatred  of  David,  that  no  sooner 
was  the  war  with  the  Philistines  over,  than 
he  pursues  him  with  3000  picked  warriors 
into  these  lonely  fastnesses.  Comp.  Pg. 
IvlL  4,  written,  accordmg  to  the  title,  upon 
the  occasion  recorded  in  this  chapter. 

Ver.  3.  —  He  came  to  the  sheepcotei. 
Rather,  "to  sheepcotes,"  there  being  no 
article  in  the  Hebrew.  Such  sheepcotes 
were  common  in  Palestine ;  for  Thomson 
(p.  603)  says,  "I  have  seen  hundreds  of  these 
sheepcotes  around  the  mouth  of  caverns, 
and  indeed  there  is  scarcely  a  cave  in  the 
land,  whose  location  will  admit  of  being 
thus  occupied  {i.  e.  by  the  flocks),  but  has 
such  a  "  cote  "  in  front  of  it,  generally  made 
by  piling  up  loose  stones  into  a  circular 
wall,  which  is  covered  with  thorns,  as  a 
further  protection  against  robbers  and  wild 
beasts.  During  cold  storms,  and  in  the 
night,  the  flocks  retreat  into  the  cave,  but 
at  other  times  they  remain  in  this  enclosed 
cote.  .  .  .  These  caverns  are  as  dark  as  mid 


MO 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


[OB.  ZXIT.  1— SS 


nlglit,  and  the  keenest  vjt  cannot  see  five 
paces  inward ;  bnt  one  who  has  been  long 
within,  and  is  looking  outward  toward  the 
entrance,  can  observe  with  perfect  distinct- 
ness all  that  takes  place  in  that  direction. 
David,  therefore,  could  watch  Saul  as  he 
came  in,  and  notice  the  exact  place  where 
he  "covered  his  feet,"  while  Saul  could  see 
nothing  but  impenetrable  darkness."  To 
cover  his  feet  The  Syriac  understands  this 
of  sleeping ;  more  correctly  the  Vulgate  and 
Chaldee  take  it  as  in  Judges  iii.  24,  margin. 

Ters.  4,  5. — Behold  the  day  of  which 
Jehovah  said  unto  thee,  &c.  David's  men 
regard  this  deliverance  of  Saul  into  their 
hand  as  providential,  and  the  fulfilment  of 
the  promises  made  in  David's  favour,  with 
which,  no  doubt,  they  were  well  acquainted. 
But  with  a  noble  self-control  he  refuses  to 
take  the  matter  into  his  own  hand,  and 
leaves  unto  God  in  trusting  faith  the  exe- 
cution of  his  purposes.  To  prove,  neverthe- 
less, to  Saul  his  ianocence,  to  soften  his 
bitterness,  and  refute  the  suspicion  that  he 
was  Ijdng  in  wait  to  murder  him,  he  cuts  off 
the  comer — Hebrew,  wing — of  his  meCl  (see 
ch.  iL  19).  Even  for  this  his  heart  smote 
him.  So  tender  was  his  conscience  that  he 
condemned  himself  for  even  deviating  so 
slightly  from  the  respect  due  to  the  anointed 
king. 

Vers.  6,  7. — Seeing  he  is  the  anointed  of 
Jehovah.  David  bases  his  allegiance  to  Saul 
on  religious  grounds.  He  was  Jehovah's 
Messiah,  and  as  such  his  person  was  sacred. 
To  this  principle  David  steadfastly  adhered 
(see  ch.  xxvl  9 ;  2  Sam.  L  16).  The  Lord 
forbid.  Hebrew,  "Far  be  it  from  me  from 
Jehovah,"  i.  e.  for  Jehovah's  sake.  So 
David  stayed  his  servants.  The  verb  is 
a  strong  one,  and  means  to  crush  down.  It 
shows  that  David  had  to  use  all  his  authority 
to  keep  his  men,  vexed  by  Saul's  pursuit, 
from  kUling  him. 

Tbmpokart  reconciliation  op  Saul  and 
David  (vers.  8—22).  Ver.  8. —Saul  ap- 
parently had  withdrawn  from  his  men,  and 
David  seizes  the  opportunity  of  proving  to 
him  his  innocence,  and  quieting  the  king's 
fears.  He  goes  out,  therefore,  and  calls  after 
liim,  saying.  My  lord  the  king,  addressing 
liim  thus  aa  his  master,  to  whom  his  obedi- 
ence was  due.  He  also  pays  him  the  utmost 
reverence,  bowing  his  face  to  the  earth  and 
making  obeisance.  By  this  lowly  bearing 
David  showed  that,  so  far  from  being  a  rebel, 
he  still  acknowledged  Saul's  lawful  authority, 
»nd  was  true  to  his  allegiance. 

Vers.  9,  10. — In  his  address  David  com- 
plained of  Saul's  listening  to  men's  words, 
which  slanderously  represented  him  as  lying 
in  wait  to  kill  the  king  (comp.  ch.  xxiL  8). 
In  answer  to  their  calumnies  he  now  pleads 
fiaol't  own  ujierieDce  of  hi*  deedi.    Soma 


hade  me  kill  thee.  Hebrew,  "he  bade  to  HI] 
thee."  The  literal  rendering  is,  "Jehovah 
delivered  thee  to-day  into  my  hand,  and 
bade  kill  thee."  The  A.  V.  supplies  tome, 
or,  more  exactly,  "one  said."  This  is  sup- 
ported by  the  Syriac  and  Chaldee,  but  the 
literal  rendering  is  probably  the  right  one. 
Had  David  killed  Saul,  it  would  have  seemed 
as  if  it  were  ordered  by  Providence  so  to  be, 
and  as  if  by  putting  Saul  into  his  powei 
God  had  intended  his  death.  But  what 
seem  to  us  to  be  the  leadings  of  Providence 
are  not  to  be  blindly  followed.  Possibly 
David's  first  thought  was  that  God  intended 
Saul  to  die,  and  so  the  Vulgate,  "  I  thought 
to  kill  thee."  But  immediately  a  truer  feel- 
ing came  over  his  mind,  and  he  recognised 
that  opportunities,  such  as  that  just  given 
him,  may  be  temptations  to  be  overcome. 
The  highest  principles  of  religion  and 
morality  do  not  bend  to  external  circum- 
stances, but  override  them. 

Vers.  11— 13.— My  father.  David  thus 
salutes  Saul  not  because  he  was  actually  his 
father-in-law,  but  as  a  title  indicative  of  the 
respect  due  &om  an  inferior  to  his  superior 
(2  Kings  v.  13).  So  David  calls  himself 
Nabal's  son  (ch.  xrv.  8).  In  the  rest  of  the 
verse  he  contrasts  his  refusal  to  slay  Saul, 
when  it  might  have  seemed  as  if  it  were 
Providence  that  had  put  him  into  his  power, 
with  Saul's  determined  pursuit  of  him.  Thou 
hnntest  my  soul  to  take  it  Thou  perpetually 
usest  every  artifice  and  stratagem  against  me 
for  the  confessed  purpose  of  killing  me,  and 
pursuest  me  as  eagerly  as  the  hunter  pursues 
his  game.  Hence  David  commits  his  cause 
to  Jehovah,  in  the  sure  confidence  that  he 
will  avenge  him,  and  with  the  firm  deter- 
mination never  himself  to  raise  his  hand 
against  one  who,  though  his  enemy,  was  also 
the  king.  In  proof  of  the  impossibility  of 
his  ever  seeking  the  king's  hurt,  he  quotes  an 
ancient  proverb,  "  From  the  wicked  goeth 
out  wickedness."  Had  David  harboured  evil 
intentions  he  would  have  executed  them 
when  so  fair  an  opportunity  offered,  but  as 
he  has  no  such  purposes  ' '  his  hand  will  never 
be  "  upon  Saul. 

Vers.  14,  15. — FinaBy,  David  makes  a 
pathetic  appeal  to  Saul,  contrasting  him  in 
his  grandeur  as  the  king  of  Israel  with  the 
fugitive  whom  he  so  relentlessly  persecuted. 
In  calling  himself  a  dead  dog  he  implies  that 
he  was  at  once  despicable  and  powerless.  Even 
more  insignificant  is  a  flea,  Hebrew,  "  one 
flea,"  "a  single  flea."  The  point  is  lost  by 
omitting  the  numeraL  David  means  that  it 
is  unworthy  of  a  king  to  go  forth  with  3000 
men  to  hunt  a  single  flea.  As  the  king's 
conduct  is  thus  both  unjust  and  foolish,  David 
therefore  appeals  to  Jehovah  to  be  judge  and 
plead  his  cause,  i.  e.  be  his  advocate,  and 
state  the  proofs  of  his  innocence.     For  d^ 


OB.  XZIT.  1—22.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


4«1 


liver  me  oat  of  thy  hand,  the  Hebrew  fa, 
"  will  judge  me  out  of  thy  hand,"  i.  e.  will 

i'udge  me,  and  by  doing  so  justly  will  de- 
irer  me  from  thy  power. 

Ver.  16. — This  address  of  David  pro- 
duced a  lively  effect  upon  SauL  Fhilippson 
gays  of  it,  "  The  speech  of  David  has  so 
mnch  natural  eloquence,  such  warmth  and 
persuasiveness,  that  it  can  be  read  by  no 
one  who  has  any  feeling  for  the  simple 
beauties  of  the  Bible  without  emotion.  The 
whole  situation,  moreover,  has  much  of  sub- 
limity about  it  We  see  David,  standing  on 
the  summit  of  some  rock  in  the  wilderness, 
raising  on  high  the  trophy  of  his  magnani- 
mity, while  addressing  the  melancholy  Saul, 
whom  he  loved  as  a  father,  obeyed  as  king, 
and  honoured  as  the  Lord's  anointed,  but 
who  nevertheless  hated  him  without  reason, 
and  followed  him  with  unremitting  energy 
to  put  him  to  death  ;  using  his  opportunity 
of  touching  the  heart  of  his  enemy  with 
words  hurried,  but  expressive  of  his  inner- 
most feelings,  and  showing  himself  fliU  of 
humility,  oppressed  by  unutterable  sorrows, 
bowed  down  by  the  feeling  of  his  powerless- 
ness,  yet  inspirited  by  the  consciousness  of  a 
noble  deed."  So  affected  is  Saul  by  David's 
words  that  he  breaks  into  tears,  affectionately 
addresses  David  as  his  son,  and  acknowledges 
his  innocence  and  the  uprightness  of  his 
cause. 

Ver.  19.— Will  he  let  him  go  well  away  t 
Hebrew,  "  will  he  let  him  go  on  a  good 
way  I "  i.  $.  will  he  let  him  go  on  his  way 
in  peace,  unhurt  t  As  David,  nevertheless, 
had  let  hij  enemy  go  unharmed,  Sanl,  touched 


momentarily  by  hfa  generosity,  prays  that 
Jehovah  wul  reward  him  for  what  he  had 
done. 

Vers.  20— 22.— I  know  well  that  thou 
shalt  surely  be  king.  Jonathan  had  ex- 
pressed a  similar  conviction  (ch.  xxiil  17), 
and  probably  there  was  a  growing  popular 
belief  that  David  was  the  person  in  whom 
Samuel's  prophetic  words  (ch.  iv.  28)  were 
to  be  falmled.  Something  may  even  have 
been  known  of  the  selection  of  David  and  his 
anointing  at  Bethlehem ;  not  perhaps  by  the 
king,  but  in  an  indistinct  way  by  the  people 
As  for  Saul  himself,  he  must  long  have 
felt  that  God's  blessing  had  departed  from 
him,  and,  brooding  perpetually  over  Samuel's 
words,  it  required  but  little  discernment  on 
his  part  to  make  him  see  that  the  kingdom 
which  he  had  forfeited  was  to  be  bestowed 
upon  one  so  worthy  of  it,  and  so  manifestly 
protected  and  blessed  by  God.  He  therefore 
makes  David  swear  that  he  will  not  cut  off 
his  seed  after  him  (see  on  ch.  xx.  16) ;  and  so 
they  part.  Saul  returns  to  Gibeah,  while 
David  and  his  men  gat  them  up  unto  the 
hold.  The  word  gat  up,  mownted,  suggests 
that  the  hold,  or  fastness,  was  their  previous 
haunt  at  Hacbilah.  They  would  go  down  to 
En-gedi,  and  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  food 
there  for  600  men  would  be  insurmountable, 
except  for  a  very  short  period.  On  the  other 
side  of  the  desert  they  were  in  a  pastoral 
country,  and  the  large  flock-masters  there 
probably  from  time  to  time  sent  them  sup- 
plies. The  position  of  David  was  thus 
improved  for  the  present  by  Saul's  recon- 
ciliation with  him. 


HOMILETICa 

Veil.  1 — ^7. — Imftruction  in  cava.  The  facts  are — 1.  Saul,  having  repelled  the 
inooTBion  of  the  PhilistineB,  returns  to  pursue  David  in  the  wilderness  of  Engedi.  2. 
Saul,  entering  privately  into  a  cave  while  David  and  his  men  lie  concealed  there, 
comes  unwittingly  within  the  power  of  David.  3.  David's  men,  referring  to  a 
Divine  prediction,  urge  him  to  slay  Saul.  4.  Apparently  to  indicate  how  entirely 
Saul  was  within  his  power,  David  stealthily  cuts  o£E  the  skirt  of  his  coat.  6.  R&- 
proaching  himself  for  the  levity  thus  displayed  in  treating  the  Lord's  anointed,  he  at 
once  justifies  his  refusal  to  touch  Saul's  life,  and  also  restrains  his  men.  It  is 
observable  how  the  sacred  narrative  of  this  period  is  entirely  occupied  with  the  con- 
flict between  Saul  and  David ;  not  a  word  being  said  of  the  social  and  spiritual  state 
of  the  nation,  its  commerce  and  agpicnlture,  its  hopes  and  fears,  or  even  of  the  nature 
and  degree  of  influence  being  exerted  by  Samuel  and  the  prophetic  schools.  The 
specialty  of  sacred  history  lies  in  the  concentration  of  all  thought  in  the  develop- 
ment of  the  chain  of  events  by  which  the  original  promise  to  Adam  and  Abraham 
is  traceable  to  fulfilment  in  Christ.  This  principle  will  account  for  countless  omis 
■ionB  of  fact  which  might  reasonably  be  expected  in  a  nation's  annals,  and  for  th< 

{irominence  given  to  persons  and  circumstances  otherwise  of  no  public  significance, 
t  is  because  men  do  not  consider  the  spiritual  principle  on  which  the  Old  Testament 
is  eTidently  constructed  that  they  mistake  much  of  its  meaning,  fail  to  see  its  exqui- 
site teaching,  and  regard  as  heterogeneous  what  is  pervaded  by  a  marvellona  unity. 
The  incidents  of  thia  stage  in  the  history  not  only  reveal  the  gradual  prooeea  by 


462  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh,  rav.  1— M 

which  FroTidence  was  working  ont  great  issnes  for  Israel  and  all  mankind,  bat  also 
suggest  several  topics  of  far  wider  range  than  the  individual  life  of  David.  Caves, 
from  Machpelah,  the  centre  of  solemn  and  tender  interests  (Gen.  zziii.  1 — 9 ;  xxv.  9 ; 
xzxv.  29  ;  I.  13),  on  to  the  hiding-place  of  a  weary-hearted  prophet  (1  Kings  xix.  9), 
to  Plato's  imaginary  scene  for  illustrating  the  limitations  of  human  knowledge  and  the 
hiding-places  of  persecuted  saints  (Heb.  xii.  38),  have  figpired  in  human  afiairs,  and 
the  cave  of  Bngedi  certainly  merits  attention.     It  reminds  us  of — 

_  I.  The  dominance  of  an  evil  pabsion.  In  reply  to  the  inquiry,  How  is  it  that  the 
king  of  Israel  is  here  away  from  his  ordinary  seat  of  government,  and  exposed  to 
peril  of  life?  the  answer  must  be.  Because  the  passion  of  cruel  envy  has  gained 
dominion  over  his  entire  nature.  Any  considerations  of  policy  or  prudence  where- 
with he  may  have  sought  to  justify  his  conduct  in  pursuing  David  were  mere  fictions 
created  by  a  perverted  will  under  the  control  of  a  masterful  envy  of  one  better  than 
himself.  The  history  traces  the  growth  of  this  feeling.  The  dire  evil,  like  a 
repressed  torrent,  seemed  to  gain  force  by  the  check  given  by  Samuel  and  the  pro- 
phets (ch.  xix.  18 — 24),  until  at  last  it  gained  such  ascendancy  over  Saul's  life  that 
the  entire  energy  of  his  mind  and  the  ordinary  administration  of  his  kingdom  were 
•  made  subordinate  to  its  expression.  He  was  the  slave  of  an  evil  once  consisting  in  a 
sudden  feeling  of  ill-will,  which,  had  it  been  dealt  with  as  every  unhallowed  feeling 
should  the  moment  it  appears,  might  have  been  crushed  in  the  germ.  The  case  o/ 
Said  is  not  unlike  that  of  many  men,  although  the  governing  feeling,  may  be 
different.  Men  are  more  entirely  dominated  by  some  powerful  disposition  than  they, 
in  their  neglect  of  introspection  and  consequent  lack  of  self-knowledge,  imagine. 
The  reality  is  seen  in  the  instance  of  persons  given  up  to  intemperance,  dissolute- 
ness of  life,  and  cruelty ;  and  ordinary  observers  may  be  able  to  trace  the  process 
from  slight  indulgence  in  the  sin  to  its  complete  mastery  over  the  life.  Others,  who 
look  at  life  more  closely  and  estimate  its  value  by  the  Scriptural  standard,  can  also 
see  the  same  enslavement,  brought  on  by  degrees,  in  the  instance  of  persons  who 
pursue  wealth,  worldly  fame,  or  personal  enjoyment  as  the  chief  end  of  life.  The 
Pharisees  thought  it  shocking  to  have  killed  the  prophets,  and  were  not  disposed  to 
admit  their  own'  enslavement  to  evil  feelings  deadly  in  character.  The  positive 
antagonism  of  men  to  Christ  means  the  gradual  growth  in  them  of  aversion  to  his 
holy  restraints  until  they  become  its  slaves.  There  is  a  proud  but  delusive  sense  of 
independence  attaching  to  this  enslavement  to  evil.  "  We  were  never  in  bondage  to 
any  man"  (John  viii.  33).  It  is  a  device  of  the  devil  to  make  his  captives  content 
with  their  chains  or  to  blind  them  to  their  reality.  "  Are  we  blind  also  ?  "  (John  ix. 
40).  And  as  in  the  case  of  Saul  the  domination  of  the  evil  only  drew  him  on  and 
on  to  deeper  trouble,  till  at  last  all  was  lost,  so,  unless  our  ruling  evils  are  destroyed 
by  prompt  submission  of  will  to  Christ's  yoke,  and  consequent  subjection  of  the  life 
to  his  purifying  grace,  sin  will  "  bring  forth  death." 

II.  The  influence  of  human  feeling  in  the  interpretation  which  men  put 
UPON  revelation  and  phovidencb.  Different  opinions  may  be  entertained  as  to 
the  sense  attached  to  the  words  of  David's  men  (ver.  4),  and  accordingly  the  prac- 
tical lessons  deducible  will  vary  with  the  choice  we  make.  (1)  On  the  supposition 
that  they  were  here  quoting  a  specific  communication  conveyed  to  David  through 
Samuel  or  Gad,  and  probably  divulged  in  course  of  conversation  with  them,  we  have 
raised  the  question  of i  the  fact  of  revelations  having  been  made  in  past  ages  to  holy 
men  which,  servin,!^  for  their  personal  guidance  and  comfort,  have  not  been  incor- 
porated in  the  ordinary  records,  which  conserve  only  what  has  been  deemed  neces- 
sary to  the  connected  history  of  redemption  and  the  general  instruction  of  mankind. 
If  this  be  so,  it  is  obvious  obscurities  might  cease  to  be  obscurities  to  us  did  we 
but  know  what  those  immediately  concerned  in  the  events  recorded  may  have  been 
familiar  with.  (2)  On  the  supposition  that  the  language  of  these  men  was  the  inter- 
pretation which  they  put  upon  the  predictions  contained  in  ch.  xv.  28 ;  xvi.  1,  12, 
and  on  the  avowed  beliefs  of  Jonathan  (ch.  xx.  15;  xxiii.  17),  which  by  this  time 
may  have  become  current,  we  have  raised  the  question  of  tho  influence  of  a  cherished 
state  of  feeling — its  extent  and  legitimacy — on  the  interpretation  which  men  put 
upon  the  teachings  of  Scripture  in  reference  to  doctrine,  history,  and  worship.  (3) 
On  the  suppositif  n  that  their  words  were  simply  intended  to  be  the  sense  they  put 


3H.  xxiT.  1—22.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  4U 

apon  the  indications  of  Providence  as  then  working  oat  in  favonr  of  Dayid'i  oange, 
we  have  the  question  of  the  proneness  of  men  to  view  passing  events  in  the  light  of 
their  own  tendencies,  and,  therefore,  to  make  Providence  mean  what  it  was  never 
designed  to  suggest.  Apart  from  controversy  on  the  fore-mentioned  points,  it  is 
possible  to  generalise  the  teaching  of  the  passage  by  saying  that  there  is  a  prevailing 
tendency  in  men  to  prejudice  the  interpretation  both  of  Divine  words  and  providen- 
tial events  by  undue  regard  to  their  own  wishes.  It  is  clear  that  these  men  wanted 
David  to  slay  Saul.  Being  less  spiritual  and  generous  than  he,  not  having  risen  to 
his  lofty  conception  of  tho  kingdom  of  God,  and  restive  under  the  restraints  which 
kept  them  from  positions  of  power  under  the  coming  king,  they  easily  believed  it 
was  God's  will  that  David  should  force  on  the  issue  by  the  death  of  his  enemy. 
Passing  event  or  spoken  word  in  the  past  would  have  no  other  meaning  for  them. 
1.  This  fact  should  be  remembered  in  relation  to  controversies  and  diversities  of 
opinion  on  matters  of  sacred  history,  doctrine,  and  worship.  The  existence  of  such 
diversities  is  no  evidence  against  a  revealed  religion,  as  some  suppose,  bnt  just  the 
reverse  ;  for  in  the  nature  of  the  case  men  view  the  truth  through  the  medium 
created  by  their  own  cherished  moral  condition.  The  final  supremacy  of  truth  is  not 
to  be  attained  in  violation  of  laws  which  govern  the  operations  of  the  human  mind, 
but  by  means  of  them.  That  men  so  diverse  in  opinion  and  in  worship  should 
nevertheless  have  so  much  in  common  that  is  fundamental,  and  should  be  under  the 
mighty  influence  of  it,  is  a  sign  that  the  truth  is  one  and  of  God,  while  the  error  is 
of  man  and  is  manifold.  No  student  of  human  nature  can  be  surprised  that  men 
should  seek  to  eliminate  the  supernatural  from  Scripture  history ;  for  only  let  a 
desire  be  cherished  to  see  a  revelation  harmonise  with  what  a  man  thinks  would  be  a 
proper  way  of  giving  it  to  the  world, — namely,  by  just  such  an  absence  of  super- 
natural manifestations  as  characterises  an  era  when  no  new  revelation  is  longer 
needed, — and  it  will  be  as  easy  for  him  to  see  only  naturalism  in  Scripture  events  as 
for  David's  men  to  see  in  words  and  events  an  authorisation  to  slay  Saul.  It  is  a 
suggestive  circumstance  that  men  of  diverse  temperaments  and  emotional  or 
esthetic  tendencies  gravitate  towards  certain  ecclesiastical  organisations ;  nor  can 
we  overlook  the  fact  that  it  is  rare  for  men  to  pass  over  from  a  system  in  which  their 
tastes  have  been  formed  to  another,  the  advocates  of  which  claim  to  represent  the 
truth.  2.  The  fact  should  variously  affect  our  conduct  in  relation  to  our  fellow- 
men  and  to  the  truth.  It  should  induce  a  distrust  of  our  oum.  judgment  in  so  far  as, 
on  severe  self-examination,  it  is  seen,  to  be  associated  with  our  wishes.  Every  one  is 
bound  to  "search  the  Scriptures,"  to  "see  whether  these  things  are  so,"  and  to 
"  hold  fast  what  is  true."  No  surrender  of  this  great  duty  and  privilege  to  an  order 
jf  men  can  be  pleaded  on  the  ground  that  possibly  feeling  may  distort  the  vision  of 
truth  in  the  private  individual ;  for  men  acting  for  others  are  men  still,  and  cannot 
escape  the  conditions  of  human  nature,  while  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  as  avail- 
able for  one  sincere  heart  as  for  another.  Our  duty  is  to  bring  the  most  vigorous 
powers  we  can  command  to  bear  on  our  understanding  of  the  will  of  God,  and  in  so 
far  as  we  do  so  in  dependence  on  the  Holy  Spirit  we  may  calmly  rest  in  our  con- 
clusions, with  the  proviso  that  they,  however  good,  are  not  coextensive  with  truth, 
and  that  we  have  purged  our  hearts  of  all  human  preference  and  prejudice.  It 
should  induce  charity  towards  others.  The  exercise  of  charity  in  matters  of  opinion 
is  not  identical  with  a  surrender  of  our  own  judgment  to  a  superior,  nor  a  denial  of 
the  importance  of  fundamental  truth  and  the  possibility  of  its  attainment,  nor  a  blind- 
ness to  the  serious  consequences  resulting  from  error,  but  an  exercise  of  kindly  con- 
sideration for  those  who  differ  from  us,  proceeding  from  the  consciousness  that  our 
own  views  may  be  in  some  degree  affected  by  our  subjective  moral  condition,  and 
that  our  superiority  to  others  depends  on  the  belief  we  have  in  the  comparative  free- 
dom of  our  judgment  from  personal  bias.  It  is  a  characteristic  of  the  interaction  of 
feeling  with  thought  that  in  so  far  as  feeling  has  become  habitual  we  are,  by  a  well- 
tnown  psychological  law,  less  conscious  of  its  presence  as  an  element  in  the  forma- 
tion of  judgment ;  and  consequently  we  may,  as  may  others,  be  very  sincere  though 
in  error.  This  by  no  means  justifies  error,  or  renders  men  safe  from  its  consequences ; 
but  it  does  demand  mutual  consideration,  and  imposes  on  every  man  the  solemn 
Ttsponsibility  of  so  guarding  the  beginnings  of  his  life  that  no  unholy  feeling  or  form 


4S4  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh,  xxiv.  1—M. 

d.  self-will  shall  gain  ascendancy  in  bis  nature.  They  are  wise  who  in  a  kind  and 
tender  spirit  seek  to  bring  men  to  a  higher  form  of  spiritual  life.  It  is  in  love— the 
pure  love  of  God — that  truth  is  to  be  seen.  It  should  induce  us  to  seek  for  (mrselvei 
and  others  more  of  the  purifying  grace  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Possibly  while  on  earth 
men  will  not  entirely  rise  above  the  disturbing  or  perverting  influence  of  tastes  and 
sentiments  inwrought  with  their  early  education,  and  unconsciously  fostered  as  years 
advance ;  for  by  the  mental  law  of  association  we  are,  while  in  the  body,  in  some 
measure  subject  to  bondage.  Yet  the  truth  is  clear  that  in  so  far  as  we  do  become 
pure  in  heart  and  like  as  a  little  child — with  a  nature  open  to  receive  what  God  may 
teach,  and  not  furnished  with  wishes  by  which  truth  is  to  be  judged — we  shall  lise 
to  a  correct  view  of  God's  word  and  providence.  Pure  souls  are  quick  in  spiritual 
perception  and  responsive  to  all  that  is  Divine,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  sensitive  to 
the  faint  appearance  of  evil.  The  more  fully  the  Church  becomes  eanotified,  the 
more  unitjr  will  be  created  in  a  discernment  of  all  that  constitutes  fundamental  truth. 
The  eras  m  which  men  have  paraded  opinions  alien  to  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the 
saints,  priding  themselves  on  their  skill  and  ability,  have  not  been  distinguished  by 
extreme  dependence  on  the  sanctifying  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  nor  perhaps  haw 
the  Church  ever,  since  apostolic  days,  sufficiently  associated  growth  in  spiritual  know- 
ledge with  his  blessed  indwelling. 

III.    The  MEINB  OF  SUCCESS  AS  VIEWED  BT  MEN  OF  DIVERSE   CHABACTEE.      All  the 

men  in  the  cave  were  one  with  David  in  the  cause  on  which  he  was  embarked. 
But  followers  do  not  always  enter  into  the  lofty  aspirations  of  their  leaders,  or  share 
equally  with  them  the  responsibility  of  the  position  assumed,  while  they  often  outstrip 
them  in  apparent  zeal  for  the  completion  of  their  work.  Hitherto  the  chief  obstacle  in 
the  way  of  success  was  Saul,  and  now  that  Providence  had  manifestly  put  him  within 
the  power  of  David,  what  more  conclusive  evidence  to  ardent  followers  of  the  true  road 
to  success  could  be  forthcoming?  Let  David  smite  his  persecuting  foe,  and  the 
cause  is  won  I  Such  was  the  road  to  success  suggested  by  policy,  self-interest,  usages 
of  Eastern  warfare,  and  restless  impatience  of  the  ways  of  God.  Against  this  David 
protests.  It  is  his  duty  to  abide  God's  time  for  entrance  on  his  royal  dignities. 
Even  the  slight  liberty  which  David,  on  the  impulse  of  the  moment,  took  with  the 
king  in  spoiling  his  garment  became  on  reflection  an  occasion  of  self-reproach. 
Respect  for  office  is  a  power  in  social  life,  being  one  form  of  reverence  for  law  and 
order,  and  contributing  to  the  easy  maintenance  of  lawful  authority  ;  and  therefore 
the  levity  of  finding  amusement  for  himself  and  others  at  a  king's  expense  was 
inconsistent  with  the  true  Hebrew  culture  which  indicates  its  regard  for  the  finer 
sentiments  of  life  by  such  prohibitions  as,  "  Thou  shalt  not  seethe  a  kid  in  its  mother's 
milk;"  "Thou  shalt  not  speak  evil  of  the  ruler  of  thy  people.''  It  should  be 
remembered  generally  that  there  is  a  semiing  way  to  rapid  success  which  is  not  the 
true  way,  and,  vice  versd,  a  tediowi,  painful  way  which  is  the  right.  David's 
■uperior  discernment  was  fortunate  for  him,  though  doubtless  his  adherents  were 
annoyed  at  his  apparent  timidity  and,  as  they  supposed,  fastidiousness.  Lot  ungener- 
ously made  choice  of  the  richest  district  in  haste  to  be  rich,  but  his  uncle  eventually 
was  most  anccessful  (Gen.  xiii.  8 — 11;  xiv.  11,12).  On  the  other  hand,  Moses 
refused  the  temptation  to  become  possessed  of  the  honours  and  riches  of  Egypt,  and 
finally  was  raised  to  the  highest  position  a  servant  of  God  could  occupy  (Heb.  xi. 
24 — 26).  Our  Saviour  might  have  gained  a  vast  following  and  lieen  regarded  by  the 
authorities  of  Jerusalem  as  their  Messiah  had  he  only  accommodated  his  standard 
a  little  to  their  wishes  ;  but  now  he  is  Lord  of  millioriA  The  apostles  constantly 
resisted  inducements  to  achieve  an  immediate  success  by  lowering  their  standard  of 
preaching  to  the  tastes  of  men,  and  so  lost  some  (Gal.  iii.  1 — 4)  disciples  ;  but  the 
lesnlt  has  been  most  blessed.  In  Church  organisation,  modes  of  worship,  and 
methods  of  labour  it  is  possible  to  devise  means  by  which  at  first  a  large  accession 
■hall  be  made  to  the  ranks  of  nominal  Christians,  yet  at  the  same  time  wrong  may 
be  done  to  the  claims  of  order,  purity,  reverence,  and  truth,  which  wrong  will  be 
avenged  in  years  to  come  by  corruption  of  manners,  low  spiritual  tastes,  and  possibly 
apostasy  from  the  truth.  In  matters  of  business  men  often  see  an  easy  way  by  which 
wealth  may  be  speedily  won,  and,  in  preference  to  the  slow  and  steady  process  <A 
honest  toil,  it  may  be  chosen  to  the  ruin  of  the  soul.     Simple,  earnest  waiting  CB 


m.  xm.  1—22.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  4M 

Providence,  doing  daily  work  as  it  comes,  not  seeking  to  force  matters  by  any  act 
that  conscience  would  condemn,  is  the  oonrse  suggested  by  the  conduct  of  David 
md  all  who  fear  Ood. 

Vers.  8 — 15. — Disvnmination  in  relation  to  men,  truth,  and  voeatum.  The  facte 
are — 1.  David  follows  Saul  out  of  the  cave  and  pays  him  homage.  2.  He  remon- 
strates against  Saul  heeding  the  lies  of  slanderers,  and  declares  to  him  bow  he  had 
just  spared  his  life.  3.  Exhibiting  the  skii-t  of  the  robe  in  evidence  of  his  words, 
and  appealing  to  Ood,  he  protests  his  innocence  of  purpose,  4.  He,  while  admitting 
his  own  iosignificance,  commends  his  cause  to  the  justice  of  God,  and  prays  for 
deliverance.  If  we  take  into  account  what  human  nature  is  under  provocation,  and 
the  rough  and  painful  life  of  David  at  this  period,  we  shall  not  fail  to  admire  the 
generous,  highly  spiritual  tone  of  his  conduct  on  this  occasion.  It  is  a  remarkable 
instance  of  real  conformity  of  spirit  with  Christian  requirements  among  those  in 
ancient  times  not  blessed  with  our  advantages.  It  is  also  a  remarkable  testimony  to 
the  value  of  these  virtues  that  men,  without  dissent,  admire  the  beautL^ll  spirit  of 
David,  even  though  in  many  instances  they  have  not  the  will  to  act  likewise  in 
analogous  situations.  But  the  general  teaching  of  the  section  may  be  arranged  in 
the  following  order  : — 

I.  Discrimination  op  characteb  is  a  product  of  teub  goodness,  and  is  kbsential 
TO  SUCCESS  IN  dealing  WITH  MEN  amidst  the  difBculties  of  life.  David  was  a  man  of 
valour,  of  deep  piety,  and  of  keen  discernment.  His  intense  love  of  righteousness  was 
not  attended  by  a  hasty  and  harsh  condemnation  of  Saul's  conduct,  evil  as  it  was.  While 
keenly  alive  to  the  wrong  Saul  was  doing  him,  and  recognising  that  One  above  visits 
every  evil-doer,  he  nevertheless  in  his  first  words  to  Saul  recognises  the  fact,  which 
doubtless  through  Jonathan  and  others  he  had  ascertained,  that  there  were  greater 
sinners  in  this  sad  business  than  Saul.  "  Wherefore  hearest  thou  men's  words,  say- 
ing, Behold,  David  seeketh  thy  hurt  ? "  He  knew .  how  the  unhappy  king  had 
departed  from  God,  and  subsequently  had  become  melancholy,  and  at  times  almost 
insane,  and  he  understood  how  the  original  wicked  envy  was  associated  with  this 
sad  fall  from  God's  favour ;  and  hence,  apart  from  the  reverence  cherished  for  the 
office  of  king,  he  could  not  but  commiserate  his  persecutor.  Saul,  in  the  judgment 
of  David,  was  now  but  a  mere  tool  in  the  hands  of  cunning,  unscrupulous  men  at 
court,  who  basely  roused  the  enmity  of  the  unfortunate  monarch  by  inventing  lies 
concerning  the  intentions  of  David.  Discrimination  of  character  may  find  aJmndarU 
icope  in  every  man's  life.  How  much  it  is  lacking  is  obvious  when  we  reflect  on  the 
wholesale  condemnation  often  passed  on  individuals  aud  communities.  Accidental 
association  in  public  life  is  frequently  the  sole  basis  of  a  common  judgment.  Much 
of  the  faulty  training  of  families  and  imperfect  education  in  schools  is  to  be 
ascribed  to  this  source,  while  errors  in  this  particular  are  the  cause  of  manifold  mis- 
takes and  disastrous  failures  in  private  life.  It  is  due  to  others,  as  also  nafe  for 
ourselves,  that  we  act  on  our  Saviour's  exhortation,  "  Judge  righteous  judgment." 
David  was  just  to  Saul  in  regarding  him  as  the  weak  instrument  of  stronger  wills ; 
as  was  our  Saviour  just  to  a  misled  people  when  he  charged  the  scribes  and  Phari- 
sees with  hindering  them  from  obeying  the  gospel  (Matt,  xxiii.  13).  A  certain 
development  and  balance  of  the  intellectual  faculties  are  requisite  to  discriminate 
character.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  very  little  attention  is  paid  to  this  kind  at  cul- 
ture in  many  homes  and  schools,  and  consequently  there  are  thousands  in  a  far 
worse  position  for  the  great  conflict  of  life  than  they  need  be.  But  where 
ordinary  capacities  for  discernment  exist,  true  piety  will  insure  their  right  and  just 
exercise ;  for  religion  raises  the  whole  moral  tone  of  a  man,  and  gives  a  superior 
moral  element  to  our  judgments  on  the  motives  and  conduct  of  men.  The  gift 
of  "  discerning  spirits  "  is  of  much  value  still  in  the  Church  of  God  and  in  daily 
affairs. 

II.  OUB  JUDGMENT    ON  THE  LANGUAGE  OF   THE    BiBLE   SHOULD   BB    REGULATED    BT 

REGARD  TO  THE  SPECIFIC  KNtWLEDGE  ON  WHICH  IT  IS  BASED.  David  discriminates 
between  the  weak  anl  sinful  Saul  and  the  cunning,  determined  men  who  used 
him  as  a  tool  for  their  wicked  schemes.  The  language  employed  by  him  here  in 
reference  to  Saul  is  mild  and  tender— recognising  wrong,  but  expressive  of  the 

iRAM.  HH 


466  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxit.  1— 2i 

conviction  that  his  actions  were  now  not  responsible  in  the  same  degree  as  when  ha 
disobeyed  the  command  of  God  through  Samuel.  In  the  Psalms  we  have  other 
language — strong,  severe,  withering — intended  for  "  men  set  on  fire,  sons  of  men 
whose  teeth  are  spears  and  arrows,  and  their  tongue  a  sharp  sword"  (Ps.  Ivii.  4). 
"  Deceit,"  "  fraud,"  "  lying  lips,"  "  poison  of  adders,"  tongues  "  set  on  fire,"  that 
"wrest  words  "  and  "love  all  devouring  words,"  are  the  terms  used  to  indicate  the 
motives  and  purposes  of  the  men  prompting  the  action  of  Saul.  .Now  as  we  find 
the  explanation  of  the  mild  language  in  the  intimate  knowledge  which  he  had  of  the 
weakness  of  his  enemy,  and  the  use  which  stronger  wills  were  making  of  him,  so, 
by  the  same  rule  of  interpretation,  ought  we  to  allow  an  appropriateness  of  other 
and  more  severe  language  to  men  so  utterly  vile  as  these  were  known  to  be,  and  to 
whom  he  alludes  in  ver.  9  and  ch.  xxvi.  19.  Too  often  Christian  men,  and  especially 
unbelievers,  read  the  strong  language  of  the  Psalms  as  though  it  were  expressive  of 
sentiments  ordinarily  entertained  towards  any  who  might  differ  from  David  ;  and  it 
is  viewed  as  in  contrast  with  his  address  to  Saul  and  the  precepts  of  Christ.  The 
unreasonableness  of  this  judgment  is  evident  when  we  only  consider  what  David 
knew  these  men  to  be,  and  to  be  aiming  at.  They  were  deliberate,  calculating  liars, 
knowing  by  his  deeds,  by  Samuel's  approval,  and  by  his  pure  and  useful  life,  that  he 
was  a  chosen  man  of  God,  and  yet  endeavouring  by  false  representations  to  blast  his 
reputation,  to  incite  a  moody  king  to  slay  him  on  account  of  his  vileneas  of  intention, 
and,  in  fact,  to  frustrate  the  purpose  which  God  had  announced  through  Samuel, 
and  of  which  Jonathan,  Gad,  Abiathar,  and  others  were  aware.  A  baser,  more  cruel 
and  cowardly  conspiracy  against  character,  life,  and  national  welfare  can  hardly  be 
imagined.  The  knowledge  of  these  specific  facts  renders  David's  wrath  and  indigna- 
tion most  holy,  and,  in  view  of  what  would  be  the  calamity  to  Israel  should  they 
succeed  in  annulling  the  purpose  of  God  as  declared  to  Samuel  and  made  known  to 
David  and  others,  the  Church  can  say  Amen  to  the  Psalms.  ThiB  principle  of  inter- 
pretation is  wider  than  the  case^  before  us.  None  of  us  dare  use  towards  others  the 
severe  language  of  Christ's  deimnciation  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  because  we 
have  not  the  minute  knowledge  of  motive  and  internal,  irreclaimable  deceitfulness 
which  was  clear  to  his  eye  ;  but  his  view  of  what  is  hidden  from  us  rendered  his 
words  just  and  good.  Also,  the  language  used  with  reference  to  the  necessity  of 
atonement,  the  manner  in  which  it  is  made,  and  the  conditions  on  which  it  becomes 
available  for  those  made  acquainted  with  it,  should  be  considered  reverently,  as  being 
founded  on  an  intimate  knowledge  on  the  part  of  God  of  very  many  facts  pertain- 
ing to  moral  existence,  the  inter-relation  of  all  moral  beings,  and  the  administration 
of  a  government  stretching  through  all  time  and  place,  which  necessarily  at  present 
escape  our  observation.  The  same  principle  may  apply  to  much  of  the  language  in 
reference  to  the  future  condition  of  the  wicked.  Even  the  right  interpretation  of 
historical  matter  in  many  dubious  cases  may  depend  on  facts  which  to  the  writers 
were  well  known,  but  to  us  are  unknown.  It  would  be  useful  to  direct  attention  to 
the  conditions  of  a  right  understanding  of  the  Bible,  embracing  in  the  purview 
moral  health,  attained  by  the  quickening  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  caution,  reverence, 
regard  to  its  spiritual  aims,  its  fragmentary  character,  its  progressive  teaching — 
especially  sympathy  with  its  purpose. 

III.  A  man's  vocation  in  life  exercises  a  powerful  influence  in  detebmininq 
HIS  MORAL  QUALITIES.  The  moial  qualities  of  consideration,  forbearance,  magna- 
nimity, and  candour  so  prominent  in  David  during  this  interview  with  Saul  met  with 
little  sympathy  among  his  followers  at  the  time,  though  subsequently  they  would  see 
the  wisdom  of  his  conduct.  Like  others,  they  judged  of  what  should  be  done  by 
what  from  their  lower  moral  position  they  were  inclined  to  do.  The  superior  conduct 
of  David  was  not  due  simply  to  tenderness  of  natural  disposition,  nor  to  the  presence 
of  piety  considered  jjer  «e,_but  largely  to  the  educating  influence  on  his  generally 
pious  character  of  his  catting  in  life.  He  perfectly  understood  that,  as  servant  of 
God,  he  was  called  to  be  future  ruler  of  Israel,  and  meanwhile  so  to  live  and  act  that 
no  deed  of  his  should  touch  his  personal  reputation  in  Israel  or  create  the  impression 
on  the  mind  of  Saul  that  he  sought  his  removal  from  the  throne  to  gratify  private 
ambition.  Virtually  he  was  already  a  royal  personage.  His  actions  and  words  were 
therefore  public  property.     The  build  "ng  up  of  national  chai-acter  and  development 


om.  xxiT.  1—82.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  461 

of  national  resources  were  matters  of  deepest  concern.  The  consciousness  of  thi« 
drew  him  nearer  to  God,  attached  responsibility  to  his  deeds,  imparted  dignity  and 
grace  to  his  bearing,  put  a  restraint  on  the  flow  of  private  feelings,  ai-d,  though 
uncrowned,  made  him  royal  in  his  magnanimity.  David  as  a  coming  king  was  morally 
a  more  developed  man  than  would  have  been  David  as  a  simple  citizen.  A  consider- 
ation of  the  influence  of  calling  on  character  would  afford  much  instruction  in  relation 
to  social  habits,  mental  and  moral  development,  Chrislian  excellence  and  degeneracies, 
national  and  provincial  characteristics  and  tendencies,  domestic  comfort  and  discom- 
fort, personal  antagonisms  and  aversions,  and  the  need  for  a  large  charity  in  estimat- 
ing conduct  difEerent  from  our  own,  as  also  for  profound  thought  in  reference  to 
the  best  means  of  remedying  some  evils  incident  to  a  highly-developed  civilisation,  in 
which  the  comforts  and  luxuries  of  one  class  are  procuieJ  by  avocations  of  another 
class  that  tell  perniciously  on  tlieir  mental  and  moral  development.  Christians  are 
especially  exhorted  to  walk  worthy  of  their  high  calling  ;  and,  apart  from  direct 
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  formation  of  character,  it  would  be  helpful  to  all 
to  study  the  natural  influence  over  the  entire  man  of  a  calling  to  be  "  kings  and  priests 
unto  God."  "  What  manner  of  persons  ought  ye  to  be  ?  "  "  As  he  which  hath  called 
you  is  holy,  so  be  ye  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation"  (1  Pet.  i.  15). 

IV.  The  committal  op  o0B  interests  to  God  is  the  proper  sequel  to  a  consci 
ENTions  DisoHARQE  OF  DDTY.  David  had  done  all  an  honest  man  could  do  to  clear 
himself  of  guilt  and  to  pacify  Saul,  and  with  strong  faith  in  an  over-ruling  Providence 
he  leaves  his  cause  with  God.  Personal  retaliation  for  injuries  done  is  no  part  of  our 
duty.  "  Vengeance  is  mine,  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord."  Whether  we  succeed  in  a 
difficult  work  is  not  our  business.  To  have  done  right  is  the  chief  concern.  Our 
Saviour  has  set  us  an  example  of  fulfilling  all  righteousness  and  then  committing 
himself  and  his  cause  to  the  "righteous  Father."  There  is  that  in  the  conscience 
of  men  which  bows  before  such  appeals  to  the  "  Judge  of  all  the  earth."  The  name 
of  God  is  a  power  over  men  because  they  are  moral  beings.  It  is  a  refuge  for  the 
oppressed  and  a  terror  to  the  wicked. 

General  lessons : — 1.  The  real  guilt  of  men  is  to  be  estimated  both  by  the  intrinsic 
evil  of  their  intentions  and  the  influence  they  seek  to  exercise  over  others.  2.  Men 
who  desire  to  find  the  Bible  faulty  in  its  language  can  have  their  desire  easily  grati- 
fied by  reasoning  as  though  they  inew  all  concerning  its  production  and  contents ;  ■ 
while  a  difEerent  disposition  will  lead  to  suspension  of  judgment  or  minute  search 
for  hidden  facts.  3.  The  moral  influence  of  a  calling  on  character  should  guide  us 
in  our  arrangements  for  our  sons  and  daughters.  4.  Deeds  are  the  tests  and  signs 
of  principles  ;  for  as  wickedness  is  the  natural  outcome  of  the  wicked  man,  good 
actions,  as  in  the  generous  sparing  of  Saul's  life,  are  the  product  of  a  righteous 
soul  (ver.  13). 

Vers.  16 — 22. — Tenderness  transitory  and  truth  suppressed.  The  facts  are — 1.  Ban!, 

subdued  by  the  magnanimity  of  David,  weeps  and  admits  his  own  wrong  in  contrast 
with  David's  kindness.  2.  Acknowledging  his  belief  that  David  is  to  be  king,  he  pleads 
with  him  to  be  merciful  to  his  seed.  3.  David,  granting  the  request,  returns  to  his 
stronghold,  and  Saul  to  his  home.  Good  actions  soon  begin  to  authenticate  their  Divine 
mission  in  the  world.  The  noble  self-vindication  from  the  calumnies  of  slanderers  and 
the  rare  display  of  generosity  to  a  persistent  foe  told  at  once  even  on  the  obdurate 
nature  of  Saul,  and  in  the  efEect  produced  we  have  an  instance  of  two  facts  often 
observable  among  men  and  of  some  significance  in  their  experience. 

I.  The  transitory  tenderness  of  sinful  men.  Saul's  heart  was  softened,  and 
he  wept.  Words  of  tenderness  and  of  frank  confession  of  guilt  came  forth  with  all 
sincerity.  The  terrible  encrustation  formed  by  years  of  transgression  and  disobedi- 
ence seemed  to  be  broken,  and  the  true  man  reasserted  itself  from  within.  The  power 
of  kindness  received  a  conspicuous  illustration.  Wickedness  could  no  longer  confront 
goodness.  And  yet,  as  we  know  from  the  subsequent  care  of  David  to  escape  from 
Saul,  the  tenderness  was  only  as  "  the  morning  cloud  and  early  dew."  1.  There  are 
seasons  of  tenderness  even  in  the  lives  of  the  most  impenitent  of  men.  This  might  be 
inferred  from  our  necessary  knowledge  of  the  conflicting  principles  at  work  in  all 
moral  beings,  and  from  our  observation  that  it  requires  enormous  effort  to  kill  outright 

hh2 


468  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [at  xiiv.  1— M. 

all  the  better  qualities  of  our  humanity ;  but  the  fact  comes  before  na  in  history, 
biographical  confessions,  and  in  the  intercourse  of  daily  life.  Who  has  not  seen  a 
hardened  sinner  subdued  by  a  reminder  of  a  mother's  prayers,  or  the  mention  in 
gentle  tones  of  the  Saviour  s  name,  or  the  kindly  gaze  of  a  Christian  eye  ?  In  the 
vilest  abodes  of  sin,  and  among  the  proudest  sceptics,  there  are  those  who  sometimes 
weep  in  secret  or  relent  in  their  rebellion  against  God.  2.  2%«  eamti  of  this  tender- 
ness are  often  ascertainable.  In  the  case  of  Saul  we  see  a  combination  of  causes. 
The  display  of  magnanimity  was  impressive  because  of  its  very  rarity ;  it  came  home 
to  his  sense  of  right ;  it  was  in  vivid  contrast  with  his  own  conduct ;  it  was  in  its 
logic  BO  conclusive  as  to  the  goodness  of  the  man  he  was  persecuting ;  it  brought 
out  the  fact  that  all  along  he  had  known  David  to  be  good,  but  had  forced  the  fact 
out  of  thought ;  it  was  a  revelation  of  his  bondage  to  vile  men,  to  whose  character  he 
could  not  be  quite  blind ;  and  it  could  not  but  call  up  to  memory  days  once  bright  and 
happy,  when  he  was  a  young  man  unburdened  by  present  guilt  and  care.  Varied  are 
the  causes  which  enable  the  remnant  of  good  in  men  to  assert  itself  for  awhile ; 
some  lie  deep  in  the  hidden  processes  of  thought,  where  the  association  of  ideas  is 
made  subservient  to  the  force  of  Scriptural  truth  learnt  in  early  years  and  to  the  uncon- 
scious influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God ;  while  others  arise  in  the  events  of  daily  life, 
such  as  sickness,  casual  words  of  kindness,  presence  of  a  beautifully  holy  life  that 
suggests  a  contrast,  mention  of  the  words  of  Jesus,  or  the  open  grave.  3.  Th« 
import  of  these  seasons  of  tenderness  deserves  consideration.  Is  there  not  some  hope 
for  such  men  in  spite  of  their  past  and  present  surroundings  ?  Is  there  not  a  basis 
on  which  Christians  may  work  in  wisdom  ?  Have  we  not  here  the  secret  on  the 
human  side  of  the  mighty  power  of  the  truth  of  God  ?  Is  it  not  important  to  make 
such  men  believe  that  there  is  some  germ  worth  caring  for  in  their  otherwise  sad  and 
wretched  life  ?  Does  not  the  transitoriness  of  the  tenderness  often  arise  from  the 
absence  of  some  wise  friend  to  encompass  the  self-condemned  heart  with  love? 
Ought  not  Christians  to  go  among  men  with  the  conviction  that  they  are  all  reclaim- 
able,  and  that  it  is  largely  a  question  of  gaining  access  to  the  tender  place  in  their 
nature  and  caring  for  them  as  a  wise  physician  would  for  a  patient  desperately  ill? 
There  are  many  ways  in  which  the  Church  may  apply  the  thoughts  thus  awakened 
in  our  endeavours  to  win  to  Christ  even  the  most  abandoned.  Immense  power  is 
.  gained  over  men  when  they  know  us  to  be  cognizant  of  any  transitory  feeling  of 
tenderness ;  and  half  the  battle  is  won  when  they  begin  to  look  on  us  as  friends  to 
be  trusted. 

II.  Thb  foeced  sdppbession  of  tbdth.  Saul  was  evidently  sincere  in  saying, 
"  Now,  behold,  I  know  that  thou  shalt  surely  be  king ; "  but  the  confession  was  also  a 
revelation  of  the  fact  that  all  through  these  persecutions  he  had  more  than  surmised 
that  David  was  the  coming  king.  Had  he  been  anxious  to  know  the  actual  truth 
before  as  surely  as  he  professed  now  to  have  attained  it,  the  course  was  clear  enough. 
But  these  words  confirm  the  teaching  of  the  entire  history — that  he  was  aware  not 
only  of  his  own  rejection,  but  that  this  slayer  of  the  lion  and  bear,  and  conqueror  of 
Goliath,  and  protege  of  Samuel,  and  friend  of  Jonathan,  was  the  chosen  servant  of 
God.  The  course  adopted  by  Saul  can  only  be  explained  on  the  supposition  that  he 
suppressed  the  truth.  It  is  in  the  nature  of  truth  to  assert  its  power  over  the  life 
by  convincing  the  understanding  and  constraining  the  will,  and  only  the  rebellious 
spirit  that  refused  to  submit  to  the  sad  punishment  announced  by  Samnel,  sustained 
by  cherished  envy  of  David,  and  wrought  upon  by  cunning  slanderers,  could  have 
rendered  the  facts  clear  to  Saul  so  nugatory  in  their  influence  over  his  life.  Well 
would  it  have  been  if  this  were  a  solitary  instance  of  suppression  of  ti-uth  I  Every 
man  persisting  in  a  sinful  course  has  to  force  out  truth  from  thought.  The  internal 
war  consists  partly  in  crushing  the  free  evidence  of  knowledge.  Men  know  more 
than  they  like  to  admit  and  act  upon ;  and  all  kinds  of  devices  are  resorted  to,  to 
explain  away  or  to  divert  attention  from  what  is  manifestly  true.  THie  suppressions 
of  truth  in  controversy  are  denounced  as  very  wicked,  but  in  relation  to  personal 
moral  conduct  and_  religion  it  is  possible  for  the  advocates  of  candour  to  shut  their 
eyes  to  much  that  is  out  of  harmony  with  their  wishes.  It  is  a  truth  that  self  is  sinful 
before  God,  that  efforts  to  find  true  rest  apart  from  Christ  are  unavailing,  that  the 
chosen  life  of  sin  is  "hard,"  that  the  holy  are  happier  than  the  sii^al,  and  that 


m.  xxrr.  1— SS.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  4M 

Christ  is  waiting  to  be  gracions,  and  yet  this  truth  is  constantly  put  away  from  Tiew 
as  unwelcome,  troublesome.  Doubtless,  also,  many  who  under  the  influence  of 
stronger  wills  are  bold  in  their  denial  of  Christ's  authority  know  in  their  secret  heart 
fhat  he  if  Lord  and  will  establish  his  kingdom.  Sin  makes  men  dishonest  to  them- 
selves ;  under  its  power  they  are  not  of  the  truth.  They  prefer  darkness  beosuM 
their  deeds  are  evil. 

Generid  lessons : — 1.  In  the  issue  goodness  will  be  recognised  by  those  who  despise 
it,  apd  generosity  is  always  influential.  2.  The  anguish  of  wrong-doing  occasionally 
felt  is  fearfully  suggestive  of  the  future  experience  of  the  unropcnting.  3.  The 
occasional  triumphs  of  the  good  over  alltheir  slanderers  and  oppressors  are  intimations 
of  the  final  triumph  of  Christ  in  the  establishment  of  his  kingdom.  4.  Vows  and 
promises  in  reference  to  future  acts  in  so  far  as  they  embrace  the  quality  of  meray 
may  be  freely  and  at  all  times  made  (ver.  21). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOBa 

Vers.  1 — 7.  (Enqbdi.) — BamcC$  forbearance  toward  Said.    "Would  it  not  ba 

manly  to  resent  it  ?  "  said  one,  on  receiving  an  affront.  "  Yes,"  was  the  reply,  "  but 
it  would  be  Godlike  to  forgive  it."  In  the  spirit  of  this  answer  David  acted  when 
he  spared  Saul  in  the  cave  at  Engedi,  and  thereby  proved  that  be  was  guiltless  of  the 
design  which  the  latter  in  his  delusion  attributed  to  him — of  aiming  at  his  throne  and 
his  life  (ch.  xxii.  8).  Saul  himself  had  shown  generosity  toward  enemies  in  the  earlier 
part  of  his  career  (ch.  xi.  12) ;  but  his  character  had  fearfully  deteriorated  since  that 
time,  and  his  generosity  toward  others  was  far  surpassed  by  that  of  David  toward 
him.  "  Generosity  toward  his  enemies  was  a  part  of  David's  veiy  being.  And  be 
alone  is  the  true  hero  who,  like  David,  forces  involuntary  recognition  and  friendship 
even  from  his  bitterest  foe  "  (Ewald).     Observe  that — 

I.  Hi  WAS  STBONQLT  TEMPTED  TO  AVBNGB  HiMBBLF.  He  had  been  bitterly  hated 
and  grievously  wronged ;  "  was  a  man  of  like  passions  with  ourselves  ;  "  and  the 
temptation  came  to  him,  as  it  comes  to  others,  m — 1.  A  favourable  oppwrtunily  to 
take  revenge.  His  enemy  was  entirely  in  his  power,  and  his  life  might  Be  taken  away 
at  a  stroke. 

"  0,  Opportunity !  thy  guilt  is  great ; 
'Tis  thou  that  ezecut'st  the  traitor's  treason ; 
Thon  set'st  the  wolf  where  he  the  lamb  may  get  {' 
Whoever  plots  the  sin,  thon  point'st  the  season  ; 
"Tis  thou  that  spum'st  at  right,  at  law,  at  reason ; 
And  in  thy  shady  cell,  where  none  may  spy  him, 
Sits  sin,  to  seize  the  souls  that  wander  by  him  "  (ShakespeaM^ 

X.  A  plaurihle  argumeiU  used  by  others.  David's  men  not  only  desired  to  see  the 
deed  done  and  sought  permission  to  do  it  (vers.  7, 10),  but  also  said,  "  See,  this  is  the 
day  of  which  Jehovah  hath  said  to  thee,  Behold,  I  give  thine  enemy  into  thine  hand," 
&c.  "  The  speakers  regarded  the  leadings  of  Providence  by  which  Saul  liad  been 
brought  into  David's  power  as  a  Divine  intimation  to  David  himself  to  tuke  this 
opportunity  of  slaying  his  deadly  enemy,  and  called  the  intimation  a  word  of  Jeho- 
vah "  (Keil).  Men  are  apt  to  interpret  the  Divine  purpose  of  events  according  to 
their  own  interests  and  inclinations  (ch.  zxiii.  7),  and  it  is  often  the  exact  reverse  of 
what  they  imagine  it  to  be.  It  was  not  that  David  should  slay  Saul,  but  (among 
other  things)  that  he  should  be  tried,  and  by  sparing  him  vindicated,  blessed  and 
made  a  blessing.  What  is  meant  for  good  is  by  a  deceived  heart  turned  to  evil. 
"  And  those  temptations  are  most  powerful  which  fetch  their  force  from  the  pretence 
of  a  religious  obedience  "  (Hall).  3.  A  sudden  thmight  tending  in  the  direction  of 
revenge  (ver.  10,  Vulgate :  "  And  I  thought  t'l  kill  thee  ").  He  did  not  cherish  it  or 
form  a  distinct  purpose  to  carry  it  into  effect,  but  came  perilously  near  doing  so  in 
the  indignity  he  offered  to  the  king.  "  He  does  not  seem  to  have  been  quite  free 
from  the  temptation .  to  kill  Saul.  The  words  (ver.  5)  are  only  intelligible  on  the 
supposition  that,  on  cutting  off  Saul's  skirt,  his  thoughts  were  not  directed  only  to  the 
use  which  he  afterwards  made  of  it,  at  least  in  the  beginning,  but  that  his  object  wai 


470  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xinr.  1— 21 

rather  to  prove  the  goodness  of  his  thoughts  at  the  first  weak  beginning  he  made  tt' 
carry  them  into  effect.  But  his  hetter  self  soon  awoke ;  all  impure  thoughts  fled ; 
his  eye  became  clear;  with  horror  he  put  the  temptation  from  him  "  (Hengstenberg). 
"  Blessed  is  the  man  that  endureth  temptation,"  &c.  (James  i.  12). 

II.  He  completely  otebcamb  the  temptation.  By — 1.  The  possession  (^  a 
tender  conscience,  which  enabled  him  to  perceive  the  will  of  God,  shrank  from  sin, 
and  smote  him  for  his  "  thought  of  foolishness  "  (Prov.  xxiv.  9)  and  irreverent  act. 
"  It  is  a  good  thing  to  have  a  heart  within  us  smiting  us  for  sins  that  seem  little ;  it 
is  a  sign  conscience  is  awake  and  tender,  and  will  be  a  means  to  prevent  greater  sins  " 
(M.  Henry).  2.  Regard  to  the  Divine  will,  which  directed  him  not  to  avenge  him- 
self but  to  leave  vengeance  with  the  Lord ;  to  honour  the  king,  and  love  his  neighbour 
as  himself.     His  regard  for  it  was  lowly,  reverent,  and  supreme.    The  purpose  of 

f)rovidential  events  must  be  interpreted  in  harmony  with  conscience  and  the  moral 
aw.  How  often  do  the  Scriptures  enjoin  forbearance  and  forgiveness  toward 
enemies  1  (Prov.  xx.  22  ;  xxv.  21,  22 ;  Matt.  v.  44 ;  Eom.  xii.  19—21 ;  Col.  iii.  13). 
8.  Repression  oj  evil  thought  and  impulse ;  immediate,  firm,  and  entire.  "  The  better 
to  know  how  to  guard  against  the  wiles  of  the  enemy,  take  it  for  a  certain  rule  that 
every  thought  which  discourages  and  removes  thee  from  growing  in  love  and  trust 
towards  God  is  a  messenger  of  hell ;  and,  as  such,  thou  must  drive  him  away,  and 
neither  admit  him  nor  give  him  a  hearing "  (Scupoli).  David  repressed  such  a 
thought  in  himself  and  in  his  men,  became  the  protector  of  Saul,  was  not  overcome 
of  evil,  but  overcame  evil  with  good,  and  was  made  by  means  of  temptation  stronger 
and  more  illustrious.  "  Temptation  is  the  greatest  occasioner  of  a  Christian's  honour ; 
indeed,  like  an  enemy,  it  threatens  and  endeavours  to  ruin  him,  but  in  conquest  of  it 
consists  his  crown  and  triumph  "  (Hales,  '  Golden  Remains '). 

As  aids  to  the  practice  of  forbearance — 1.  Consider  the  "  goodness,  forbearance, 
and  long-sufiering  of  God."  2.  Contemplate  the  example  of  Christ.  3.  Watch 
against  the  first  thought  of  evil.  4.  Pray  for  the  spirit  of  patience,  forgiveness, 
and  love. — D. 

Vers.  8 — 12.  (Engem.) — Calumny.  "Wherefore  hearest  thou  men's  words,  saying, 
David  geeketh  thy  hurt?  "  (ver.  9]).  Saul's  hatred  and  persecution  of  David  were 
stirred  up  by  slanderers  ;  and,  in  vindication  of  himself  from  the  charge  of  seeking 
his  hurt,  David  referred  to  them  on  this  and  on  a  subsequent  occasion  (ch.  xxvi.  19). 
One  of  them  seems  to  have  been  Cush  the  Benjamite  (see  Eitto,  '  D.  B.  lUus.'),  on 
account  of  the  calumnies  of  whom  he  wrote  Ps.  vil.,  'The  righteous  'judgment 
«f  God '  (see  inscription) : — 

"  Jehovah  my  God,  in  thee  hare  I  found  refuge ; 
Save  me  from  my  peraecutora  and  deliver  me  I " 

How  much  he  felt  the  wrong  which  they  had  done  him,  and  how  intensely  his  zeal 
burned  against  their  sin  against  God  and  man,  appears  in  many  of  his  psalms  (Ps. 
xxiv.  13 ;  XXXV.  11 ;  Iii.  2  ;  1  vi.  6 ;  Ivii.  4 ;  lix.  7,  &o.).  Good  men  are  often  exposed 
to  the  calumnious  attacks  of  men  of  similar  character. 

"  Be  thou  aa  chaste  as  ice,  aa  pure  aa  snow, 
Thou  ahalt  not  eacape  calumny. " 

I.  It  IB  ONE  OP  THE  MOST  ODIOUS  OF  VICES.  It  is  "  the  Uttering  of  false  (or 
equivalent  to  false,  morally  false)  speech  against  our  neighbour  in  prejudice  to  his 
fame,  his  safety,  his  welfare,  or  concernment  in  any  kind,  out  of  malignity,  vanity, 
rashness,  ill  nature,  or  bad  design  "  (Barrow,  Ser.  xviii.)  ;  and  it  is  exhibited  in  an 
endless  variety  of  ways.  1.  It  is  marked  by  falsehood,  folly,  injustice,  malice,  and 
impiety.  2.  It  exerts  a  most  pernicious  influence.  The  tongue  on  which  it  dwells 
is  like  a  fire,  which  (though  at  first  but  a  single  spark)  may  set  a  whole  forest  in  a 
blaze  (James  iii.  5)  ;  is  "full  of  deadly  poison,"  and  sends  forth  "  arrows,  firebrands, 
and  death."  In  private  reputations,  domestic  life,  social  intercourse,  the  Church  and 
the  world,  what  mischief  it  works  I  3.  It  is  frequently  forbidden  and  condemned  in 
the  word  of  God  (Levit.  xix.  16  ;  Prov.  x.  31 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  9).     "  I  say  unto  you  that 


CH.  XXIV.  1—22.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  471 

every  idle  (emptjr,  insincere,  wicked,  and  injurious)  word,"  Ac.  (Matt.  xii.  36,  87). 
"  God  is  angry  (with  the  wicked)  every  day  "  (Ps.  vii.  11). 

IL  It  ohght  never  to  be  countenanced.  "  Wheref ofe  hearest  thou  ?  "  No  on« 
should  listen  to  it ;  for  by  doing  so — 1.  He  encourages  the  wicked  in  their  wickedness 
(Prov.  XXV.  23).  "When  will  talkers  refrain  from  evil  speaking?  When  listeners 
refrain  from  evil  hearing  "  (Hare).  2.  Ke  injures  himself;  becomes  a  tool  of  design- 
ing- men,  and  is  led  to  do  things  which  his  better  nature  cannot  approve ;  whilst,  a( 
the  same  time,  he  manifests  his  own  unreasonableness  and  sinful  disposition.  3.  He 
makes  himself  "  pat-taher  of  their  evil  deeds,"  and  exposes  himself  to  the  same  con- 
demnation. Although  incited  by  others,  Saul  was  not  guiltless  in  "hunting  after' 
the  soul  of  David  "  to  take  it"  (ver.  11). 

III.  It  should  always  be  met  in  a  right  manner  by  those  who  are  calumniated  . 
as  by — 1.  An  open  assertion  of  innocence,  direct  denial  and  rebuke  of  false  state- 
ments, and  faithful  remonstrance  against  their  being  entertained.  "  Whose  mouths '' 
(says  Paul  concerning  unruly  and  vain  talkers  and  deceivers)  "  must  be  stopped  ' ' 
(Titus  i.  11).  2.  A  clear  proof  of  innocence  afforded  by  becoming,  righteous,  and 
merciful  actions  (vers.  10,  11  ;  compare  Ps.  vii.  3,  4).  3.  A  sincere  appeal  to  God 
as  the  Vindicator  of  the  innocent ;  lowly  submission  to  his  will  and  firm  confidence 
in  the  manifestation  of  his  righteous  judgment.  "  The  justice  of  God  ia  a  refugr 
and  comfort  to  oppressed  innocency  "  (M.  Henry).  "  The  Lord  judge  between  mp 
and  thee,"  &c.  (ver.  12). 

"  Jehovah  judgeth  the  people. 
Judge  me,  0  Jehovah,  according  to  my  righteouanen, 
And  according  to  my  integrity  be  it  done  to  me. 
Oh  let  the  wickedness  of  the  wicked  come  to  an  end, 
And  establish  thou  the  righteous  ; 

For  thou  that  triest  the  hearts  and  reins  art  a  righteous  Ood. 
My  shield  is  with  God, 
Who  delivers  the  upright  in  heart "  (Ps.  vii  8,  9,  10). 

Learn — 1.  To  use  the  gift  of  speech  in  speaking  well,  and  not  ill,  of  others.  2.  T^ 
rely  on  God  more  than  on  your  own  efEorts  for  your  vindication  when  evil  spoken  of. 
3.  The  blessedness  of  those  against  whom  men  "say all  manner  of  evil  falsely"  fui 
Christ's  sake. — D. 

Vers.  13 — 15.  (Engbdi.) — A  proverb  of  the  ancietUt.  "  Wickedness  proceedetli 
from  tlie  wicked  "  (ver.  13).  Proverbs  are  brief  and  apt  sayings  expressive  of  the 
general  experience  of  men.  They  have  been  described  as  "  the  wisdom  of  many  and 
the  wit  of  one"  (Russell)  ;  and,  more  poetically,  "jewels  five  words  long,  which  on 
the  stretched  forefinger  of  time  sparkle  for  ever  "  (Tennyson).  The  most  valuable 
of  "  the  words  of  the  wise  "  were  uttered  by  Solomon,  and  are  contained  in  the  Book 
of  Proverbs.  But  this  saying  was  already  ancient  in  the  days  of  David.  It  is  also 
"  true  and  faithful "  and  very  instructive.     Consider-^ 

I.  Its  meaning.  "  111  men  do  ill  things."  "  Actions  usually  correspond  to  the 
quality  of  the  mind  "  (Grotius).  ■  1.  An  evil  disposition  is  possessed  by  some  men. 
The  ancients  noticed  the  distinction  between  evil  ocii'ow*  (as  well  as  good)  and  evil 
character  (as  well  aa  good).  There  is  in  some  men,  in  contrast  to  others,  a  selfish 
nud  bad  disposition.  All  men,  it  is  true,  are  sinful ;  but  some,  instead  of  striving 
against  sin  and  overcoming  it,  are  the  slaves  of  sin ;  their  supreme  afEection  is  set 
upon  unworthy  objects,  and  the  ruling  principle  of  their  life  is  wrong.  This  is  due 
to  many  causes — previous  voluntary  acts,  wilful  neglect  of  Divine  aid,  &c.  ;  but 
the  fact  is  certain.  Their  wtture  differs  from  that  of  good  men  just  as  (though  not 
so  necessarily  or  to  the  same  extent)  the  serpent  from  the  dove,  and  the  thistle  from 
the  vine.  2.  An  evil  disposition  expresses  ttself  in  corresponding  actions.  It  uses 
power  and  opportunity  according  to  its  nature  (ver.  19),  and  turns  to  evil  the  same 
circumstances  which  a  good  disposition  turns  to  good  (ver.  6).  This  is  in  harmony 
with  the  established  order  of  things  in  the  world.  "  A  good  tree  bringeth  not  forth 
corrupt  fruit ;  neither  doth  a  corrupt  tree  bring  forth  good  fruit "  (Luke  vi.  43). 
"  Do  men  gather  grapes  of  thorns  ?  "  &c.  (Matt,  vi  16 — 20 ;  xii.  35).  "  Doth  a  f  oun. 
tain  send  forth  at  the  same  place  sweet  wuier  and  bitter?  "  &c.  (James  iii.  11.^—13? 


472  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  zzit.  1-42. 

Fh>y.  ziii.  16).  3.  An  evil  ditpogkion  it  plainly  proved  by  evil  aetioru.  It  is  so 
especially  when  they  are  performed  deliberately,  habitually,  and  Qn  occasions  of 
decisive  trial.  "  By  their  fruits  ye  shall  know  them."  The  proof  is  perfectly  reliabia, 
easily  perceivable,  and  generally  applicable. 

II.  Its  application  (ver.  11).  "  But  my  hand  shall  not  be  upon  thee  "  (vers.  12, 
13).  "  David  means  to  say  that  if  he  had  been  guilty  of  conspiracy  against  the 
king  ue  would  not  have  neglected  this  favourable  opportunity  to  kill  him,  since  men 
usually  indulge  their  feelings,  and  from  a  mind  guilty  of  conspiracy  nothing  but 
corresponding  deeds  could  come  forth  "  (Clericus).  The  application  may  be  made 
to  the  conduct  of  others,  but  it  should  be  made  first  and  chiefly  to  our  oten ;  and 
it  should  lead  us — 1.  To  test  our  character  by  our  actions,  and  to  prove  to  others 
when  it  is  suspected  and  calumniate.d  that  it  is  good,  and  not  evil.  As  wickedness 
proceedeth  from  the  wicked,  so  goodness  proceedeth  from  the  good.  2.  To  feel  t»- 
creased  aversion  to  evil,  to  act  according  to  the  integrity  we  assert  of  ourselves,  to 
resolve  to  do  nothing  wrong,  and  to  endeavoui'  to  prevent  others  from  doing  wrong 
(ver.  14).  3.  To  appeal  to  God,  who  searches  the  heart,  and,  in  the  consciousness  of 
sincerity  and  innocence,  to  put  confidence  in  his  righteous  and  merciful  aid  (ver. 
15).  "Beloved,  if  our  heart  condemn  us  not,  then  have  we  confidence  toward 
God  "  (1  John  iii.  21). 

In  the  review  of  the  subject  let  us  bear  in  mind  that — 1.  Men  are  responsible  for 
the  character  they  possess.  2.  An  evil  character  may  be  transformed  into  a  good  one 
by  the  power  (  f  Divine  grace  and  the  use  of  proper  means.  "  I  will  give  you  a  new 
heart."  "  MaV"  you  1  new  heart."  3.  We  ought  to  strive  continual!/ to  attain  the 
highesi.  degrr 0  oX      rt      anr"  goodness  possible. 

"  Such  is  this  steep  ascent, 
That  it  is  ever  difficult  at  first, 
But  more  a  man  proceeds  less  evil  grows. 
When  pleasant  it  shall  seem  to  thee,  so  mook 
That  upward  going  shall  be  easy  to  thee 
Aa  in  a  vessel  to  go  down  the  tide. 
Then  of  this  path  thou  wilt  have  reached  this  end. 
Tbsre  hope  to  rest  thee  from  thy  toil "  (' Purg.'  iv.X  D. 

Ver^-lC — -9.'.  (t^s<*:.Di.j — The  goodness  of  bad  men.  "And  Saul  lifted  no  his 
voice  and  wewl  '  '  >■•  '7]  The  opportunity  given  to  David  to  avenge  himself  on 
Saul  was  ^i  severe  U)'-'  o'  principle,  but  by  the  use  he  made  thereof  it  became  a 
means  of  hij  furthei  ivancement.  Hia  forbearance  was  also  another  test  of  the 
character  of  Saul,  o-vcr  whom  Divine  mercy  still  lingered,  and  toward  whom  it  was 
in  such  forbearance  shown  afresh.  Nor  was  it  without  effect.  The  heart  of  the  man 
who  had  ordered  the  massacre  of  eighty-five  priests  and  was  bent  on  the  destruction  of 
his  most  faithful  servant  relented  at  the  words  addressed  to  him ;  his  voice  trembled 
with  amotion,  tears  flowed  down  his  cheeks,  he  wept  aloud,  acknowledged  his  gpiilt, 
and  turned  from  his  purpose.  It  seemed  as  if  he  had  undergone  a  sudden  transform- 
ation and  become  a  new  man.  But  his  heart  remained  unchanged.  And  hia  good- 
ness, as  on  former  occasions,  was  like  that  of  those  to  whom  the  prophet  said,  "  Your 
goodness  "  (fits  of  piety)  "  is  as  the  morning  cloud,  and  as  the  early  dew  it  goeth  away  " 
(Hosea  vi.  4).     Concerning  such  goodness,  notice  that — 

I.  It  is  not  unfeequently  displayed.  There  is  in  the  worst  of  men  some  capa- 
city of  moral  and  spiritual  impression ;  and  those  who  might  be  least  expected  to  be 
moved  are  often  most  powerfully  affected  by — 1.  The  force  of  apmverful  appeal,  in 
which  the  truth  is  set  before  their  minds  and  brought  home  to  their  hearts  and  con- 
sciences (vers.  9 — 15).  They  walk  in  the  darkness  of  error  and  illusion,  and  the 
light  breaks  suddenly  upon  them,  revealing  what  they  could  not  or  would  not  se« 
before.  It  is  made  so  plain  that  they  are  unable  to  deny  its  reality  or  resist  its  im- 
pression. 2.  The  exhibition  of  unusual  generosity  and  superior  excellence,  which 
shows  by  contrast  their  own  defects,  shames  and  subdues  them,  overcomes  not  only 
them,  but  also,  in  some  degree,  the  evil  that  is  in  them — ^their  envy,  hatred,  and  sin. 
"  The  simple  self -presentation  and  self -witness  of  moral  purity  and  truth  has  a  great 
Baissionary  power,  and  often  makes  a  mighty  impression  on  spiritually  darkened  and 


OH.  mv.  1—22.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  478 

morally  perverted  natures,  in  such  wise  that  the  Divine  in  them  is  freed  from  the 
binding  power  of  evil,  and  the  religious  moral  element  of  the  conscience,  which  ia 
concealed  deep  under  religious  moral  corruption,  breaks  freely  forth,  at  least  in  some 
bright  and  good  moments,  in  order  to  point  to  the  way  of  salvation  and  show  the 
possibility  of  deliverance,  provided  the  man  is  vdlling  to  be  saved  and  renewed  " 
(Eidmann).  3.  The  appreliension  of  an  extraordinary  escape  from  danger  and 
death  (ver.  18).  Saul  had  been  placed  "by  the  hand  of  God  within  reach  of  the 
stroke  of  death,  and  if  David  had  acted  as  men  would  ordinarily  have  done  he  would 
not  have  been  now  alive  (ver.  19).  The  heart  must  be  hard  indeed  if  it  be  not  melted 
by  such  things  as  these. 

II.  It  is  apparently  genuinb  ;  the  proof  of  a  radical  change  of  disposition.  In 
tears  and  words  and  actions  there  is — 1.  The  presence  of  strong  emotion.  It  is 
evidently  not  simulated,  but  real.  2.  The  operation  of  an  awakened  conscience  (ver. 
17),  which  produces  the  recognition  of  what  is  right,  the  vindication  of  one  who  has 
been  wronged,  the  confession  of  sin,  and  prayer  for  the  blessing  of  Godon  one  who 
has  been  regarded  as  an  enemy  (ver.  19).  3.  The  conviction  of  the  Divine  ^rpose. 
"And  now,  behold,  I  know  well,"  &c.  (ver.  20).  That  purpose  had  been  indicated 
to  Saul  by  Samuel  and  by  the  course  of  events ;  but  he  refused  to  recognise  it,  sought 
to  change  it,  and  fought  against  it.  Now  he  acknowledges  its  inevitable  fulfilment 
on  the  ground  of  the  superior  worth  of  David  (ch.  xv.  28),  submits  to  it  without 
complaint,  and  even  seeks  a  solemn  pledge  of  forbearance  toward  his  house  on  its 
accomplishment  (ver.  21).  He  says  in  effect,  "  The  will  of  the  Lord  be  done."  4. 
The  abandonment  of.  evil  designs.  His  amendment  goes  beyond  good  resolutions, 
and  appears  in  his  actually  leaving  ofi  the  pursuit  of  David  and  returning  home  to 
Gibeah  (ver.  22).  When  good  actions  follow  good  words,  what  more  can  be  needed  ? 
Yet  Saul  among  the  saints,  like  Saul  among  the  prophets,  was  Saul  still. 

III.  It  is  beallt  worthless.  Although  the  signs  of  repentance  and  reformation 
in  Saul  were  greatly  valued,  they  were  not  absolutely  relied  upon  by  David,  who 
had  experience  of  his  impulsive  and  changeable  nature,  and  "  knew  what  was  in  man." 
The  most  promising  signs  may  be,  and  often  are,  connected  with  a  goodness  which 
is — 1.  Superficial;  the  depth  of  the  heart  being  still  hard  and  stony.  _2.  Defective, 
in  hatred  of  sin,  renunciation  of  self,  return  to  God,  surrender  of  the  wOl,  true  faith, 
inward  renewal,  and  spiritual  strength  to  resist  temptation.  3.  Transient.  "Tlieysoon 
forgat  his  works,"  &c.  (Ps.  cvi.  13).  Not  long  afterwards  Saul  was  again  in  pursuit 
of  David,  and  his  heart  was  more  obdurate  than  ever  (ch.  xxvi.  1).  Transient  good- 
ness issues  in  permanent  destruction.  "  Water  that  riseth  and  floweth  from  a  living 
spring  runneth  equally  and  constantly,  unless  it  be  obstructed  or  diverted  by  some 
violent  opposition ;  but  that  which  is  from  thunder-showers  runs  furiously  for  a 
season,  but  is  quickly  dried  up.  So  are  those  spiritual  thoughts  which  arise  from  a 
prevalent  internal  principle  of  grace  in  the  heart ;  they  are  even  and  constant  unless 
an  interruption  be  put  upon  them  for  a  season  by  temptations.  But  those  which  are 
excited  by  the  thunder  cf  convictions,  however  their  streams  may  be  filled  for  a  season, 
they  quickly  dry  up  and  utterly  decay  "  (Owen,  '  Spiritual-Mindedness '). 

Consider  that— 1.  Men  may  be  near  the  kingdom  of  God  and  yet  never  enter  into  it. 
2.  We  are  liable  to  be  deceived  by  the  appearance  of  goodness  in  others,  and  even  in 
ourselves.  3.  Whilst  we  should  "  search  and  try  our  hearts,"  we  should  also  pray, 
"  Search  me,  0  God,"  &c.  (Ps.  cxxxix.  23,  24).  "  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,"  Ac. 
(Ps.  IL  10).— D. 

Vers.  16, 17. — Hvil  overcome  by  good.  Recent  passages  of  this  history  have  shown 
more  of  David's  weakness  than  of  his  strength.  But  here  he  is  again  a  hero.  The 
fine  points  of  his  character  shine  out — his  self-control,  his  magnanimity,  and  his 
reliance  on  the  justice  of  God  to  vindicate  his  integrity.  To  this  period  is_  ascribed 
the  sevienth  Psalm,  in  which  the  son  of  Jesse  appeals  against  the  slanders  with  which 
he  was  assailed,  and  looks  to  God  for  solace  and  deliverance.  The  situation  strikes 
both  the  imagination  and  the  heart.  The  young  chief  stands  at  the  mouth  of  the 
cavern,  holding  up  the  proof  of  his  generous  forbearance,  and  protesting  with 
picturesque  eloquence  against  Saul's  hot  pursuit.  The  king  amazed,  ashamed,  and 
ftbdsed ;  the  Btemness  fading  from  his  face,  the  haughty  anger  in  his  eyes  drowned 


474  THE  MBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xuv.  1--22, 

In  tears.  So  evil  was  for  the  time  overcome  by  good.  David  was  helped  to  this 
noble  behaviour  at  Engedi  by  his  recent  meeting  with  Jonathan  in  the  forest  of 
Ziph.  At  and  through  that  meeting  he  had  been  encouraged  in  God.  So  in  the 
hour  of  temptation  he  abstained  from  revenge,  confided  to  God  the  vindication  of 
his  innocence  and  the  preservation  of  his  life,  would  not  lift  a  hand,  or  let  one  of  his 
ofBcers  lift  hand,  against  the  king.  With  what  thankfulness  and  joy  must  Jonathan 
have  heard  of  the  sparing  of  his  father's  life  by  his  friend  1  Their  meeting  had 
home  fruit  very  soon.  Their  prayers  were  heard.  Perhaps  we  have  a  happy 
meeting  with  a  friend,  or  a  strengthening  and  refreshing  service  at  church,  and 
the  reason  why  is  not  at  once  apparent ;  but  soon  we  fall  into  some  temptation 
or  danger,  and  then  we  are  helped  by  the  recent  confirmation  of  our  faith  to  endure 
with  patience.  Our  "  good  time  "  in  the  wood  of  Ziph  is  meant  to  prepare  us  f  oi 
the  hour  of  temptation  in  the  cave  of  Engedi. 

I.  Mark  the  rkbtraint  of  God  upon  the  persecutor.  Saul  seemed  to  have 
every  facility  for  gaining  his  object.  No  one  disputed  his  will.  Armed  men  by 
thousands  followed  him  in  pursuit  of  David  ;  and  Saul  knew  how  to  lead  men,  and 
how  to  fight.  He  had  spies  to  track  out  the  fugitive.  The  country  was  small,  and 
the  inhabitants,  both  at  Keilah  and  at  Ziph,  showed  their  readiness  to  help  the  king. 
Yet  he  could  never  reach  David  to  arrest  or  to  smite  him.  More  than  once  he  had 
thrown  the  javelin  at  him,  but  missed.  In  the  highlands  of  Judah  he  was  more  than 
once  close  upon  his  steps,  but  still  missed  him.  He  went  on  one  side  of  a  hill  while 
David  moved  round  the  other  side.  He  had  almost  caught  him  when  he  was  called 
off  to  repel  a  sudden  inroad  by  the  Philistines.  He  actually,  entered  the  cave  in 
which  David  and  his  men  lay  hid,  and  did  not  see  them.  This  was  no  mere  luck. 
It  was  God  who  preserved  David  and  baffled  the  malice  of  Saul.  And  in  the  tragical 
history  of  persecution  the  restraining  hand  of  God  has  often  been  shown.  As  Saul 
was  allowed  to  kill  the  priests  but  not  to  kill  David,  bo  has  the  Lord  allowed  many  a 
tyrant  to  go  so  far,  but  no  farther.  Jezebel  could  make  away  with  Naboth,  but  not 
with  Elijah.  Herod  could  kill  St.  James,  but  not  St.  Peter.  The  Roman  Catholic 
persecutors  could  bum  Huss,  but  not  Wickliffe ;  George  Wishart,  but  not  John 
Knox.  There  has  been  a  cord  of  Divine  control  round  every  oppressor,  and  when- 
ever God  saw  meet  he  has  simply  drawn  that  cord,  and  so  has  restrained  the 
remainder  of  wrath,  defeated  the  devices  of  cruelty. 

II.  DlSTINOniSH   BETWEEN   A    RELENTING    MOOD   AND  A   REPENTING  HEART.      An  evil- 

doer  may  be  thrown  into  a  fit  of  shame  and  grief  over  his  own  misconduct,  promise 
amendment  with  tears,  and  yet  never  truly  repent.  The  generous  conduct  and 
appeal  of  his  son-in-law  overwhelmed  the  king  with  confusion,  and  woke  lingering 
echoes  of  good  feeling  in  his  troubled  breast.  He  even  wept  before  all,  and,  with  the 
hot  tears  pouring  from  his  eyes,  confessed  that  he  was  m  the  wrong,  praised  the 
noble  forbearance  of  David,  acknowledged  that  the  young  captain  was  destined  to 
fill  the  throne,  and  even  asked  him  to  swear  that  on  his  accession  ho  would  not  exter- 
minate the  royal  family.  David  swore,  and  they  parted.  Saul  went  home,  but 
David  did  not  attend  him,  for  he  was  too  shrewd  to  trust  to  the  altered  mood  of  the 
king.  Well  for  him  that  he  was  so  cautious,  for  Saul  had  only  relented  for  a  little 
while,  not  really  repented  of  his  malignant  purpose.  Softened  feeling  is  one  thing, 
repentance  in  mind  and  purpose  another  thing.  This  is  familiar  to  those  who  try  to 
reclaim  criminals.  They  find  them  melt  under  kind  words,  bewail  their  misconduct, 
promise  to  lead  lives  of  honesty  and  sobriety,  and  yet  after  all  this  fall  very  soon 
under  temptation,  and  not  only  renew,  but  increase,  their  wickedness.  It  is  because 
they  have  only  a  gush  of  feeling,  not  a  grasp  of  principle,  and  are  sorry  for  them- 
selves, but  not  penitent  towards  God.  It  is  often  illustrated  in  persons  who  have 
■uccumbed  to  the  infatuation  for  strong  drink.  One  has  allowed  this  vice  to  grow 
insensibly,  and  does  not  know  how  far  it  has  mastered  him,  till  at  last  there  comes 
an  exposure  of  drunkenness  which  covers  him  with  shame.  A  friend  speaks  to  him 
about  it  seriously  and  kindly,  and  tears  come  promptly  to  his  eyes,  expressions  of  poign- 
ant regret  and  promises  of  the  utmost  caution  flow  from  his  lips.  He  is  quite  surprised 
that  he  shoula  have  been  so  foolish,  hopes  that  no  more  will  be  said  about  it,  and  is 
quite  sure  that  nothing  of  the  kind  will  ever  happen  again.  But  there  is  little  dis- 
teirlwiw  vt  oonacience,  no  grave  sfnse  of  sin,  no  humbling  of  self  before  God  witb 


CH, 


XXV.  1—44.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


471 


petitions  for  pardon  and  for  help  to  cease  from  this  insidious  vice.  So  in  •  little 
while  the  shame  is  gone,  the  good  promises  are  forgotten,  the  friend  who  spoke  so 
kindly  is  hated  for  his  pains,  and  the  perverse  man  succumhs  to  temptation,  and  goes 
on  to  a  drunkard's  disgrace,  goes  down  to  a  drunkard's  grave.  There  are  many  other 
instances  of  this  folly  without  descending  to  gross  vice.  Men  have  twinges  of  com- 
punction and  gusts  of  admirable  feeling,  and  so  resolve  to  lead  hotter  lives.  But 
there  it  ends.  They  mean  well,  hut  somehow  cannot  carry  out  their  iutention.  It  is 
for  want  of  repentance  toward  God, 

III.  Eecognise  the  superior  strength  of  moral  weapons.  Whatever  good  ie 
done  to  those  who  are  going  astray  is  effected  hy  moral  means  and  weapons  only. 
David  might  have  fought  Saul  and  heaten  him,  but  that  would  not  have  brought 
even  a  temporary  relenting  to  his  heart.  It  would  probably  have  hardened  him. 
David  smote  him  with  the  moral  power  of  truth  and  love,  and  so  disarmed  him  for 
the  time,  and  subdued  him  to  unwonted  tenderness.  So  now  we  can  best  benefit  our 
fellow-men  by  using  the  moral  influences  of  probity  and  kindness.  So  may  our 
nation  influence  other  nations  as  a  Christian  people  ought  to  do,  not  by  vaunting  our 
power  to  go  where  we  like  and  kill  whom  we  please,  but  by  showing  righteousness 
and  good-will  towards  all  mankind.  Physical  weapons  of  destruction  are  not  worthy 
to  be  compared  with  the  moral  weapons  that  reach  the  conscience  and  the  heart. 

IV.  Rise  to  the  thought  of  God's  magnanimity  to  vs.  Though  we  have  con- 
ceived in  our  minds  enmity  against  him,  he  does  not  crush  us  by  the  might  of  his 
arm,  or  willingly  slay  us  as  with  the  edge  of  a  glittering  sword.  The  gospel  conveys 
to  us  the  sublime  appeal  of  his  truth,  righteousness,  and  pardoning  love.  We  enter 
no  cave  where  God  is  not.  We  are  never  beyond  his  reach ;  and  if  he  should  smite, 
who  is  there  that  could  deliver  out  of  his  hand  ?  But  he  has  no  pleasure  in  our  death. 
Much  as  we  have  provoked  him,  he  has  compassion,  he  spares,  he  even  pleads  with 
us  to  be  reconciled  to  him.  Let  us  consent  to  his  proposals  of  grace  not  with  mere 
evanescent  feeling,  but  with  inward  repentance  and  cordial  faith.  Then  we  shall 
not  part  from  our  God,  as  did  Saul  from  David,  but  abide  and  "  walk  together  as 
those  that  are  agreed." — F. 


EXPOSITION. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


Death  of  Samuel  (ver.  1).  Ver.  1.— 
And  Samuel  died.  According  to  Josephns, 
Samuel  had  for  eighteen  years  been  contem- 
poraneous with  Saul's  kingdom.  If  this 
3alculation,  which  protiahly  rests  upon  some 
Jewish  tradition,  be  at  all  correct,  we  must 
include  the  years  of  Samuel's  judgeship  in 
the  sum  total  of  Saul's  reign  (see  on  ch.  xiiL 
1),  as  evidently  his  fall  was  now  fast 
approaching.  Samuel's  life  marked  the  he- 
ginning  of  the  second  age  of  Israelite  history 
(Acts  iii,  24).  Moses  had  given  the  people 
tlieir  law,  hut  Samuel  in  the  schools  of  the 
prophets  provided  for  them  that  education 
without  which  a  written  law  was  powerless, 
and  called  forth  also  and  regulated  that 
living  energy  in  the  prophetic  order  which, 
claiming  an  all  but  equal  authority,  modified 
and  developed  it,  and  continually  increased 
its  breadth  and  force,  until  the  last  prophet, 
Jesus  of  Nazareth,  with  supreme  and  Divine 
power  re-enacted  it  as  the  religion  of  the 
whole  world.  And  as  neither  Ms  educational 
institutions  nor  the  prophetic  order,  whose 
ordinary  duties  were  closely  connected  with 
these  schools,  could  have  flourished  without 


internal  quietness  and  security,  Samuel  also 
established  the  Jewish  monarchy,  which 
was  ideally  also  necessary,  because  the  Mes- 
siah must  not  only  he  priest  and  prophet, 
but  before  all  things  a  kmg  (Matt.  li.  1,  6  ; 
John  xviii.  37).  And  side  by  side  with  the 
kingdom  he  lived  on  to  see  the  military  suc- 
cesses of  the  first  king,  and  the  firm  establish- 
ment of  the  royal  power ;  but  to  witness  also 
the  development  of  that  king  into  a  despot, 
the  overclouding  of  his  mind  with  fits  of 
madness,  the  designation  of  his  successor,  the 

Erobation  of  that  successor  by  manifold  trials, 
is  ripening  fitness  under  them  to  be  the 
model  of  a  theocratic  king,  and  his  growth 
in  power  so  as  practically  to  be  now  safe 
from  all  Saul's  evil  purposes.  And  so  in  the 
fulness  of  time  Samel  died,  and  all  Israel 
gathered  together  and  made  lamentation 
for  him  (see  Gen.  L  10),  and  buried  him  in 
his  house.  The  tomb  at  present  shown  as 
that  of  Samuel  is  situated  upon  a  lofty  hill, 
the  identification  of  which  with  Bamah  is 
very  uncertain.  Probably  he  was  buried  not 
actually  in  his  house,  as  that  would  lead 
to  perpetual  ceremonial  defilement  (Num. 
xix.  16  ;  Luke  zi  44),  but  in  soma  open  spot 
in  his  garden  (comp.   2  Kings  ixL  18  :   2 


47« 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[OB.  ZXT.  1 — M. 


Ohron.  xxzUL  20).  So  Joab  vas  boned  in 
his  own  honse  (1  Kings  ii  34).  At  Bamah. 
Thenins  thinks  that  the  prophets  shared 
with  the  kings  the  right  of  intramural  buriaL 
David  in  the  wilderness  of  Faban 
(rers.  1 — 42).    David  asks  a  gift  of  the 

WKALTHT  NABAL  AND  IB  EEFTJSBD  (verS.  1 — 

13).  Ver.  1. — ^David  arose.  This  is  not  to 
be.  connected  with  the  death  of  Samuel,  as 
though  David  had  now  lost  a  protector. 
But  as  he  had  fully  600  men  with  him, 
and  his  force  was  continually  increasing,  it 
was  necessaty  for  him  to  roam  over  a  wide 
extent  of  country  in  order  to  obtain  supplies 
of  food.  The  wilderness  of  Faran.  Faran 
strictly  is  a  place  in  the  southernmost  part 
of  the  peninsula  of  Arabia,  a  little  to  the 
west  of  Mount  Sinai ;  but  there  can  be 
little  doubt  that  it  gave  its  name  to  the  vast 
extent  of  pasture  and  barren  laud  now  known 
as  the  desert  of  El-Tih  (see  1  Kings  xi.  18). 
Of  this  the  wildernesses  of  Judah  and  Beer- 
sheba  would  virtually  fonn  parts  without 
the  borders  being  strictly  defined.  We  need 
not  therefore  read  "  the  wilderness  of  Maon," 
with  the  Septuagint  and  many  comment- 
ators. On  the  contrary,  we  have  seen  that 
the  hold  in  ch.  xxiv.  22  was  the  hill 
Hachilah  in  that  neighbourhood,  and  David 
now  moved  southward  towards  the  edge  of 
this  vast  wilderness. 

Ver.  2. — A  man  in  Maon.  Though  strictly 
by  descent  belonging  to  Maon  (for  which  see 
on  ch.  xxiii.  24),  his  possessions —rather, "  his 
business,"  "occupation"  (see  Gen.  xlvii.  3, 
and  Eccles.  iv.  3,  where  it  is  translated 
ivark) — were  in  Carmel,  the  small  town  just 
uorth  of  Maon,  where  Saul  set  up  a  trophy 
at  the  end  of  the  Amalekite  war  (ch.  xv.  12), 
and  to  which  Abigail  belonged  (ch.  xxviL  3). 
He  is  described  as  very  great  because  of  his 
wealth  arising  from  his  large  flocks  of  sheep 
and  goats,  which  fed  upon  the  pasture  land 
which  forms  the  elevated  plateau  of  Carmel, 
where  he  was  shearing'  his  sbeep,  usually  a 
time  of  lavish  hospitality  (2  Sam.  xiil  23, 
24). 

Ver.  8. — ^Nabal,  the  word  rendered /i>o2  in 
Ps.  xiv.  1 ;  literally,  "flat,"  "vapid.'^  Abi- 
gail means  "  one  who  is  the  cause  (father) 
of  joy,"  i.  e.  one  who  gives  joy.  She,  with 
her  blight  understanding  and  beautiful  per- 
son (the  Hebrew  word  takes  in  much  more 
than  the  coontenance;  see  ch.  xvi.  18,  where 
it  is  rendered  comely  person),  is  in  contrast 
with  the  coarse,  churlish  man  who  was  her 
husband.  His  name  was  either  one  which  he 
had  acquired  by  his  conduct,  or  if  given  him 
by  his  parents  shows  that  they  were  clownish 
people.  He  was  of  the  house  of  Caleb. 
The  written  text  has,  "  he  was  according  to 
his  heart,"  celibbo,  i.  e.  a  self-willed  man, 
or  one  whose  rude  exterior  answered  to  his 
umer  nature  ;  but  there  are  linguistic  diffi- 


cnlties  in  the  way  of  this  reading,  and  tht 
Eri  is  probably  right  in  correcting  ealibbi,  a 
Calebito,  a  descendant  of  Caleb,  who  had 
large  possessions  assigned  hiia  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Hebron  (Josh.  iv.  _  18 — 19), 
which  is  only  ten  miles  north-west  of  Car- 
mel. The  versions  support  the  Kri,  though 
the  Syriao  and  Septuagint  render  doglike-— 
one  who,  like  a  dog,  though  he  has  plenty, 
yet  grudges  others.  The  meaning  of  the 
name  Caleb  is  literally  "a  dog." 

Vers.  4,  5.  —Though  David  had  gone  some 
distance  southward  of  Carmel,  yet  it  was 
worth  his  while  to  send  men  to  Nabal's 
sheep-shearing,  as  the  maintenance  of  his 
numerous  force  must  have  been  a  continual 
difficulty.  The  large  number,  ten,  also  shows 
that  he  expected  a  liberal  gift  of  food.  Fro- 
bably  such  missions  were  not  uncommon, 
and  the  large  sheep-masters  were  glad  to 
supply  the  wants  of  one  who  guarded  their 
flocks  and  defended  them  &om  the  incur- 
sions of  the  desert  tribes. 

Vers.  6— 8.— Say  to  him  that  liveth  in 
prosperity.  The  Hebrew  is  obscure,  but  the 
rendering  of  the  A.  V.  is  untenable,  and 
also  very  tame.  Literally  it  is,  ''Ye  shall 
say  to  him,  For  life  1 "  Frobably  it  was  a 
colloquial  form  of  greeting,  and  equivalent 
to  "good  luck,"  "success,  life  in  Hebrew 
being  sometimes  used  for  prosperity.  So 
Luther  translates  it,  and  Bashi  and  the 
Babylonian  Talmud  are  also  in  its  favour. 
The  reading  of  the  Vulgate,  "  To  thy  bro- 
thers "  (be  peace),  is  to  be  altogether  rejected. 
"We  hurt  them  not.  Literally,  "  we  caused 
them  no  shame"  (see  Judges  xviii  7),  we 
did  nothing  to  vex  and  injure  them.  Eeally 
the  words  mean  that  David  had  protected 
them,  and  enabled  them  to  feed  their  flocks 
in  safety.  The  fact  that  David  waited  till 
the  sheep-shearing,  when  hospitality  was  the 
rule,  proves  that  he  did  not  levy  black-mail 
upon  his  countrymen,  though  necessarily  he 
must  have  depended  upon  them  for  the  food 
indispensable  for  the  support  of  his  men. 
A  good  day.  /.  e.  a  festive  day,  which 
should  bring  us  a  share  in  thy  prosperity. 
Thy  son  David.  A  title  expressive  of  the 
reverence  due  from  the  youthful  David  to  his 
senior,  and  an  acknowledgment  of  Nabal's 
superiority  over  his  fugitive  neighbour. 

Ver.  9. — They  .  .  .  ceased.  Literally, 
"they  rested;  "  i.  e.  either  they  remained 
quiet  awaiting  Nabal's  answer,  or  sat  down, 
as  is  the  custom  in  the  East,  for  the  same 
purpose. 

Vers.  10,  ll.^There  be  many  servants, 
&c.  Nabal  would  scarcely  have  ventured  to 
speak  in  so  insulting  a  manner  if  David  had 
been  at  Maon,  but  as  he  had  moved  with  his 
men  a  long  distance  towards  the  south,  h* 
gave  free  vent  to  his  rude  feelings  without 
restraint.     David   ivas  to  him  a  mere  slav» 


OH.  KV.  1—44.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


477 


who  had  ran  away  from  his  master,  SauL 
My  bread,  ...  my  water.  These  are  the 
necessaries  of  life,  while  the  flesh  was  the 
special  luxury  provided  for  the  festival 
David's  ten  young  men  would  not  literally 
carry  water  to  him  at  so  great  a  distance, 
nor  did  Nabal  mean  more  than  our  phrase 
"  meat  and  drink. "  The  use,  nevertheless,  of 
water  as  equivalent  to  d/rink  marks  the  value 
of  water  in  the  hill  country,  and  also  the 
abstemious  habits  of  the  people. 

Vers.  12,  13.— Gird  ye  on,  &c.  David's 
determination  was  fierce  and  violent.  No 
doubt  Nabal's  insult  irritated  him,  and  pos- 
sibly also  the  rude  outlaws  round  him  would 
have  protested  against  any  other  course  ; 
but  Nabal's  words,  rude  though  they  were, 
would  not  justify  David  in  the  rough  venge- 
ance which  he  meditated.  Abigail  through- 
out her  speech  argues  that  David  was  taking 
too  violent  a  course,  and  one  for  which  he 
would  afterwards  have  been  sorry. 

AbioaiIi  pacifies  David  (vers.  14 — 36). 
Vers.  14 — 17.  —  One  of  the  young  men. 
Hebrew,  "  a  lad  of  the  lads,"  i.  e.  one  of  the 
servants  (see  on  the  word  ch.  i  24) ;  when 
nsed  in  this  sense  it  has  no  reference  to 
age  (see  ch.  ii.  17).  This  man  was  pro- 
bably some  old  and  confidential  servitor. 
To  salute.  Hebrew,  "to  bless"  (see  ch. 
xiii.  10 ;  2  Kings  iv.  29).  He  railed'  on 
them.  Literally,  "flew  upon  them  like 
a  bird  of  prey."  We  were  not  hnrt. 
Literally,  "not  put  to  shame"  (see  on  ver. 
7).  The  language  of  a  people  always  bears 
witness  to  their  character,  and  it  is  a  mark 
of  the  high  spirit  of  the  Israelites  that  they 
thought  less  of  the  loss  than  of  the  disgrace 
of  an  injury.  As  long  as  we  were  conversant 
with  them.  Hebrew,  "as  long  as  we  went 
about  with  them."  In  the  fields.  Beally, 
"  in  the  field,"  the  wilderness,  the  common 
pasture  land.  A  wall.  /.  e.  a  sure  protec- 
tion both  against  wild  beasts  and  Amalekite 
and  other  plunderers.  A  son  of  Belial.  A 
worthless,  bad  man  (see  on  ch.  i.  16),  so 
coarse  and  violent  that  it  ia  hopeless  to 
expostulate  with  him. 

Vers.  18 — 20. — Five  measures  of  parched 
oom.  The  measure  named  here,  the  seah, 
contains  about  a  peck  and  a  half.  As  this 
seems  little,  Ewald  reads  500  seahs,  but 
probably  it  was  regarded  as  a  delicaOT. 
Clasters  of  raisins.  Rather,  as  in  the 
margin,  lumps  of  raisins.  The  bunches  of 
grapes  when  dried  were  pressed  into  cakes. 
Sending  her  servants  in  front  leading  the 
asses  which  carried  the  present,  she  followed 
behind,  and  met  David  as  she  was  coming 
down  by  the  oovert  of  the  hill.  Hebrew, 
"in  secret  of  the  hill,"  under  cover  of  the 
hill,  i.  «.  she  met  him  as  she  was  descending 
into  some  glen  into  which  he  had  entered 
bom.  the  Qther  end. 


Vers.  21,  22. — David  justifies  his  fierce 
anger  by  referring  to  the  services  he  had 
rendered  Nabal,  and  which  had  been  requited 
so  shabbily.  For  the  phrase  so  do  God  unto 
the  enemies  of  David  see  on  ch.  xx.  16. 
A  superstitious  feeling  probably  lay  at  the 
root  of  this  substitution  of  David's  enemies 
for  himself  when  thus  invoking  a  curse. 

Vers.  23— 25.— Abigail  .  ,  .  fell  before 
David  on  her  face.  'This  very  abject  obei- 
sance may  have  been  grounded  on  her  belief 
in  David's  future  kingship,  or  it  may  simply 
mark  the  inferior  position  held  by  women  in 
those  days  (see  ver.  41).  Her  whole  address 
is  couched  in  very  humble  terms.  David 
(ch.  xxiv.  8)  only  stooped  with  his  face  to 
the  ground  before  Saul.  Upon  me.  Abigail 
represents  herself  as  the  person  really  guilty, 
on  whom  the  iniquity,  «.  «.  the  punishment 
of  the  offence,  must  fall.  Nabal  is  ^  mere 
sou  of  Belial,  a  worthless,  bad  man,  whose 
name  Nabal,  i.  e.  fool,  is  a  sign  that  folly 
is  with  him,  and  accompanies  all  his  acts. 
As  a  fool  he  is  scarcely  accountable  for  his 
doings,  and  Abigail,  whose  wont  and  busi- 
ness it  was  to  set  things  to  rights,  saw  not 
the  young  men,  and  so  was  unable  to  save 
them  from  her  husband's  rudeness. 

Vers.  26,  27. — Abigail  begins  her  appeal 
by  affirming  that  it  was  Jehovah  who  thus 
made  her  come  to  prevent  bloodshed ;  she 
next  propitiates  David  with  the  prayer  that 
his  enemies  may  be  as  Nabal,  insignificant 
fools ;  and  finally  asks  him  to  accept  her 
present,  not  for  himself, — that  would  be  too 
great  an  honour, — but  as  good  enough  only 
for  his  followers.  The  first  of  these  affirma- 
tions is  obscured  by  the  rendering  in  the 
A.  v.,  and  should  be  translated,  "And  how, 
my  lord  (an  ordinary  title  of  respect,  like  our 
tw),  as  Jehovah  liveth,  and  as  thy  soul 
liveth,  so  true  is  it  that  Jehovah  hath  with- 
holden  thee  from  blood-guiltiness,  and  from 
saving  thyself  with  thine  own  hand ;  and 
now  let  thine  enemies,"  &c.  The  same  words 
recur  in  vers.  31,  33.  Blessing.  /.  «.  ^ft, 
present  (see  ch.  xxx.  26).  This  beautiful 
term  shows  the  deep  religiousness  of  the 
Hebrew  mind.  The  gift  is  something  that 
comes  not  from  the  donor,  but  from  God,  in 
answer  to  the  donor's  prayer. 

Ver.  28. — Forgive  the  trespass  of  thine 
handmaid.  Reverting  to  her  words  in  ver. 
24,  that  the  blame  and  punishment  must 
rest  on  her,  she  now  prays  for  forgiveness ; 
but  the  intermediate  words  in  ver.  26, 
emphasised  in  ver.  31,  have  raised  her  re- 
quest to  a  higher  leveL  Her  prayer  rests 
on  the  ground  that  she  was  saving  David 
from  a  sin,  and  that  in  his  thirst  for  venge> 
ance  he  was  bringing  upon  himself  guilt. 
If  the  form  of  Abigail's  address  was  most 
humble,  the  matter  of  it  was  brave  and 
noble.    A  f  nie  hsnae.    /.  «.  permanent  pros- 


t78 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL, 


[CH.  XXV.  1 — 44 


parity  (see  on  ch.  iL  35).  Becanse  my  lord 
fighteth.  Hebrew,  "will  fight."  David 
was  not  fighting  these  battles  now  because  he 
was  not  yet  enthroned  as  the  theocratic  king. 
It  was  Saul's  business  at  present  to  fight 
"Jehovah's  battles,"  either  in  person  or  by 
his  officers  (ch.  xviii.  17).  The  words, 
therefore,  distinctly  look  forward  to  the 
time  when  David  as  king  will  have  the  duty 
imposed  upon  him  of  protecting  Jehovah's 
covenant  people.  Evil  hath  not  been  found 
in  thee.  Hebrew,  "shall  not  be  found  in 
thee,"  i.  e.  when  the  time  comes  for  thee 
to  take  the  kingdom  no  one  shall  be  able  to 
allege  against  thee  any  offence  by  which 
thou  hast  lost  thy  title  to  the  kingly  office  ; 
nor  afterwards  as  king  shalt  thou  be  guilty 
of  any  breach  of  thy  duty  to  Jehovah,  Israel's 
supreme  Euler,  w  as  to  incur  rejection  as 
Saul  has  done. 

Vers.  29 — 31. — ^Tet  a  man  is  risen.  Rather, 
"  And  should  any  one  arise  to  pursue  thee," 
kc  The  reference  is  of  course  to  Saul,  but 
put  with  due  reserve,  and  also  made  general, 
so  as  to  include  all  possible  injury  attempted 
against  David.  Bound  in  the  bundle  of  life. 
Hebrew,  "of  the  living."  The  metaphor 
is  taken  from  the  habit  of  packing  up  in  a 
bundle  articles  of  great  value  or  of  indis- 
pensable use,  so  that  the  owner  may  carry 
them  about  his  person.  In  India  the  phrase 
is  common  ;  thus,  a  just  judge  is  said  to  be 
bound  up  in  the  bundle  of  righteousness  ;  a 
lover  in  the  bundle  of  love.  Abigail  prays, 
therefore,  that  David  may,  with  others  whose 
Ufe  is  precious  in  God's  sight,  be  securely  kept 
under  Jehovah's  personal  care  and  protection. 
In  modem  times  the  two  words  signifying 
' '  in  the  bundle  of  the  living "  form  a 
common  inscription  on  Jewish  gravestones, 
the  phrase  having  been  interpreted  in  the 
Talmud,  as  also  by  Abravanel  and  other 
Jewish  authorities,  of  a  future  life.  Shall 
he  sling  out,  &c.  In  forcible  contrast  with 
this  careful  preservation  of  David's  life,  she 
prays  that  his  enemies  may  be  cast  away  as 
violently  and  to  as  great  a  distance  as  a 
stone  is  cast  out  of  a  sling.  The  middle  is 
the  hollow  in  which  the  stone  was  placed. 
Bnler.  /.  e.  prince.  It  is  the  word  rendered 
captain  in  ch.  ix.  16 ;  x.  1,  but  its  mean- 
ing is  more  correctly  given  here.  Griet 
The  word  really  means  much  the  same  as 
•tumbling-block,  something  which  makes 
a  person  stagger  by  his  striking  against  it 
unawares.  Abigail  prays,  therefore,  that 
when  David  has  become  prince,  and  so 
has  to  administer  justice,  this  violent  and 
revengeful  act  which  he  was  purposing  might 
not  prove  a  cause  of  stumbling  and  an  offence 
of  heart  to  himself,  by  his  conscience  re- 
proaching him  for  having  himself  done  that 
which  he  had  to  condemn  in  others. 
-  Vert  83  —  35.  —  David,  in  his  thankful 


acknowledgment  of  Abigail's  remonstrance, 
sees  in  it  the  hand  of  Jehovah  the  God  of 
Israel,  who  had  sent  her,  i.  e.  stirred  herup  to 
come.  He  commends  also  her  advice,  liter- 
ally, her  "taste,"  i.  e.  wisdom,  discretion. 
It  is  the  word  rendered  beha/viour  in  ch. 
xxi.  13.  But  for  this  prudent  conduct  on 
her  part  in  thus  coming  to  meet  him  on  the 
way,  he  solemnly  assures  her  on  oath  that 
nothing  could  have  saved  Nabal  and  every 
male  in  his  household  from  death.  Finally, 
he  accepts  her  present  and  dismisses  her 
with  the  assurance  that  all  was  forgiven. 

Death  of  Nabal  and  MARRiAas  of 
David  and  Abigail  (vers.  36 — 42).  Vers. 
36 — 38. — For  he  was  very  drunken.  Hebrew, 
"  and  he  was  very  drunken."  This  was  not 
the  cause  of  his  heart  being  merry,  but  the 
result ;  he  gave  himself  up  to  enjoyment  till 
he  became  drunken,  and  then  his  merriment 
was  over.  When  Abigail  came  back  he  was 
stupefied  by  drink,  and  it  was  not  until  the 
next  day,  when  his  debauch  was  passing  off, 
that  he  was  capable  of  being  told  what  his 
wife  had  done.  And  when  Abigail  recounted 
to  him  David's  fierce  resolve,  and  how  she 
had  pacified  him,  he  seems  to  have  given 
way  to  a  fit  of  violent  indignation,  flying 
out  possibly  at  her  as  he  had  at  David's 
messengers  (ver.  li),  the  result  of  which  was 
an  attack  of  apoplexy,  and  after  lying  in  a 
state  of  insensibility  for  ten  days,  he  died. 

Vers.  39—42. — Hath  pleaded  the  cause 
of  my  reproach.  In  the  causes  tried  at  the 
gate  of  an  Israelite  city  the  friends  of  the 
accused  both  pleaded  his  cause,  defended 
him  from  wrong,  and  punished  any  who  had 
wronged  him.  So  Goo.  had  avenged  David, 
while  preventing  him  by  Abigail's  inter- 
ference from  avenging  himself  (see  ch.  xxiv. 
13).  As  a  widow's  legal  mourning  seems  to 
have  lasted  only  seven  days,  David,  on  hear- 
ing of  Nabal's  death,  sent  messengers  to 
Abigail  at  Carmel  to  ask  her  in  marriage. 
He  was  probably  moved  to  this  not  merely 
by  her  sensible  conduct,  but  also  by  the  news 
that  Michal  had  been  given  to  another. 
She  expresses  her  willingness  in  true  Oriental 
fashion  by  saying  she  was  ready  to  perform 
the  most  abject  menial  duties,  even  for  his 
servants,  and  at  once  with  five  maidens 
proceeds  to  join  him.  It  is  a  proof  that 
David  considered  himself  practically  secure 
against  Saul's  attempts  that  he  thus  married 
and  allowed  women  to  accompany  his  small 
force,  as  their  presence  would  not  only  im- 
pede the  rapidity  of  his  movements,  but  also 
implies  a  certain  amount  of  ease  and  comfort 
for  their  maintenance. 

Additional  partioulars  KBapEOTisa 
David's  married  life  (vers.  43,  44).  Vera, 
43,  44. — Besides  Abigail,  David  also  took  to 
wife  Ahinoam  of  Jezreel,  a  small  village 
among  the  hills  of  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  66),  and 


OH,  XXV.  1 — 44. 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


471 


not  the  better  known  town  of  that  name  in 
the  tribe  of  Issachar.  Ahinoam  was  the 
name  also  of  Saul's  wife  (ch.  zir.  60).  They 
were  also  ...  his  wives.  I.  e.  besides 
Michal.  She  had  been  given  by  Saul  to 
Fbaiti  the  ion  of  Laiih,  called  Phaltiel  in 


2  Sam.  ill.  16,  wheie  we  read  of  hit  lament- 
ation at  her  being  torn  from  Him  by  Ish- 
bosheth  in  order  that  she  might  be  restored 
to  David.  Oallim  is  described  in  Isa.  x. 
80  as  being  situated  between  Gibeah  of  Saul 
and  Jerusalem. 


H0MILSTIC8. 

Vers.  1 — 12. — Honour  to  the  dead  and  insult  to  the  living.  The  facts  are — !• 
Samuel  dies,  and  is  buried  at  Ramah  amidst  the  sorrow  of  Israel.  2.  David,  return- 
ing to  the  wilderness,  sends  a  greeting  to  Nabal,  a  wealthy  man  at  Garmel,  anH  asks 
for  some  favour  to  his  young  men  on  account  of  the  friendly  aid  recently  reiidnred 
to  Nabal's  shepherds.  3.  Nabal,  in  a  churlish  spirit,  sends  an  insulting  reply,  and 
refuses  the  request.  4.  Whereupon  David  resolves  on  taking  revenge  for  the  insult. 
The  allusion  here  to  the  death  of  Samuel,  while  a  necessary  part  of  the  history  of 
the  age,  seems  to  be  introduced  to  prepare  the  way  for  the  continuance  of  the  nar- 
rative concerning  David,  who  now  has  become  the  principal  figure  in  the  national 
life.  We  have  to  consider  the  teaching  of  the  good  man's  death  and  the  churlish 
man's  insult. 

Honour  to  the  dead.  The  various  points  brought  out  in  the  brief  reference  are, 
the  brevity  of  the  notice  compared  with  the  length  of  service,  the  ground  of  the 
public  homage,  the  loss  and  gain  to  Israel,  the  extent  of  influence  revealed,  and  the 
temporary  subsidence  of  party  conflicts.  Formulating  the  truths  thus  suggested,  we 
see — 

I.  That  THE  SCANTY  REFERENCB  IN  THE   BiBLB  TO  THE   PERSONAL  WORK   AND  DEATH 

OF  God's  best  servants  is  in  instructive  contrast  with  the  records  concerning 
Christ.  Samuel's  life  was  long  and  immensely  useful  to  the  world  by  the  reform- 
ation wrought  in  Israel  by  the  force  of  his  character,  and  the  preparation  made  for 
prophetic  teaching  and  stable  government.  A  holier  and  more  devoted  man  was  nol 
found,  and  yet  one  verse  tells  us  all  about  his  death  and  burial.  The  same  reticence 
is  true  concerning  Abraham,  Moses,  Isaiah,  and  indeed  all  the  most  distinguislied  of 
men.  They  during  life  spoke  little  of  themselves,  and  referred  little  to  their  an- 
cestors. The  apostles  also  live,  labour,  and  die,  and  no  stress  is  laid  on  their  worl< 
and  death,  a  circumstance  in  keeping  with  the  self-abnegation  which  never  made 
themselves  prominent  objects  of  faith.  The  contrast  with  Christ  is  impressive.  He 
is  all  and  ever3rthing.  His  self-reference  is  perfect  egotism  if  he  be  a  mere  human 
being  ordained  only  in  higher  degree  than  others  to  execute  a  Divine  purpose.  The 
exaltation  of  his  name,  work,  and  death  by  the  apostles  is  most  natural  and  har- 
monious with  the  silence  of  the  Bible  in  relation  to  all  others  if  he  be  really  Divine. 
The  question  of  his  personality  cannot  be  settled  by  mere  verbal  discussions.  Broad 
facts  must  be  considered,  and  these  clearly  determine  the  verbal  sense  where  exegetes 
may  be  supposed  to  differ.  This  kind  of  argument  appeals  to  the  common  sense  of 
men,  and  accords  also  with  the  instinct  of  the  Christian  heart  to  worship  Christ. 

II.  That  THE  HONOUR  paid  to  the  dead,  so  far  as  referred  to  in  Scripture,  is  that 
DUE  to  holt  character  and  service.  The  allusion  here  and  elsewhere  to  a  proper 
homage  to  the  dead  is  clearly  associated  with  the  holy  life  and  conduct  previously 
recorded  in  the  sacred  narrative.  There  is  a  singular  silence  in  the  Bible  with  respect 
to  any  honours  paid  to  men,  on  account  of  the  greatness  supposed  to  consist  in  warlike 
exploits.  True  greatness  lies  in  good  abilities  being  pervaded  by  a  spirit  of  piety, 
and  consequently  consecrated  to  the  advancement  of  the  kingdom  of  God  on  earth. 
The  value  of  a  man's  life  is  to  be  sought  in  the  contribution  he  makes  to  the  spiritual 
impulse  by  which  the  world  is  brought  nearer  to  God.  The  supreme  honours  often 
paid  to  mere  titular  rank,  to  wealth,  to  military  prowess,  and  even  to  bare  learning, 
are  expressive  of  a  human  judgment  which  is  discounted  by  the  language  of  the 
Bible,  and  will  be  reversed  when,  adjudged  by  the  lofty  standard  of  Christ,  every 
man  shall  receive  according  to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body. 

III.  That  the  death  of  truly  good  men  is  both  a  loss  and  a  gain  to  the  ■world. 
Israel  properly  mourned  because   the   "godly  man"  fn'led,  for  the   activity  uid 


UO  THE  FIBOT  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [cK.  xzr.  1—44 

penonal  inflnence  of  the  greatest  man  of  the  age  henceforth  would  cease.  We  cannot 
ny  whether  a  good  man's  activity  of  spirit  no  longer  operates  as  s  power  on  men 
after  his  death — prohably  it  does  if  there  be  any  truth  in  the  conservation  and  per- 
sistence of  spiritual  forces ;  but  so  far  as  survivors  are  concerned  they  are  uncon- 
scious of  it,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  are  henceforth  more  open  to  the  action  of  other 
visible  influences.  We  lose  much  when  good  men  die  ;  yet  we  gain  something. 
The  whole  life  becomes  more  impressive  in  death  than  during  its  continuance.  The 
germinal  good  sown  in  the  heart  by  silent  goodness  and  actual  effort  is  quickened 
around  the  grave  into  healthy  growth.  The  sobering,  elevating  influence  of  a 
sainted  memory  is  a  permanent  if.reasure.  Many  have  to  bless  God  for  the  death 
of  his  saints.  Heaven  becomes  more  real  to  those  whose  beloved  ones  have  gone 
before,  and  the  levities  of  life  are  subdued  by  the  thought  of  our  temporary  separation 
from  the  "general  assembly." 

IV.  That  THE  REALITY  AND  EXTENT  OF  A  GOOD  MAN's  INFLTJENCB  OVEB  OTHERS  IB 

BROUGHT  OUT  IN  DEATH  MORE  THAN  IN  LIF«.  The  public  homage  paid  to  Samuel  was 
the  nation's  response  to  his  life's  appeal  to  the  heart  and  conscience.  Like  Elijah,  he 
no  doubt  often  deplored  the  degeneracy  of  the  age,  and  questioned  whether  he  was 
doing  any  substantial  good.  This  doubt  is  the  common  experience  of  all  God's 
servants.  They  cannot  see  the  incidence  of  the  rays  of  light  as  they  silently  fall  on 
the  dull  heart  of  the  people,  though  in  theory  they  know  that  every  ray  performs  its 
part  in  the  great  spiritual  economy  of  the  universe.  But  the  subjects  of  holy 
influence  do  receive  in  some  degree  all  that  comes  forth  from  a  consecrated  life,  and 
it  often  requires  the  removal  of  a  good  man  from  this  world  to  make  manifest  how 
strong  a  hold  he  has  had  on  the  thought  and  feeling  of  others.  There  are  many 
instances  of  this  in  all  grades  of  society.  Churches  and  families  reveal  the  power 
of  a  character  when  that  character  ceases  to  exercise  its  wonted  energies.  This 
should  induce  calmness  and  confidence  in  all  who  strive  to  bless  the  world  by  a 
devoted  life.  Those  who  exercise  moral  power  are  not  always  the  best  judges  of  its 
force  and  extent.  God  mercifully  keeps  from  our  view  some  of  the  good  we  are 
doing,  lest  we  fall  into  the  snare  of  the  devil. 

V.  That  man's  consciousness  of  the  sacredness  and  mystebt  of  humam  existence, 
when  aroused,  is  supreme  over  evert  thought  and  feeling.  All  Israel,  embracing 
Saul,  David,  the  prophets,  and  the  slanderers  and  conspirators  at  the  court,  assembled 
around  the  g^ave  of  Samuel  and  wept.  The  strifes  and  rivalries  of  parties,  the 
deadly  feuds  and  cruel  animosities  of  life,  the  most  urgent  of  human  passions, 
were  for  the  time  set  aside  imder  the  influence  of  that  deep,  all-mastering  feeling 
that  human  existence  on  earth  is  a  sacred  mystery.  The  holiest  and  most  honoured 
are  seen  to  succumb  to  the  strong  hand  which  carries  off  the  most  worthless.  Each 
asks.  Is  this  the  end  ?  Is  there  nothing  beyond  ?  If  there  is,  what  ?  Thus  it  is 
man's  reflectiveness,  awakened  by  the  death  of  the  great,  which  causes  him  to  recog- 
nise at  the  same  time  both  his  littleness  and  his  greatness.  The  solemnity  of  having 
arational  existence  comes  on  all  in  presence  of  death.  That  we  are  made  for  some- 
thing far  above  what  now  engages  our  attention  is  forced  on  the  spirit,  and  our  con- 
nection with  an  invisible  sphere  and  final  tribunal  rises  into  awful  distinctness.  This 
frequently-recurring  sense  of  the  sacredness  and  mystery  of  existence  is  a  check  on 
sinful  tendencies,  and  furnishes  occasions  for  the  application  of  the  gospel  to  the 
hearts  of  men.  _  Gospel  truth  learnt  in  early  years  will  often  assert  its  power  in  men 
as,  leaving  awhile  the  contentions  and  sins  of  life,  they  stand  by  the  open  grave. 

Insult  to  the  living.  The  question  arises.  Why  is  it  that  this  narrative  of  Nabal's 
churlishness  occupiec  so  prominent  a  place  in  the  sacred  records,  seeing  that  so 
adventurous  a  lifo  as  that  of  David  must  have  abounded  in  striking  incident? 
Among,  then,  the  topics  suggested  by  the  account  of  the  churlish  maiTs  insult  we 
may  notice — 

I.  The  principle  on  which  events  are  recorded  in  Scripture.  Is  this  principle 
ascertainable  ?  Can  any  hypothesis  concerning  it  be  verified  by  an  induction  of 
facts  ?  Granting  an  afiSrinative  reply  to  these  questions,  do  we  here  get  a  harmony 
of  Scripture  superior  to  that  of  literal  agreement  in  details  ?  Now,  in  dealing  with 
such  questions  we  have  to  be  guided  by  a  few  broad  facts,  such  as,  the  order  of 
Providence  among  men  is  subservient  to  the  working  out  of  the  redemptive  purpose 


CB.  rxT.  1—44.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  Ml 

in  Christ ;  the  redemptive  poipose  is  wrought  out  through  the  instrumentality  of 
chosen  servants,  succeeding  one  another  by  Divine  arrangement ;  events  touching 
the  lives  of  these  men  affected  the  performance  of  their  part  in  the  accomplishing 
of  the  purpose,  in  so  far  as  they  developed  character  or  brought  the  great  principles 
for  which  they  lived  into  conflict  with  opposing  principles  ;  the  Bible  is  designed  to 
be  a  record  of  the  events  which  advanced  the  unfolding  of  the  redemptive  purpose, 
either  directly,  or  ))y  indirectly  shaping  the  character  and  conduct  of  those  engaged 
in  its  outworking,  and  forcing  the  Divine  idea  into  sharp  contrast  with  various  forms 
of  evil.  The  attempt  to  find  the  principle  of  selection  of  facts  for  incorporation  in 
God's  record  of  the  history  of  redemption  in  any  other  direction  must  fail.  The 
great  thought  of  this  Book  of  Samuel  is  the  conflict  of  the  Messianic  hope  with 
opposing  evils.  Hence  all  through  tbe  life  of  David  we  see  that  the  "  salvation  of 
the  Lord,"  ».  e.  the  great  spiritual  reformation  to  be  wrought  as  a  prelude  to  a  future 
and  more  blessed  one,  was  the  issue  at  stake  ;  and  those  events  are  evidently  related 
which  helped  it  on,  and  such  as  were  opposed  to  it.  Principles  are  embodied  in  each 
of  these  instances,  and  thus  the  relation  of  events  to  the  unfolding  purpose  of  God 
is  that  quality  in  them  which  accounts  for  their  insertion  in  the  Scripture*.  The 
verification  of  this  is  an  interesting  study.  It  may  suffice  here  to  note  that  when  we  . 
consider  the  great  influence  on  the  life  of  David  of  such  a  woman  as  Abigail,  and 
therefore  on  his  work  for  the  world,  we  can  see  the  propriety  of  some  account  of  her 
in  relation  to  him,  and  we  shall  see  directly  how  completely  Nabal's  churlishness  was 
an  illustration  of  the  grovelling  spirit  which  scorns  such  lofty  spiritual  aspirations 
as  are  involved  in  working  out  the  Divine  purpose  for  mankind. 

II.  The  causes  and  cure  of  domestic  infelicity.  The  home  life  of  Nabal  was 
evidently  not  happy,  arising  partly  from  utter  diversity  of  taste,  temperament,  and 
culture,  and  partly  from  dissimilarity  of  moral  conduct  and  religious  principle.  A  low, 
grovelling  disposition,  revelling  in  sensual  indulgence  and  proud  of  wealth,  could  not 
but  embitter  the  life  of  a  "  woman  of  good  understanding,"  and  of  such  fine  spiritual 
perceptions  as  are  indicated  by  her  words  to  David  (vers.  27 — 31).  There  are  unfor- 
tunately many  such  homes.  Wise  and  holy  women  are  held  to  the  humiliation  and 
sorrow  of  a  lifelong  bondage.  In  modem  times  the  causes  of  doniestic  infelicity 
are  various — fashion,  that  considers  station  before  happiness ;  love  of  wealth,  that 
lays  beauty,  sweetness,  and  culture  at  the  feet  of  mammon ;  inconsiderate  haste, 
acting  on  partial  knowledge  of  character ;  concern  for  a  livelihood  irrespective  of 
moral  qualities  ;  incompatible  religious  sentiments ;  selfishness  on  the  one  side,  seeking 
inordinate  attention,  and  neglect  on  the  other,  heedless  of  the  sacred  bond.  In 
many  cases  the  release  is  only  in  death,  so  utter  is  the  desolation.  So  far  as  Abigail 
was  concerned,  her  discretion  and  self-command  mitigated  the  evils  of  her  home  j 
but  the  radical  remedy  is  a  renewal  of  the  spirit,  a  turning  of  the  life  to  God. 

III.  The  obligations  of  wealth.  That  every  talent  imposes  on  its  possessor 
corresponding  obligation  is  a  first  principle  of  morals  and  religion.  No  man  holds 
material  wealth  for  himself.  He  is  a  member  of  society,  and  bound  to  exercise  his« 
gifts  for  the  welfare  of  others.  The  common  responsibilities  attached  to  wealth 
therefore  devolved  on  Nabal,  and  no  narrow,  private  views  or  acquired  greed  of  gain 
could  release  him  from  the  laws  of  God,  however  irksome  they  might  make  obedience 
to  it.  But  there  were  special  reasons  why  he  was  bound  to  allow  David  to  share  in 
nis  plenty ;  for  was  he  not  known  to  be  a  man  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake,  of 
the  same  tribe  as  Nabal,  admitted  by  the  popular  voice  to  have  been  a  benefactor  by  ' 
his  prowess  on  behalf  of  the  nation,  the  guardian,  by  means  of  his  men,  of  Nabal' s 
aervants  in  a  recent  season  of  peril,  and  regarded  in  Nabal's  house  (vers.  27 — 31)  and 
elsewhere  as  the  coming  king,  well  fitted  by  his  qualities  to  raise  the  spiritual  and 
social  condition  of  the  people  ?  The  modest  request  of  David  was  just,  and  the 
duty  of.  the  rich  man  was  clear.  The  question  of  the  obligations  attaching  to  the 
possession  of  wealth  needs  to  be  pressed  home  with  earnestness  and  elucidated  with 
intelligence..  The  "loveof  money"  is  so  strong  in  some  as  to  bhnd  the  intellect 
and  harden  the  heart  against  a  recognition  of  the  proper  uses  of  it.  No  fixed  stand- 
ard can  be  set  up  for  the  distribution  of  wealth,  for  the  duties  of  giving  and 
spending  are  relative  to  position  and  surroundings.  The  first  thing  to  recognise  is 
that  wealth  is  not  for  self-indulgence  or  aggrandisement,  but  for  the  enrichment  of 

1  BAM.  II 


482  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxt.  1-44 

•II  around.  The  next  is  the  cultivation  of  b  kindly,  generous  spirit  that  looks  ten- 
derly on  the  more  needy,  combined  with  a  soimd  judgment  as  to  the  best  means  of 
enabling  many  to  enjoy  the  distribution  of  wealth  as  the  recompense  of  labour  and 
skill.  Above  all,  every  man  should,  in  a  spirit  of  love  and  gratitude,  lay  all  on  the 
altar  of  God,  and  see  to  it  that  a  good  proportion  be  devoted  to  the  cause  of  Christ. 
None  have  ever  regretted  consecrating  wealth  to  God.  But  that  is  not  consecration 
to  God  which  appropriates  to  religious  uses  when  dependent  ones  are  lacking  means 
of  support  (Mark  vii.  11).  It  would  work  a  revolution  in  the  social  condition  of  our 
country,  and  that  of  the  mildest  and  most  beneficent  kind,  as  well  as  give  an 
immense  impulse  to  the  cause  of  religion,  did  men  of  wealth  but  conscientioosly 
estimate  their  obligations  to  God  and  man,  and  act  accordingly. 

IV.  Contempt  fob  spieitdal  aspieations.  "Who  is  David?  and  who  is  the 
son  of  Jesse  ?  there  be  many  servants  now-a-days  that  break  away  from  their 
masters."  Thus  did  Nabal,  knowing  well  who  David  was,  what  course  he  had  pur- 
sued, what  trials  had  befallen  him,  and  what  high  spiritual  anticipations  were 
associated  with  his  chequered  life,  express  his  contempt  for  the  coming  king  and 
his  supposed  mission  in  Israel.  This  was  clearly  the  case  of  a  rich  man,  fond  of 
sensual  indulgence,  boastful  of  his  possessions,  indifEerent  to  the  culture,  moral 
elevation,  and  spiritual  prosperity  of  his  countrymen,  and  looking  with  scorn  on  the 
men  who  long  for  a  higher  form  of  life  in  which  purity,  knowledge,  and  joy  in  God 
are  prominent  features.  He  wanted  to  have  nothing  to  do  with  "theorists," 
"fanatics,"  and  men  of  that  type.  The  country  was  well  enough,  and  the  son  of 
Jesse  was  not  wanted.  The  insult  to  the  living  was  insult  to  man.  Men  are  often 
only  the  exponents  of  principles  that  survive  when  they  are  gone.  Samuel  during 
his  early  labours  was  the  energetic  exponent  of  the  spiritual  idea  of  God's  kingdom 
as  against  the  grovelling  conceptions  of  Israel's  function  entertained  by  the  degene- 
rate nation.  Later  David  became  its  chosen  representative,  and  in  this  his  anoint- 
ing as  a  more  worthy  man  than  Saul  had  its  significance.  Those  who,  like  Jonathan, 
Gad,  and  Abiathar,  identified  themselves  with  David,  became  a  party  in  the  State 
devoted  to  the  assertion  of  the  higher  hope,  while  the  men  who  prompted  Saul  to 
evil,  the  Ziphites,  and  now  Nabal,  were  the  supporters  of  the  low,  earthly  ideal  of 
Israel's  life.  Their  antagonism  to  David  was,  tlierefore,  deeper  than  at  first  appears  ; 
it  was  based  on  lack  of  sympathy  with,  and  in  fact  positive  dislike  of,  the  spiritual 
aspirations  cherished  by  David,  and  which  he  in  the  providence  of  God  was  destined 
largely'  to  enunciate  and  realise.  What  is  meant  by  "such  as  love  thy  salvation" ? 
(Ps.  xl.  16).  Evidently  those  who  are  yearning  for  that  great  deliverance  from 
evil  which  God  was  then  working  out  for  Israel — typical  of  the  wider  deliverance 
which  the  true  King  of  Zioii  is  now  working  out  for  men.  And  as  men  like  Nabal 
despised  the  holy  aspirations  of  David,  so  do  the  same  men  now  despise  the  aspira- 
tions of  those  who  think  not  their  work  done  till  spiritual  religion  is  universal.    The 

.Saviour  heard  men  say,  "Is  not  this  the  carpenter's  son?"  The  pure  and  lofty 
Bspirutioiis  of  his  life  met  with  the  reverse  of  a  response  in  grovelling  minds.  Men 
do  not  object  to  a  religion,  but  they  do  dislike  a  holy  religion. 

Practical  lessons: — 1.  Let  it  be  our  efEort  so  to  live  that  men  may  remember  us 
with  feelings  of  loving  interest.  2.  The  tone  of  our  daily  life  may  often  be  raised, 
and  a  shield  against  temptation  may  be  found,  by  occasionally  communing  in  spirit 

•  with  the  honoured  dead  whom  we  have  known.  3.  In  all  arrangements  for  life  we 
should  allow  moral  and  religious  considerations  to  have  chief  influence.  4.  Con- 
scientious regard  for  the  teaching  of  God's  word  in  reference  to  wealth,  and  special 
prayer  for  guidance  in  its  use,  cannot  but  make  it  a  blessing  to  the  possessor  and  to 
others.  5.  It  requires  careful  thought  to  trace  out  the  connection  between  growing 
riches  and  distaste  for  spiritual  religion  (Mark  x.  23 — 27). 

Vers.  13 — 17. — Creed  and  practice.  The  facts  are — 1.  David,  stung  by  the  insult, 
prepares  to  take  summary  vengeance  on  Nabal.  2.  A  servant,  overhearing  his  interj- 
tion,  reports  it  to  Abigail.  3.  He  also  relates  to  her  the  circumstances  of  David's 
kindness  to  Nabal's  men,  and  appeals  to  her  for  intervention,  as  he  has  no  faith  in 
Nabal's  wisdom  or  generosity.  The  course  taken  by  David  would  ordinarily  be 
termed  natural  for  an  Eastern  chieftain  ;  that  of  the  servant  was  more  considerate 


OB.  XXV.  1—44.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  488 

than  usually  is  found  among  men  of  his  class  when  placed  in  personal  peril.  Begard- 
ing  the  two  causes  separately,  we  may  express  the  teaching  thus : — 

I.  There  is  at  times  a  bad  dibpropobtion  between  the  beliefs  and  thi 
PRACTICE  OF  EVEN  THE  BEST  OF  MEN.  David  was  Undoubtedly  the  most  spiritually 
enlightened,  patient,  and  devout  man  then  living.  The  psalms  of  the  period  indi- 
cate a  wonderful  faith  in  the  care  and  goodness  of  God,  and  his  recent  conduct  had 
illustrated  his  patience,  generosity,  and  forbearance.  The  elevated  tone  of  his  lan- 
guage to  Saul  (ch.  xxiv.  11 — 15),  in  which  he  commits  his  personal  wrongs  to  God,  is 
worthy  of  New  Testament  times.  The  common  faith  of  his  life  could  not  but  have 
been  strengthened  by  the  solemnities  of  the  funeral  from  which  he  had  lately 
returned.  Nevertheless  David  could  not  bear  an  insult,  and  ingratitude,  but  must  in 
imholy  zeal  cease  to  trust  his  cause  to  God,  and  avenge  evil  with  his  own  hand.  Sons 
of  Zebedee  live  in  every  age,  who  cannot  wait  the  calm  purpose  of  God  to  vindicate 
his  saints,  while  at  the  same  time  professing  to  be  of  a  spirit  born  of  heaven,  and 
akin  to  that  of  him  "who  when  he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again."  This  falling 
below  our  ideal  is  a  too  common  calamity  in  individual  and  Church  life.  The  ques- 
tion may  rise  whether  we  really  believe  what  we  say  we  do  when  conduct  does  not 
harmonise  therewith,  for  is  not  real  faith  influential  ?  The  great  verities  of  our 
Christian  Scriptures,  respecting  Christ's  love,  our  destiny,  the  world's  spiritual  need, 
and  the  unspeakable  importance  of  eternal  things,  are  enough  to  enchain  every  soul 
to  holy  consecration  that  knows  no  reserve.  It  is  well  that  we  estimate  the  disparity 
between  creed  and  conduct ;  the  dishonour  it  brings,  the  harm  to  religion  it  entails, 
and  the  effect  of  it  on  our  prayers  (James  v.  16). 

II.  OnB  STANDARD  OP  CONDUCT  IS  TO  BE  TAKEN  NOT  FBOM  GOOD  MEN,  blit  from 
the  EXPLICIT    TEACHING   OF   SCBIPTURE  AND  THE   EXAMPLE    OF  CHRIST.      As  we  read 

the  books  of  men  with  reserve,  and  accept  only  that  which  accords  with  a  standard 
of  truth  apart  from  them,  so  our  reading  of  the  conduct  of  saints  is  to  be  discriminat- 
ing. They  are  often  illustrious  examples  of  good,  but  not  our  models.  Our  conduct 
under  analogous  circumstances  is  not  to  be  regulated  by  that  of  David,  but  by  the 
teaching  which  tells  us  not  to  "  avenge  "  ourselves,  but  to  return  good  for  evil,  and 
even  love  our  enemies.  If  men  ask  what  this  more-personal  retaliation  means,  the 
answer  is,  the  life  of  Christ.  That  it  is  alien  to  human  tendencies  and  often  regarded 
as  unmanly  does  not  make  it  less  Christian.  Very  few  persons  "  enter  into  the  king- 
doiti  of  God  "  in  the  sense  of  behaving  in  the  world  as  Christ  did.  Even  Christian 
men  sometimes  speak  as  though  it  were  madness  to  display  just  the  spirit  of  meek- 
ness, love,  and  compassion  which  marked  his  career  under  provocation.  Who  dare 
say  in  the  truest  sense,  "  We  have  the  mind  of  Christ "? 

III.  Discrimination  and  promptitude  are  valuable  qualities  in  averting 
EVILS  INCIDENT  TO  HUMAN  WBONG-DolNG.  The  evil  consequences  of  one  great  sin 
on  the  part  of  a  good  man  may  be  very  serious,  and,  as  in  this  case,  calling  for 
exceeding  care  if  they  are  to  be  averted.  The  conduct  of  the  servant  (vers.  14—17) 
is  worthy  of  imitation  in  many  departments  of  life.  He  did  not  selfishly  flee  to 
secure  himself,  but,  reading  well  the  purpose  of  David,  thought  of  the  safety  of  all, 
formed  a  just  estimate  of  Abigail's  tact  and  courage,  and  of  Nabal's  stupidity,  and 
without  delay  laid  before  his  mistress  the  provocation  offered  to  David.  A  wise  and 
prompt  servant  is  a  blessing  in  a  home.  These  qualities  go  far  to  render  men  suc- 
cessful in  life  ;  and  if  more  attention  were  paid  in  early  years  to  the  development  of 
them,  many  an  one  would  be  saved  from  disaster,  and  the  whole  machinery  of  saints 
would  move  more  smoothly.  May  we  not  also  see  an  analogy  here  to  the  ease  of  a 
man  who,  foreseeing  spiritual  calamity  to  others,  promptly  devises  means  of  deliver- 
ing them  from  it? 

Practical  lessons : — 1.  We  should  be  on  the  watch  against  sudden  provocations  of 
our  unholy  tendencies,  and  we  shall  find  an  habitually  prayerful  spirit  one  of  the 
best  aids  to  the  immediate  suppression  of  passion.  2.  It  is  worth  considering  how 
much  the  Church  and  world  have  lost  by  failure  on  the  part  of  Christians  to  live  out 
the  spirit  and  precepts  of  Christ.     3.  It  is  a  question  whether  suflScient  attention  is 

Eaid  to  the  suppression  of  the  love  of  fighting  and  taking  of  revenge  in  children,  and 
ow  far  literature  and  customs  foster  these  evils.     4.  In  oases  of  moral  conduct 
prompt  action  is  always  best. 

ilS 


484  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [cH.  xxv.  1—44. 

Vera.  18 — 31. — Wise  pervasiveness.  The  facta  are — 1.  Abigail,  aware  of  the 
danger,  provides  an  ample  present,  and  secretly  sends  on  her  servants  to  prepare  the 
mind  of  David  for  an  interview.  2.  On  seeing  David  she  humbly  seeks  an  audience, 
and  intimates  that  Nabal  was  not  to  be  regarded  as  of  importance.  3.  She  pleads 
her  cause  by  reminding  David  of  the  kind  restraint  of  Providence  in  keeping  him 
from  wrong,  of  Nabal's  utter  unworthiness  of  his  notice,  of  the  provision  made  for 
the  young  men,  of  his  own  integrity  and  coming  distinction,  of  his  spiritual  safety 
amidst  trials,  of  the  future  satisfaction  of  not  having  causelessly  shed  blood,  and 
then  begs  that  she  may  not  be  forgotten  in  coming  days  of  power.  This  narrative 
may  be  considered  in  relation  to  Abigail  and  to  David.     In  the  former  it  affords — 

I.  An  illusteation  op  the  aet  of  pebsuasion.  The  course  pursued  by  Abigail 
was  creditable  to  her  courage,  tact,  piety,  and  loyalty  to  truth.  A  more  beautiful 
instance  of  the  art  of  persuasion  in  the  sphere  of  private  life  is  not  found  in  the 
Bible.  It  may  be  considered  in  two  ways. "  1.  In  relation  to  the  method  adopted. 
This  may  be  seen  by  noticing  the  line  of  argument.  l>avid  is,  after  a  respectful  act 
of  obeisance,  informed  that  the  omission  of  which  he  complained  was  without  the 
knowledge  of  the  person  who  was  largely  responsible  for  acts  of  hospitality  (ver. 
25).  Then,  with  exquisite  delicacy,  he  is  reminded  of  the  sin  of  avenging  self,  and 
of  the  goodness  of  God  in  restraining  from  it  (ver.  26).  This  appeal  to  the  moral 
sense  is  strengthened  by  an  assurance  that  the  offending  person  was  far  beneath  the 
notice  of  one  so  distinguished,  and  that  dignity  could  well  afford  to  let  him  alone 
(ver.  24).  Moreover,  the  occasion  which  properly  roused  his  generous  concern  for 
hungry,  and  deserving  servants  was  passed,  as  ample  provision  was  at  hand  for 
them  (ver.  27).  Passing  from  others,  David  is  assured  of  confidence  in  his  Divine 
call  and  the  integrity  of  his  life,  despite  all  slanders  (ver.  28).  And  though  persecu- 
tion is  hard  to  be  borne,  yet  he  is  reminded  that  full  compensation  is  made  in  being 
securely  kept  by  God,  and  thus  blessed  with  the  spiritual  life  embraced  in  the  ever- 
lasting covenant  (ver.  29) — a  blessing  which  wicked  foes  cannot  share.  To  crown 
all,  he  is  led  to  think  of  the  not  distant  day  when,  as  king  oi  God's  people,  he  will 
enjoy  the  highest  honours  j  and  it  is  gently  suggested  that  it  would  be  a  pity  to  mar 
the  joys  of  such  a  time  by  reflection  on  an  act  of  personal  revenge  by  deeds  of  blood. 
A  beautiful  instance  of  what  a  wise,  holy  woman  can  do  when  emergency  arises.  2. 
In  relation  to  the  general  principles  involved.  Persuasion  is  required  in  the  pulpit, 
the  home,  and  the  common  intercourae  of  life ;  and  observation  proves  how  much 
depends  on  the  adoption  of  right  principles  in  using  it.  Some  never  succeed.  The 
human  soul  can  be  successfully  approached  by  certain  avenues  only.  To  be  snccesB- 
ful  there  ought  to  be — (1)  A  tone  and  manner  befitting  the  persons  and  the  circum- 
stances. (2)  A  clear  but  delicate  reference  to  the  governing  sense  of  right ;  for 
conscience  properly  addressed  is  sure  to  become  an  internal  advocate  for  us.  (3) 
A  readiness  to  meet  every  lawful  claim  and  satisfy  every  generous  instinct;  for 
heed  is  given  to  those  who  are  zealous  in  doing  right.  (4)  An  evident  appreciation 
of  the  actual  position  in  which  those  are  whom  we  address ;  for  confidence  in  our 
judgment  and  professed  sympathy  is  then  awakened.  (5)  A  gentle  appeal  to  the 
most  sacred  religious  hopes  and  aspirations  which,  though  unexpressed,  may  exercise 
a  controlling  power  over  life.  (6)  Begard  to  the  principle  of  self-interest  as  a  force 
in  life  supplementary  to  higher  considerations.  It  is  worth  a  study  to  become 
"  wise  to  win  souls." 

II.  An  illustration  op  the  influence  on  tehpeb  and  conduct  of  keliqious 
coNspEEATlONS.  There  was  power  in  Abigail's  argument  derived  from  her  appeal  to 
David's  sense  of  the  wrong  of  revenge,  and  the  assurance  that  his  generous  concern 
for  his  young  men  was  now  unnecessary.  But  that  which  evidently  touched  David 
most  was  her  reference  to  his  being  the  object  of  God's  love  and  care.  To  be 
restrained  by  a  loving  God,  to  be  in  favour  with  him  amidst  the  wrongs  of  evil 
men,  to  have  an  interest  in  the  higher  spiritual  life  which  is  nourished  and  guarded 
by  God  was  more  than  all  beside.  How  could  one  so  richly  and  undeservedly 
blessed  be  revengeful  or  act  in  any  way  unworthy  of  the  name  of  God?  The 
apostle  adopts  the  same  line  of  argument  when  he,  enjoining  a  spirit  of  f orgriveness, 
reminds  his  readers  of  the  forgiveness  they  have  received  (Ephes.  v.  S2).  If  we 
would  b«  iHunble,  gentle,  f«rgiving,.uid  grateful,  let  us  consider  what  it  is  to  have 


OB.  Mv.  1—44.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  481 

onr  "  names  written  in  heaven "  (Luke  x.  20),  and  to  be  objects  of  a  love  from 
which  nothing  can  separate  us  (Bom.  viii,  38,  39).  A  judicious  use  of  such  reflec- 
tions and  considerations  is  extremely  important  in  spiritual  culture.  Men  are  deeply 
toiip.hed  by  the  thought  of  what  God  has  done  for  them.  A  little  religious  retrospect 
would  save  many  a  man  from  yielding  to  violent  impulses.  The  same  result  is 
secured  by  cherishing  due  regard  to  our  lofty  aspirations.  Those  who  are  to  be 
raised  to  thrones  will  not  do  mean  and  wrongful  deeds.  Who  can  estimate  the 
influence  of  Christian  anticipations  on  present  conduct  ? 

III.  An  illdstbation  of  deepening  fatth  in  Messianic  pubposes.  Men  like  Doeg, 
Cush,  and  the  Ziphites  might  combine  and  by  slander  seek  to  destroy  faitli  in 
David's  integrity,  and  so  seem  to  put  back  the  realisation  of  the  purposes  for  which 
he  had  been  anointed ;  and  the  Psalms  reveal  how  these  things  sometimes  depressed 
his  spirit.  But  all  this  time  the  more  intelligent  and  devout  saw  clearly  that  he  was 
the  man  to  build  up  the  kingdom,  and  Abigail,  by  this  beautiful  revelation  of  her 
confidence  in  his  coming  elevation  to  power,  was  only  a  revelation  to  him  of  ad- 
vancing faith.  The  strength  thus  brought  to  his  heart  reminds  us  of  the  comfort 
evidently  conveyed  to  the  Saviour's  heart  by  Peter's  explicit  avowal  (Matt.  xvi.  16, 
17).  And  as  time  advances  there  will  arise,  as  a  cheering  set-ofE  to  the  scomers  and 
detractors,  superior  minds  bearing  witness  to  the  Divine  truth  and  coming  triumph 
of  Christ's  kingdom.  Equally  so  will  confirmations  rise  up  of  the  call  of  the 
Christian  to  share  in  the  higher  service  of  the  future. 

General  lessons : — 1.  A  wise  man  will  bring  his  impulses  to  the  light  of  religious 
truth  and  allow  it  to  tone  them  down.  2.  In  cases  of  difliculty,  where  temper  is 
concerned,  a  quiet,  fervent  spirit  is  of  great  importance.  3.  To  have  a  place  in  the 
Lamb's  book  of  life  is  full  compensation  for  the  ills  we  may  sufiEer  at  the  hands  of 
men.  4.  It  is  beneath  the  dignity  of  a  Christian  man  to  contend  with  the  mean  and 
base.  5.  It  is  a  sound  maxim  to  sufEer  inconvenience  rather  than  do  anything  that 
will  tend  to  mar  the  enjoyment  of  the  success  we  hope  to  win. 

Vers.  32 — 35. — Restraining  mercif.  The  facts  are — 1.  David,  recognising  the 
hand  of  God,  expresses  his  sense  of  his  mercy  and  blesses  Abigail  for  her  advice.  2. 
He  perceives,  in  the  light  of  her  remonstrance,  the  terrible  evil  of  the  passion  that 
had  swayed  him.  3.  Accepting  her  present,  he  dismisses  her  in  peace.  The  success 
of  Abigail's  wise  conduct  was  now  assured  in  a  good  man  being  saved  the  guilt  and 
shame  of  acting  at  variance  with  his  professed  trust  in  God  ;  and  while  duly  honour- 
ing the  instrument  of  deliverance,  God's  restraining  mercy  is  fully  brought  into  pro- 
minence.   Notice — 

I.  Restraining  merot  ib  a  faot  ni  bvebt  life.  This  instance  was  con- 
spicuous, but  David  elsewhere  acknowledges  the  constant  keeping  of  his  God  (Ps. 
xix.  13 ;  cxli.  9).  We  owe  much  to  God  for  what  we  are  not  and  do  not,  as  also  for 
what  we  are  and  do.  "  By  the  grace  of  God  I  am  what  I  am  "  applies  to  preven- 
tion as  well  as  endowment.  Every  man  is  conscious  of  carrying  within  him  a  power 
of  evil  in  excess  of  what  finds  outlet  in  deeds,  and  its  repression  is  due  not  only  to 
human  wisdom  and  strength.  The  conditions  of  social  life  that  check  the  develop- 
ment of  inward  sinfulness  are  of  God  as  truly  as  the  truth  we  cherish  that  we  may 
not  sin  against  him  (Ps.  cxix.  11).  The  friends  who  counsel  and  warn,  the  ordin- 
ances that  tend  to  weaken  the  force  of  evil  and  nourish  holiness,  are  the  agencies  of 
the  same  gracious  God  who  endowed  us  with  the  helping  conscience  to  which  they 
appeal.  It  occasional  providences,  be  they  disasters  or  personal  interventions,  draw 
special  attention  to  the  unseen  hand,  they  do  not  render  the  restraint  at  other  times 
less  real  because  they,  are  more  steady  and  gentle.  There  is  a  spirit  that  strives 
silently  with  man  and  holds  him  back  from  ruin. 

II.  OUH    RECOGNITION    OF    BEBTBAINING    MEBCT    IS    UOBB    PBONOUNCED    WHKH    WE 

EAVB  PASSED  THROUGH  DNUSCAL  TEMPTATIONS.  Temptations  are  common  experience, 
but  sometimes  they  come  in  "like  a  flood."  The  admission  of  God's  kindly  and 
constant  restraint  is  an  item  of  daily  belief,  attended  with  more  or  less  gratitude ;  but 
when  the  soul  has  been  brought  face  to  face  with  a  terrible  sin  by  the  force  of 
riolent  impulses,  and  kept  from  committing  it  by  what  is  called  a  narrow  chance, 
then  the  good  hand  of  G^d  is  distinctly  recognised.    In  the  loll  of  the  stonn  we  se« 


4M  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [oH.  nv,  1-  -U. 

clearly  ths  rocks  on  which  character  well-nigh  made  Bhipwreck.  The  light  of  truth 
reveals  whither  we  were  going,  and  the  soul  is  aghast  at  the  spectacle.  In  the  lives  ol 
most  there  have  been  occasions  when  we  were  on  the  very  verge  of  destruction,  or, 
like  David,  were  about  to  mar  our  consistency  and  usefulness  by  a  sad  transgression. 
The  refined  spirit  of  a  Christian  shrinking  in  horror  at  the  very  thought  of  what 
might  have  been  cannot  but  say,  "  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God ;"  and  where  human 
instruments  have  been  employed,  a  benediction  falb  on  them  for  their  kindly  aid. 
These  acts  of  recognition,  so  full  of  gratitude  and  joy,  are  but  faint  indications  of 
that  inexpressible  joy  and  gratitude  when, in  survey  of  all  life's  dangers,  the  soul  will 
praise  the  "  mercy  that  endureth  for  ever." 

III.  A  PROPER  RECOQNITION  OF  BE8TBAINING  MERCY  IS  ATTENDED  WITH  A  CALM 
AND     STEADY    ATTENTION     TO     THE    D0TIES     OP     OUR     SPIRITUAL    POSITION.        David,  aS 

chosen  servant  of  God,  quietly  accepts  the  gift  of  Abigail,  and,  dismissing  her,  reverts 
to  the  normal  course  of  trusting  in  God  and  biding  his  time.  He  lived  out  his  true 
character  all  the  better  for  this  narrow  escape.  It  is  the  natural  efEect  of  mercy, 
when  recognised,  to  render  us  more  true  to  our  holy  calling  in  God's  service.  We 
go  on  our  way  with  stronger  determination  to  submit  to  his  will,  whatever  it  may 
bring,  and  to  live  in  closer  fellowship  with  him. 

General  lessons : — 1.  It  is  good  to  place  our  stormy  passions  in  the  clear  light  of 
God's  truth.  2.  Our  spiritual  life  acquires  more  elevation  and  tone  by  occasionally 
reflecting  on  God's  restraining  mercy.  3.  The  sin  of  indulging  in  violent  passions 
must  not  be  overlooked  in  the  deliverance  from  their  overt  expression.  4.  From  an 
experience  of  deliverance  from  fearful  moral  perils  we  may  enlarge  our  knowledge 
of  the  possibilities  of  life,  and  find  increased  reasons  for  habitual  watchfulness. 

Vers.  36 — 44. — Contrasts,  patience,  and  domestic  ties.  The  facts  are — 1.  Abigail, 
finding  Nabal  in  the  midst  ot  a  drunlcn  revel,  refrains  from  speaking  of  her  inter- 
view with  David.  2.  In  the  moniing,  on  her  relating  what  had  transpired,  ho 
became  insensible,  and  soon  after  dies.  .3.  On  hearing  of  his  death  David  recognises 
afresh  the  mercy  that  had  restrained  him,  and  sees  the  wisdom  of  leaving  judgment 
to  the^Lord.  4.  David,  deprived  of  his  wife  Michal,  though  possessed  of  Ahinoam, 
seeks  to  take  Abigail  to  wife,  and  she,  accepting  his  advances,  consents.  The  sacred 
narrative  is  wonderfully  effective  in  making  David  the  central  figure  amidst  the 
diversity  of  detail  alluded  to,  and  thus  indicates  the  unity  of  principle  on  which  it  is 
framed,  as  well  as  foreshadows  the  higher  presentation  of  Christ  as  the  one  figure, 
discernible  by  the  eye  of  faith,  amidst  the  varied  teachings  of  Scripture.  The 
manifold  teaching  of  this  section,  while  associated  with  David  as  the  central  figure, 
may  be  most  conveniently  represented  under  three  heads.     We  have  here — 

L  Contrasts  of  character.  Nabal  may  be  regarded  as  an  instance  of  a  type  of 
character  well  known  in  every  age — low  in  taste,  devoted  to  material  gains,  in- 
sensible to  lofty  spiritual  aspirations,  the  miserable  victim  of  disgusting  habits, 
exercising  a  pernicious  influence,  and  coming  to  an  end  dishonourable  and  ruinous. 
Grades  of  this  character  may  be  found,  but  the  essential  features  of  it  are  sensuality, 
irreverence,  and  earthliness.  The  chapter  prpsents  us  with  three  characters  agree- 
ing in  a  common  contrast  to  this — Abigail  s,  David's,  Samuel's.  Each  of  these,  in 
the  sphere  allotted  by  Providence,  stands  out  as  the  very  opposite  of  Nabal.  That 
which  formed  the  inspiring  power  in  them  was  intelligent  devotion  to  the  higher 
interests  of  life  and  strong  faith  in  the  Divine  purpose  that  was  being  worked  out  in 
Israel.  The  reference  in  ver.  1  to  the  honourable  burial  of  Samuel,  and  in  vers.  36 — 
38  to  the  disgraceful  end  of  Nabal,  as  well  as  the  intermediate  references  to  David 
and  Abigail,  show  that  the  contrast  of  characters  lies  in  /our  thinga — mirit,  aims, 
influence,  and  end.  All  characters  may  be  tested  by  tliese  criteria.  The  spirit  is 
either  devout,  reverent,  trustful,  and  obedient,  or  grovelling,  profane,  alien  to  God. 
The  aim,  in  life  is  the  creation  of  the  spirit,  and  is  either  to  promote  individual  and 
public  righteousness  in  association  with  God's  purpose  in  the  Messiah,  or  to  gathei 
wealth  and  find  transitory  gratification.  The  influence  is  either  to  elevate,  inspire, 
and  enrich  the  world  with  what  is  best  and  enduring,  or  to  drag  down,  embitter,  and 
brutalise  mankind.  The  end,  as  in  the  case  of  Samuel,  is  either  peace,  hononr,  and 
future  blessedness,  or  wretchedness,  dishonour,  and  future  woe.     In  every  age  and 


on.  xxY.  1-44.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  481 

locality  where  truth  ia  loved  and  rejected  these  opposite  tendencies  and  issues  ar« 
found,  and  it  would  be  instractive  and  impressive  to  develop  with  illustrations  from 
history  the  gradations  of  contrast.  The  clue  to  contrasts  in  taste,  habit,  and  final 
condition  is  to  be  sought  in  the  state  of  the  spirit  in  its  relation  to  God.  "  The 
carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God."    "  You  hath  he  quickened  who  were  dead." 

II.  The  justification  of  patience.  It  is  possible  to  take  David's  words  (ver.  39) 
as  expressing  thanks  for  preservation  from  sin,  and  at  the  same  time  pleasure  that 
his  churlish  enemy  was  now  smitten ;  but  the  sense  more  congruous  with  the  circum- 
stances seems  to  be  that  he  was,  on  reflection,  more  and  more  grateful  for  Divine 
restraint ;  and  the  fact  that  God  had,  without  his  agejicy,  done  what  seemed  to  him 
best  was  evidence  that  man  need  never  hasten  to  vindicate  himself  by  violent  mea- 
sures, but  may  be  patient  under  wrong.  He  was  glad  that  God,  and  not  he,  had 
vindicated  right.  Events  in  the  course  of  Providence  will  justify  abstention  from 
evil  even  under  strong  provocation.  Many  a  man,  patiently  repressing  violent  pas- 
sions, and  content  to  endure  rather  than  savagely  avenge  wrong,  has  lived  to  see  the 
day  when  God,  in  some  unlooked-for  way,  has  visited  the  wrong-doer  with  chastise- 
ment, and  then,  while  thankful  for  restraint,  he  is  able  to  see  in  the  Divine  conduct 
a  justification  of  the  patience  once  so  hard  to  exercise,  and  that  seemed  to  men  of 
the  world  so  inexpedient  and  weak.  And  here  comes  out  the  great  truth  that  the 
meek  and  quiet  virtues  enjoined  by  Christ  are  always  justified  by  Providence,  though 
at  the  time  they  are  exercised  they  seem  to  be  contrary  to  human  nature.  This  is 
but  a  branch  of  a  still  wider  truth,  that  all  holiness  of  feeling  and  conduct  is  in  the 
issue  coincident  with  self-interest.  Utility  may  not  be  the  basis  of  morality,  but  in 
its  broadest  sense,  taking  in  endless  existence  and  future  relations,  it  is  exemplified 
in  the  effects.  A  few  observations  may  suffice  on  this  subject.  1.  It  often  requires 
much  effort  to  he  truly  virtuov^.  David  felt  it  harder  to  abstain  from  avenging 
wrong  than  to  avenge  it.  The  positive  side  of  his  virtue  was  patient  trust  in  the 
justice  of  God,  and  the  impulses  of  the  old  man  are  against  this.  Very  often  per- 
sonal losses  and  social  disadvantages  attend  our  patient  endurance  of  evil,  and  these 
set  into  operation  our  strong  feelings  of  resentment,  our  estimate  of  profit  and  loss, 
and  our  professed  love  of  right.  2.  All  such  virtue  has  the  promise  of  success.  To 
trust  in  God,  to  be  patient  in  tribulation,  and  kindred  qualities  are  pregnant  with 
victory.  Bight  feeling  and  conduct  ^er  se  have  a  tendency,  as  Butler  has  shown,  to 
ultimate  happiness  ;  and  the  ordinations  of  Providence  are  all  subordinate  to  the 
vindication  of  right.  3.  Personal  and  general  history  show  that  patient  trust  in 
God's  justice  is  honoured.  Martyrs  have  found  it  better  to  leave  their  cause  to  God. 
The  results  of  their  endurance  are  perpetual,  and  most  blessed  arid  powerful.  Every 
Christian  can  see  in  his  own  life  that  God  does  not  forsake  his  saints,  but  turns  their 
patient  trust  to  his  honour  and  glory,  and  the  higher  education  of  the  individual  and 
the  race.  Events  will  justify  religious  feeling  in  any  form.  It  answers  in  every 
way  to  be  like  Christ. 

III.  The  domestic  pactok  in  life.  The  details  concerning  Nabal  are  given 
because  of  David's  place  in  the  history  of  redemption,  and  for  the  same  reason  we 
have  an  account  of  David's  domestic  relationships.  It  is  well  known  that  the 
domestic  tie  is  of  extreme  importance  in  every  life.  Men  are  helped  or  hindered, 
blessed  or  cursed,  by  the  kind  of  influence  that  sways  the  home.  Considering  how 
much  the  general  character  is  affected  by  the  development  of  the  tender  and  pure 
feelings  proper  to  home  life,  the  loss  to  the  world  arising  from  domestic  miseries  is 
incalculable.  What  a  change  in  society  were  our  toilers  blessed  in  the  person  of 
their  wives  with  the  love,  the  refinement  of  feeling,  and  the  intelligent  Christianity 
which  knows  how  to  make  home  a  welcome,  cheery  place  I  Men  Eke  Nabal  would 
be  much  worse  were  it  not  for  the  restraining  influence  of  an  Abigail.  David's 
public  and  private  career  was  necessarily  the  better  for  the  presence  in  his  home  of 
such  a  woman,  though  the  elevating  influence  of  her  character  was  impaired  by  his 
adoption  of  polygamy.  Many  are  the  counteracting  influences  under  which  the  best 
of  men  develope,  and  Scripture,  by  thus  calling  attention  to  David's  domestic  affairs, 
gives  us  a  clue  to  some  of  the  circumstances  amidst  which  his  virtues  and  failings 
appeared.  The  extreme  importance  of  the  domestic  factor  in  life  shonld  urge  to 
care  in  contracting  alliances,  in  the  maintenance  of  a  spirit  at  bom*  in  harmony  witb 


488  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [CB.  zn.  1—44 

th«  sacred  character  of  the  marriage  bond,  and  in  rendering  home  life  aubservient  to 
a  faithful  and  efficient  discharge  of  one's  calling  in  life  (Kphes.  y.  22 — S3 ;  1  Pet.  iiL 
1 — 7).  The  question  of  marriage  is  a  delicate  one,  and  needs  to  be  handled  with 
great  care,  but  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  Church  has  in  her. pastors  and  teachers  done 
as  much  for  the. education  of  the  people  on  the  subject  as  is  required.  A  wise 
pastor  wiU  know  how  to  incorporate  earnest  Scripture  teaching  with  his  ordinary 
ministrations  without  intruding  into  the  privacies  of  life,  and  wise  parents  have  it  in 
their  power'  to  save  their  sons  and  daughters  from  many  troubles  by  first  winning 
confidence,  and  then  judiciously  aiding  to  right  decisions. 

General  lessont : — 1.  In  order  to  form  a  correct  estimate  of  a  life  we  must  take 
into  account  the  end,  and  the  bearing  of  the  principles  cherished  on  the  endless 
existence  beyond  the  grave.  2.  The  practical  exhibition  of  the  CJhristian  spirit  in 
our  dealings  with  bad  men  is  often  more  difScult  than  the  maintenance  of  a  devout 
spirit  in  relation  to  God.  3.  The  cure  for  some  of  the  ills  of  modem  life  is  in 
making  home  more  attractive  to  those  now  seeking  unhallowed  joys  elsewhere.  4. 
A  nation  careful  of  the  parity  and  fulness  of  domestic  Mb  will  survive  those  making 
light  of  these  qualities, 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1.  (Ramah.)— ,Sa»iM«r«  death  and  burial.    "  And  Samuel  died."    1.  The  end 

of  the  great  prophet's  life  is  recorded  in  brief  and  simple  words.  This  is  according 
to  the  manner  in  which  the  death  of  men  is  usually  spoken  of  in  the  Scriptures. 
Whilst  their  life  is  narrated  at  length,  their  death  is  either  passed  over  in  silence  or 
mentioned  only  in  a  sentence,  as  of  comparatively  little  consequence  in  relation  to 
their  character,  work,  and  influence.  There  is  one  significant  exception,  viz.,  that  of 
him  "  who  once  suffered  for  sins,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to 
God."  2.  In  the  last  glimpse  afforded  of  him  be/ore  his  decease  he  is  described  as 
"  standing  as  one  appointed  over  the  company  of  the  prophets,"  and  occupied  with 
them  in  celebrating  the  praises  of  God  ^h.  xix.  20).  During  the  years  that  had 
since  elapsed  he  was  left  unmolested  by  Saul ;  and  it  is  hardly  likely  that  David  ever 
ventured  to  Eamah  again,  although  he  probably  kept  up  indirect  intercourse  with  his 
ag;ed  and  revered  friend  (ch.  xxii.  5),  and  was  often  in  his  thoughts.  3.  In  connection 
with  the  mention  of  his  death  it  is  stated  that  "  David  arose  and  went  down  "  (from 
"  the  hold  "  in  the  hill  of  Hachilah,  to  which  he  had  returned  from  Engedi)  "to  the 
wilderness  of  Paran."  He  may  have  done  so  for  reasons  independent  of  this  event, 
or  without  the  knowledge  of  it ;  or  possibly  because  he  feared  that  with  the  removal 
of  Samuel's  restraining  influence  Saul  might  renew  his  persecution.  However  it 
may  have  been,  the  melancholy  intelligence  would  speedily  reach  him.  4.  "  Samuel 
died."  Good  and  great  as  he  was,  he  could  not  escape  the  common  lot  of  men. 
"  One  event  happeneth  to  them  all."  But  that  which  comes  as  a  judgment  to  "  the 
fool  "  (ver.  38)  comes  as  a  blessing  to  the  wise.  "  Precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord 
is  the  death  of  his  saints."  The  news  of  it  came  upon  the  people  as  a  surprise  and 
filled  them  with  grief.  .  "  It  was  as  if  from  that  noble  star,  so  long  as  it  shone  in  the 
heaven  of  the  holy  land,  though  veiled  by  clouds,  there  streamed  a  mild  beneficent 
light  over  all  Israel.  Now  ifiis  star  in  Israel  was  extinguished  "  (Krummacher). 
"  Another  mighty  one  had  passed  away.  The  very  heart  of  the  nation  sighed  out 
its  loving,  weeping  requiem.  But  who  among  them  all  mourned  as  that  son  of  Jesse, 
on  whose  head  he  had  at  God's  command  poured  the  anointing  oil,  as  he  arose  and 
went  down  to  the  wilderness  of  Paran  ?  Doubtless  in  those  waste  places  he  heard 
again  in  living  memory  the  echoes  of  the  prevailing  cry  of  him  who  was  so  great 
among  those  that  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord.  Doubtless  his  own  discipline  was 
perfected  in  this  new  sorrow,  but  he  learnt  in  losing  Samuel  to  lean  more  simply  and 
alone  on  Samuel's  God  "  ('  Heroes  of  Heb.  Hist.').     We  have  here — 

I.  The  decease  of  an  illustbious  man  :  saint,  prophet,  intercessor,  judge,  restorer 
of  the  theocracy,  founder  of  the  monarchy.  "  He  was  a  righteous  man,  and  gentle 
in  his  nature ;  and  on  that  account  he  was  very  dear  to  God  "  (Josephus).  "  Samuel, 
the  prophet  of  the  Lord,  beloved  of  the  Lord,  established  a  kingdom  and  anointed 
princes  overliki  people.    And  before  his  long  sleep  he  mad*  prete«tationa  in  ttM  sight 


OH.  ZXT.  1—44.]  TH£  flBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  4M 

of  the  Lord,  Ac.  And  after  his  death  he  prophesied,  and  showed  the  king  bis  end  " 
(Ecclea.  xlvi.  13 — 20).  He  died — 1.  In  a  good  old  age.  At  what  age  we  know 
not ;  but  long  ago  he  spoke  of  himself  as  "  old  and  grayheaded  "  (ch.  zii.  2).  His 
protracted  life  was  an  evidence  of  his  self-control  and  piety,  a  mark  of  Divine  favour, 
and  a  means  of  extended  usefulness.  He  was  cut  down  not  like  "  the  flower  of  the 
field,"  which  blooms  for  a  day  and  is  gone,  nor  like  the  spreading  forest  tree  smitten 
by  a  sudden  blast ;  but  rather  like  the  ripe  corn,  bending  down  beneath  its  golden 
burden  and  falling  under  the  sickle  of  the  reaper ;  and  "  as  shocks  of  com  are  brought 
in  in  their  season,"  so  was  he  "  gathered  to  his  people."  2.  At  the  proper  time. 
When  his  appointed  work  was  done,  the  new  order  of  things  firmly  established,  and 
he  could  by  his  continuance  do  little  more  for  Israel,  he  was  "  taken  away  from  the 
evil  to  come  "  through  which  the  nation  was  to  attain  its  highest  glory.  "  He  was 
the  link  which  connected  two  very  different  periods,  being  the  last  representative  of 
a  past  which  could  never  come  back,  and  seemed  almost  centuries  behind,  and  also 
marking  the  commencement  of  a  new  period  intended  to  develop  into  Israel's  ideal 
future  "  (Edersheim).  *'  If  David's  visible  deeds  were  greater  and  more  dazzling 
than  Samuel's,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  David's  blaze  of  glory  would  have  been 
impossible  without  Samuel's  less  conspicuous  but  far  more  influential  career,  and 
that  all  the  greatness  of  which  the  following  century  boasts  goes  back  to  him  as  its 
real  author  "  (Ewald).  3.  In  peaceful  retirement ;  removed  from  public  strife,  under 
Divine  protection,  surroundea  by  prophetic  associates,  reviewing  the  past,  contem- 
plating the  present,  and  awaiting  the  fiaal  change.  A  holy  and  useful  life  is  crowned 
with  a  peaceful  and  happy  death.  4.  In  Divine  communion,  which  constitutes  the 
highest  life  of  the  good.  In  God  (with  whom  he  had  walked  from  his  childhood, 
and  whose  inward  voice  he  had  so  often  heard)  he  found  his  chief  delight,  to  his  will 
he  cheerfully  submitted,  and  into  his  hands  he  committed  his  spirit  in  hope  of  con- 
tinued, perfect,  and  eternal  fellowship.  The  ancient  covenant  to  be  "the  God"  of 
his  people  overshadowed  the  present  and  the  future ;  nor  did  they  suppose  (however 
dim  their  views  of  another  life)  that  he  would  sufEer  them  to  be  deprived  by  death 
of  his  presence  and  love.  "  All  live  unto  him  "  and  in  him.  Ha  "  died  in  faith." 
His  decease  was  like  a  peaceful  summer  sunset, 

"  Not  the  last  atmggle  of  the  sun 
Precipitated  firom  his  golden  throne 

Holds,  dazzling,  mortals  in  sublime  snapente ;. 
But  the  calm  exode  of  a  man, 
Nearer,  but  far  above,  who  ran 
The  race  we  run,  when  Heaven  recalls  him  henoe"  (W.  8.  I«ndorX 

11.  Thb  mourning  of  a  whole  people.  " And  a/nsrael"  (represented  by  thefa 
elders)  "were  gatliered  together  "  (out  of  common  veneration  and  love), "  and  lamented 
him  "  (whom  all  knew  and  none  would  see  again),  "  and  buried  him  in  his  house  at 
Ramah  "  ("  the  ancient  and  the  manor  house,"  so  long  his  residence,  and  endeared  to 
him  by  so  many  tender  associations).  It  was  "  a  grievous  mourning,"  as  when  Jacob 
was  buried  at  Machpelah  (Gen.  1.  11 ;  Acts  viii.  2).  The  honour  rendered  to  his 
memory  was  simple  and  sincere,  very  different  from  that  which,  it  is  said,  was  paid 
to  his  dust  in  later  times,  when  "  his  remains  were  removed  with  incredible  pomp  and 
almost  one  continued  train  of  attendants  from  Hamah  to  Constantinople  by  the 
Emperor  Arcadius,  A.D.  401 "  (Delany,  i.  148).  But  "  of  Samuel,  as  of  Moses,  it  may 
be  said,  '  No  man  knoweth  of  his  sepulchre  unto  this  day ' "  (Stanley).  The  national 
mourning  was  an  indication  of — 1.  The  high  esteem  in  which  he  was  held,  on  account 
of  his  great  ability,  eminent  piety,  and  beneficent  activity — his  integrity,  firmness, 
gentleness,  consistency,  disinterestedness,  adaptability,  and  living  communion  with 
God  (ch.  ii.  30 ;  Ps.  cxii.  6).  "  A  true  Christian  may  travel  in  life  under  troubles 
and  contempts  ;  but  mark  his  end,  and  you  shall  find  (as  peace,  so)  honour.  Life  is 
death's  seed-time ;  death  life's  harvest.  As  here  we  sow,  so  there  we  reap.  He  that 
spends  himself  upon  God  and  man  shall  at  last  have  all  the  honour  that  heaven  and 
earth  can  cast  upon  him  "  (B.  Harris),  2.  The  deplorable  loss  which  had  been  sus- 
tained. "  The  men  who  had  once  rejected  Samuel  now  lamented  him ;  when  th« 
light  of  his  presenco  was  departed  tbev  felt  the  darkness  which  remained ;  whu  tii« 


490  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxv.  1—44. 

actaal  energy  of  his  example  had  ceased  to  act  they  remembered  the  strength  of  his 
principles,  the  consistency  of  its  operation.  There  was  a  feeling  common  to  man. 
Whilst  we  enjoy  the  gift  we  ofttimes  forget  the  Q-iver,  and  are  awakened  only  to 
the  full  consciousness  of  the  value  of  that  which  we  once  possessed  by  finding  that 
we  possess  it  no  longer  "  (Anderson).  3.  The  unjust  treatment  which  he  had  received, 
and  which  was  now  regretted.  His  predictions  had  proved  true  (ch.  viii.  11),  and 
his  course  was  fully  vindicated.  "  The  sorrow  at  his  decease  was  the  deeper,  the 
more  heavily  the  yoke  of  Saul's  misgovemment  pressed  on  them."  4.  The  continued 
influence  he  exerted  upon  the  nation.  "  The  holy  expression  stamped  by  him  on  the 
tribes  of  Benjamin  and  Judah  remained  for  centuries  unefEaced.  Never  was  a  single 
man  more  instrumental  in  sowing  the  soil  of  a  district  with  the  enduring  seeds  of 
goodness.  It  seems  to  have  been  mainly  through  his  influence  that  piety  found 
a  home  in  Judah  and  Benjamin  when  it  was  banished  from  the  rest  of  the  country. 
Humanly  speaking  David  could  never  have  been  king  if  Samuel  had  not  prepared 
the  way.  He  was  to  King  David  what  John  the  Baptist  was  to  Christ.  Unquestion- 
ably he  is  to  be  ranked  among  the  very  greatest  and  best  of  the  Hebrew  worthies  " 
(Blaikie).     "  And  he  being  dead  yet  speaketh." 

"  0  good  gray  head  which  all  men  knew, 
O  voice  from  which  their  omens  all  men  drew, 
0  iron  nerve  to  true  occasion  true, 
0  fall'n  at  length  that  tower  of  slrength 
Which  stood  four-square  to  all  the  winds  that  blew  I "  (TennyiOB)L 

Learn  to— 1.  Honour  the  memory  of  the  good.    2.  Praise  God  for  their  lives. 
8.  Imitate  their  example.    4.  Carry  out  their  purposes. — D. 

Vers.  1 — 44.  (The  wildebness  cf  Pakan.) — Davids  activity  and  advancement. 
"And  David  arose,  and  went  down  to  the  wilderness  of  Paran"  (ver.  1).  Samuel 
was  dead.  Saul  was  becoming  more  and  more  incapable  of  fulfilling  the  duties  of 
his  high  office.  Meanwhile  David  was  being  prepared  by  Divine  providence  to  grasp 
the  sceptre  when  it  fell  from  his. hand  and  wield  it  in  a  nobler  manner.  He  was  the 
rising  sun  of  the  new  era.  And  we  see  in  this  chapter  numerous  signs  of  his  peculiar 
qualification  for  his  future  rule  and  of  his  gradual  progress  towards  it ;  such  as,  e.  g. 
— 1.  The  strict  discipline  which  he  exercised  among  his  men.  Those  600  warriors 
dwelt  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Nabal's  shepherds,  and  could  easily  have  supplied 
their  wants  from  the  flocks  kept  by  the  latter ;  but "  the  men  were  very  good  to  us," 
said  one  of  them,  "  and  we  were  not  hurt,  neither  missed  we  anything,"  &c.  (ver.  15). 
"  He  was  bringing  his  wild  followers  under  a  loving  discipline  and  government  which 
they  had  never  experienced ;  he  was  teaching  them  to  confess  a  law  which  no  tyrant 
had  created,  no  anarchy  could  set  aside  "  (Maurice).  2.  The  valuable  service  which 
he  rendered  to  his  people.  "  They  were  a  wall  unto  us  both  by  night  and  day  "  (ver. 
16).  He  employed  his  followers  (whom  he  could  not  lead  against  Saul  without  in- 
curring the  charge  of  rebellion)  in  protecting  those  who  were  occupied  in  honest 
industry  against  the  plundering  Bedouin,  and  thus  doing  the  work  which  had  been 
left  undone  by  the  king.  There  is  no  place  or  position  but  affords  opportunity  for 
useful  work.  Even  an  outlaw  may  be  serviceable  to  his  country.  3.  The  perfect 
equity  of  the  claim  he  made.  His  defence  of  the  sheep  gave  him  a  right  to  some 
share  in  them ;  and  he  was  justified  in  voluntarily  undertaking  it  by  the  condition  of 
society  at  the  time  and  his  own  peculiar  position.  The  reply  of  Nabal,  in  its  appli- 
cation to  David,  was  destitute  of  justice,  truth,  and  charity  (vers.  10,  11).  4.  The 
respectful  consideration  he  showed  in  urging  his  claim.  He  did  not  make  it  un- 
seasonably, but  waited  till  "a  good  day"  (a  festive  occasion  on  which  men  were 
usually  disposed  to  be  generous),  and  then  sent  ten  young  men  to  ofEer  him  a  courte- 
ous greeting,  state  the  case,  and  humbly  seek  as  a  favour  what  might  have  been 
demanded  as  a  right  (vers.  6 — 8).  He  appealed  to  what  was  noblest  and  best  in  the 
man.  6.  The  conscious  power  which  he  displayed.  "Greet  him  in  my  name  " — a 
name  well  known  in  Israel  as  thai  of  a  faithful,  though  persecuted,  servant  of  Jeho- 
vah. Not  a  word  escaped  his  lips,  indeed,  on  this  or  any  other  occasion  concerning 
his  royal  destiny.    But  he  knew  the  strength  of  his  position  (see  ch,  xxvi.),  whick 


OH.  XXV.  1—44.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMU.BL.  491 

was  very  different  now  from  what  it  was  at  the  beginning  of  his  wanderings,  was 
manifested  in  his  whole  bearing,  and  especially  in  the  marriage  relationships  into 
which  he  entered  (vers.  42 — 44).  6.  The  increased  renown  which  he  had  acquired. 
The  words  of  Abigail  (vers.  28 — 31)  expressed  the  growing  conviction  of  the  godly 
in  Israel  that  David  was  destined  to  be  their  theocratic  ruler.  She  may  also  havo 
"  received  certain  information  of  his  anointing  and  destination  through  Samuel,  or 
one  of  the  pupils  of  the  prophets"  (Keil).  7.  The  Divine  restraint  by  which  he 
was  kept  from  doing  what  would  have  imperilled  or  interfered  with  his  future  honour 
and  happiness  (ver.  26).  When  God  has  an  important  place  for  a  man  to  fill,  he 
prepares  the  way  to  it  and  prepares  him  for  it,  and  a  part  of  his  preparation  consists 
in  his  being  taught  faithful  co-operation  with  the  Divine  purposes. — D. 

Vers.  2—39.  (Maon,  Caemel.)— TAe  prosperous  fool.  "  Now  the  name  of  the 
man  was  Nabal "  (ver.  3  ;  "  a  son  of  Behal,"^  ver.  17  ;  "  Nabal  is  his  name,  and  folly 
is  with  him,"  ver.  25).  This  chapter  is  like  a  picture  gallery  in  which  are  exhibited 
the  portraits  of  Samuel  and  the  elders  of  Israel,  David  and  his  men,  with  the  Bedouin 
marauders  in  the  background;  Nabal,  the  wealthy  sheep -owner,  his  sheep-shearers 
and  boon  companions,  Abigail  and  her  maidens,  and  Ahinoam  of  Jezreel  (mother  of 
Amnon,  the  eldest  son  of  David).  Let  us  pause  and  look  at  one  of  them — Nabal. 
"  As  his  name  is,  so  is  he  ;  "  a  fool,  i.  e.  a  stupid,  wicked,  and  godless  man.  "  Ac- 
cording to  the  Old  Testament  representation  folly  is  a  correlate  of  ungodliness  which 
inevitably  brings  down  punishment "  (Keil).  He  is  such  an  one  as  is  described  by  the 
Psalmist  (Ps.  xiv.  1),  often  mentioned  by  the  wise  man  (Prov.  xvii.  16  ;  six.  1 ;  xxi. 
24),  called  a  churl  by  the  prophet  (Isa.  xxxii.  6 — 7),  and  referred  to  by  our  Lord  in 
the  parable  (Luke  xii.  13 — 21).  What  a  contrast  between  his  appearance  and  that 
of  Samuel  I 

I.  His  advantages  were  great.  1.  jffe  belonged  to  a  good  family .  "He  was 
of  the  house  of  Caleb,"  who  "  wholly  followed  Jehovah  God  of  Israel,"  and  had 
"  a  part  among  the  children  of  Judah."  But  he  inherited  none  of  the  better 
qualities  of  his  illustrious  ancestor.  "  A  good  extraction  is  a  reproach  to  him  who 
degenerates  from  it."  Religious  privileges  also  (such  as  he  enjoyed  from  his 
connection  with  Israel),  unless  rightly  used,  only  serve  to  increase  condemnation. 
2.  He  possessed  an  excellent  toife;  "a  woman  of  good  understanding  and  of  a 
beautiful  countenance,"  prudent,  generous,  and  devout.  "  A  prudent  wife  is  from 
the  Lord  "  (Prov.  xix.  14).  But  many  a  man  is  little  benefited  by  the  gift.  His 
worldly  prosperity  may  be  increased  by  her  skilful  management  of'  his  household 
(vers.  14,  25),  whilst  his  spiritual  condition  is  not  improved  by  her  example,  coun- 
sel, and  prayers.  The  persistently  bad  are  hardened  by  their  intimate  intercourse 
with  the  good.  3.  He  enjoyed  immense  prosperity.  "  The  man  was  very  great 
(wealthy),  and  he  had  three  thousand  sheep,  and  a  thousand  goats,"  a  palatial  residence 
in  Maon,  and  a  house  at  Carmel  (Kurmul),  where  his  business  lay  (vers.  2,  36).  He 
may  have  inherited  his  wealth,  or  he  may  have  had  wisdom  enough  to  know  how  to 
make  and  keep  it,  industrious  himself,  and  profiting  by  the  industry  of  others ;  it  is 
not  improbable  from  his  language  concerning  slaves  (ver.  10)  that  he  was  one  of 
those  usurers  and  oppressors  from  whose  exactions  many  of  David's  men  sought  to 
free  themselves  by  flight  (ch.  xxii.  2).  "  Here  we  may  see  the  fickle  and  uncertain 
state  of  the  world  "  (Willet)  ;  "  the  wicked  in  great  power"  (Ps.  xxxvii.  35),  and  the 
good  oppressed  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  10).  But  "  a  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance 
of  the  things  which  he  possesseth  "  (Luke  xii.  15).  His  abundance  should  make 
him  thankful  to  God  and  generous  to  men.  It  has  often,  however,  the  reverse 
efilect,  and  "the  prosperity  of  fools  shall  destroy  them"  (Deut.  viii.  10 — 20;  Prov. 
i.  32). 

II.  His  character  was  worthless.  "  The  man  was  churlish ''  (hard  and  harsh) 
"  and  evil  in  his  doings  "  (ver.  3).  1.  ffe  had  evidently  no  thought  of  God  as  the 
living,  ever-present  One,  the  true  King  of  Israel,  the  Author  and  Preserver  of  his 
life,  the  Giver  of  all  his  blessings,  the  moral  Ruler  to  whom  he  was  responsible  for 
their  proper  employment.  What  was  material  and  sensible  was  to  him  the  only 
reality.  He- recognised  in  practice  no  will  superior  to  his  own,  and  lived  "without 
God  in  the  world."    2.  He  was  regardless  of  the  claims  of  other  people;  despisinj; 


m  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUBL.  [oh.  ZXT.  1—44 

{hose  who  were  beneath  him  in  social  position,  headstrong,  and  resentful  of  every 
word  which  his  servants  might  say  to  him  in  opposition  to  his  way  and  for  his  good 

Sver.  17)  ;  illiberal  toward  the  needy,  unjust  and  ungrateful,  "  requiting  evil  for  good  " 
ver.  21)  ;  disparaging  the  character  and  conduct  of  others  (vers.  10 — 12),  and  railing 
upon  them  (ver.  14)  in  coarse  and  insulting  language.  "  His  wealth  had  not  endowed 
him  with  common  sense  ;  but,  like  many  in  our  own  day,  he  imagined  that  because 
he  was  in  affluent  circumstances  he  might  with  impunity  indulge  in  rude,  ill-mannered 
sneers  at  all  who  were  around  him  "  (W.  M.  Taylor).  3.  He  lived  for  himself  alone  ; 
regarding  his  wealth  as  his  own  ("  «iy  bread  and  my  water,''  &c.),  using  it  only  for 
himself;  making  an  ostentatious  display  ("the  feast  of  a  king"),  and  indulging  in 
intemperance, "  the  voluntary  extinction  of  reason."  "  So  is  he  dat  layeth  up  treasure 
for  limself,  and  is  not  rich  toward  God." 

III.  HiB  END  WAS  MiSBBABLB  (vers.  36 — 39).  1.  He  was  overtaken  by  death  very 
suddenly  and  unexpectedly,  and  when  he  was  unprepared  for  it.  "  Thou  fool,  this 
night  thy  soul  shall  be  required  of  thee,"  &c.  2.  He  suffered  the  naiural  penalty  of 
the  course  which  he  had  pursued.  3.  He  was  consigned  to  his  grave  without  honour. 
Whilst  "  all  Israel  mourned  "  for  Samuel,  none  lamented  him. 

Learn  that — 1.  The  worth  of  a  man  consists  not  in  what  he  has,  but  in  what  he  ii. 
2.  Wealth  entails  on  its  possessor  a  serious  responsibility  for  its  proper  use.  3.  The 
inequalities  of  men's  earthly  position  disappear  in  the  light  of  truth  and  eternity. — D. 

Ver.  10.  (Carmkl.) — Masters  and  servants.  "  There  are  many  servants  now-a- 
days  that  break  away  every  man  from  his  master."  What  Nabal  said  was  probably 
the  fact.  Many  servants  did  in  that  unsettled  time  break  away  from  their  masters, 
preferring  independence  with  its  risk  and  privation  to  servitude  with  its  protection 
and  provision.  But  the  imputation  which  he  intended  to  cast  upon  them  was  either 
wholly  unjust,  as  in  the  case  of  David,  or  partially  so,  as  in  the  case  of  many  others. 
He  omitted  to  state  that  their  conduct  toward  their  masters  was  due  to  the  conduct 
of  their  masters  toward  them.  People  are  never  so  ready  to  see  and  condemn  the 
faults  of  the  class  to  which  they  belong  as  those  of  the  opposite  class.  Concerning 
masters  and  servants,  consider — 

I.  The  nature  op  the  relation.  It  has  been  aptly  illustrated  in  the  following 
language ; — "A  party  of  friends,  setting  out  together  upon  a  journey,  soon  find  it  to 
be  the  best  for  aU  sides  that  while  they  are  upon  the  road  one  of  the  company  should 
wait  upon  the  rest,  another  ride  forward  to  seek  out  lodging  and  entertainment,  a 
third  to  carry  the  portmanteau,  a  fourth  take  charge  of  the  horses,  a 'fifth  bear  the 
purse,  conduct,  and  direct  the  route ;  not  forgetting,  however,  that  as  they  were  equal 
and  independent  when  they  set  out,  so  they  are  all  to  return  to  a  level  again  at  the 
journey's  end"  (Paley,  'Mor.  Phil.,'  book  iii.).  The  relation  is  confined  to  life's 
journey  alone.  1.  It  is,  in  some  form  or  other,  necessary  and  mutually  beneficial. 
The  benefit  received  is  really  greater  on  the  part  of  masters  than  servants.  2.  It 
must  of  necessity  vary  with  the  drcuTnstances  of  those  among  whom  it  exists. 
Hence  the  Mosaic  law  tolerated  and  regulated  a  species  of  slavery  (though  no  Hebrew 
could  become  other  than  a  " hired  servant "  for  a  specified  time)  ;  but  "no  other 
ancient  religion  was  ever  so  emphatically  opposed  to  it,  or  at  least  to  all  inhumanity 
connected  with  it,  or  made  such  sure  preparations  for  its  abolition  "  (Ewald,  '  Anti- 
quities ').  3.  It  always  involves  mutual  obligations.  These  "  now-a-days  "  are  often 
neglected.  The  tie  between  master  and  servant  (mistress  and  maid,  employer  and 
employed)  is  not  what  it  once  was.  There  is  less  dependence  on  the  one  hand,  and 
less  authority  on  the  other.  Each  complains  of  the  other :  "  servants  are  careless 
and  too  independent ;  "  "  masters  are  too  exacting  and  selfish."  And  the  relation 
can  only  be  what  it  ought  to  be  by  their  common  submission  to  "  the  law  of  Christ " 
(Gal.  VI.  2). 

II.  The  duty  o»  servants  (Ephes.  vi.  6—8 ;  Col.  iii.  22 — 25 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  1,2; 
Titus  ii.  9,  10  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  18).  1.  Obedience— \oirlj,  respectful,  cheerful ;  always  in 
subordination  to  the  supreme  will  of  God.  This  is  the  first  duty  of  a  servant.  2. 
Diligence  in  performing  the  work  given  them  to  do,  with  attention  and  earnestness, 
and  mthe  best  possible  manner.  "And  be  content  with  your  wages"  (Luk«  vii.  14) 
S.  Fait^ulness  to  the  trust  committed  to  them,  seeking  their  masters'  Interests  •■ 


m.  XXV.  1—44.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL,  49S 

their  own  ;  honesty,  thorough  sincerity,  "  u  the  Berranta  of  Christ,  doing  the  -will  of 
God  from  the  heart." 

III.  The  duty  of  mastebb  (Ephes.  vi.  9 ;  Col.  It.  1).    1.  Equity;  giving  to  them 
"  that  which  is  just  and  equal,"  and  imposing  upon  them  no  unnecessaiy  burdens 

glal.  iii.  6 ;  James  v.  4).  2.  Gonsideration,  respect,  courtesy,  kindness,  seeking 
eir  physical,  moral,  and  spiritual  welfare.  "  Thou  shalt  not  rule  over  thy  servuit 
with  rigour  "  (Levit.  xxv.  43).  And  a  mere  money  payment  is  not  all  that  a  fellow- 
creature  is  entitled  to  expect,  or  an  adequate  compensation  for  his  services.  3.  Conr 
sistency  ;  acting  in  accordance  with  their  position,  reproving  wrong-doing,  setting  t 
good  example,  exercising  their  authority  and  influence  as  a  trust  committed  to  them 
by  God  and  in  obedience  to  his  will.  Those  who  expect  to  receive  honour  must  seek 
to  make  themselves  worthy  of  it. 
Let  ooth  learn — 1.  To  be  less  observant  of  the  faults  of  others  than  of  their  own. 

2.  To  be  more  concerned  about  fulfilling  their  duties  than  insisting  on  their  rights. 

3.  To  look  for  their  chief  reward  in  the  approbation  of  God. — D. 

Vers.  14—42.  (Caembl.) — Abigail.  Of  her  familj'  and  early  life  nothing  is  re- 
corded. When  first  mentioned  she  was  the  wife  of  the  wealthy  and  churlish  Nabal. 
It  was  an  ill-assorted  union,  probably  due  (like  most  Oriental  marriages)  to  parental 
arrangement.  She  was  distinguished  by  a  beautiful  countenance  and  form,  and 
(what  is  not  always  associated  therewith)  by  a  beautiful  mind  and  character,  em- 
bodying the  ideal  of  womanhood  (Prov.  xxxi.  10 — 31).  "  Where  do  we  find  in  all 
the  heathen  world  a  woman  comparable  with  Abigail,  the  daughter  of  the  wilder- 
ness ?  "  She  was  a  woman  of — 1.  Superior  intelligence,  practical  wisdom,  prudence, 
tact,  and  good  management.  "Of  good  understanding"  (ver.  3).  The  part  she 
took  in  the  afEairs  of  her  husband  is  evident  from  the  servants  telling  her  of  the 
threatening  danger  (ver,  17),  and  her  apology  (ver.  26).  Her  discretion  was  also' 
shown  in  her  reserve  (ver.  19).  2.  Prompt  decision,  energy,  and  activity.  "  Abigail 
made  haste,"  &c.  (ver.  18).  Not  a  moment  was  lost,  and  she  was  promptly  obeyed. 
3.  Unaffected  humility,  meekness,  modesty,  and  self-devotion.  "She  fell  before 
David  on  her  face,"  &o.  (vers.  23,  41).  Her  meekness  and  patience  must  have  been 
greatly  tried  by  the  temper  of  Nabal,  and  had  doubtless  previously  averted  many  a 
disaster.  4.  Noble  generosity  exA  sacrifice.  "Two  hundred  loaves,"  &c,  (ver.  18). 
She  felt  that  no  sacrifice  was  too  great  to  save  her  husband  and  his  household. 
"  David's  men  and  David  felt  that  these  were  not  the  gifts  of  a  sordid  calculation,  but 
the  offerings  of  a  generous  heart  And  it  won  them,  their  gratitude,  their  enthu- 
siasm, their  unfeigned  homage"  (Robertson).  6.  Conciliatory,  faithful,  eloquent 
speech,  and  pacifying,  beneficent  influence  (vers.  24 — 31).  Having  taken  the  mame 
upon  herself  (as  intercessor),  and  referred  to  her  husband  "  with  that  union  of  play- 
fulness and  seriousness  which  above  all  things  turns  away  wrath"  (Stanley),  she 
directed  the  thoughts  of  David  to  God,  by  the  leadings  of  whose  providence  she  had 
been  sent  to  divert  him  from  his  purpose,  utters  the  wish  that  he  to  whom  vengeance 
belongs  would  avenge  him,  humbly  begs  the  acceptance  of  her  offering  for  his  young 
men,  and  beseeches  his  forgiveness.  Then  (assuming  her  prayer  to  be  granted)  she 
assures  him  of  the  brilliant  future  that  awaited  him,  inasmuch  as  he  would  fulfil  the 
purposes  of  Jehovah,  and  not  his  own ;  that,  should  any  one  seek  to  do  him  harm, 
Jehovah  would  preserve  him  in  safety,  and  punish  his  adversaries  ;  and  that  when  he 
should  be  "ruler  over  Israel"  it  would  be  a  source  of  comfort,  and  not  of  trouble, 
to  him  that  he  had  not  shed  blood  causelessly,  nor  taken  vengeance  into  his  own  hand. 
Finally  she  says,  "  And  Jehovah  will  do  good  to  my  lord,  and  thou  wilt  remember 
thine  handmaid  "  (for  good) — "  remember  the  things  which  I  have  spoken  "  (Dathe). 
No  disBuasions  from  revenge  could  be  more  effective. 

"  When  a  world  of  men 
Could  not  prevail  with  all  their  oratoiy. 
Yet  hath  a  woman's  kindness  overruled. 

"  Donbtlera  she  had  not  studied  eloquence  in  the  schools,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  alone 
made  her  such  an  orator.  God  put  wisdom  into  her  heart,  and  it  flowed  out  in  wise 
discourse"  (Roos).    6.  Exalted jnety ;  faith  in  the  righteousness  and  goodness  of 


494  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  zxt.  1—44 

God,  his  overruling  providence,  and  the  establishment  of  his  kingdom  (see  the  song 
of  Hannah),  devotion,  spiritual  insight,  manifested  in  this  appeal,  and  in  her  whole 
conduct  (ProT.  xxxi.  26,  30).  It  is  not  surprising  that,  after  the  death  of  Nabal, 
"  David  sent  and  communed  with  Abigail,  to  take  her  to  him  to  wife"  (ver.  S9). — D. 

Ver.  29.  (Cabmbl.  ) — The  handle  of  life.  1.  The  bundle  of  life,  or  the  living  (the 
word  bundle,  tseror,  being  used  once  before  of  the  bag  or  purse  of  money  which  each 
of  Joseph's  brethren  found  in  his  sack  of  com,  Gen.  xlii.  35),  signifies  the  society 
or  congregation  of  the  Kvinq  out  of  which  men  are  taken  and  cut  off  by  death 
(Barrett,  'Synopsis  of  Criticisms').  It  contains  those  who  possess  life,  continued 
and  prosperous  life,  in  the  present  world  in  the  midst  of  the  dangers  to  which  they 
are  exposed,  and  by  which  others  are  taken  away  from  "the  land  of  the  living"  (Isa. 
iv.  3).  Life  is  a  gift  of  God,  and  its  continuance  is  presumptive  of  his  favour.  2. 
What  is  here  desired  and  predicted  concerning  them  is  based  upon  their  moral  dis- 
tinction from  other  men.  They  are,  like  David,  servants  of  God,  and  diSer  from 
others,  as  David  from  Saul  and  Nabal,  in  their  character  and  conduct.  They  con- 
stitute the  community  of  the  godly  in  "this  present  evil  world,"  and  "their  names 
are  written  in  heaven."  3.  They  are  of  inestimable  worth  in  the  sight  of  God.  He 
values  all  men  because  of  their  capadti/  for  goodness,  but  much  more  some  on 
account  of  their  a.ctna\  possession  of  it.  Their  worth  surpasses  all  earthly  possessions 
and  distinctions.  "  The  whole  system  of  bodies  (the  firmament,  the  stars,  the  earth, 
and  the  kingdoms  of  it)  and  spirits  together  is  unequal  to  the  least  emotion  of 
charity"  (Pascal).  4.  They  are  his  special possessimi ;  belong  to  him  in  a  peculioi 
manner,  because  of  what  he  has  done  for  them  "  above  all  people,"  and  their  own 
voluntary  devotion  to  him.  "  Know  that  the  Lord  hath  set  apart  him  that  is  godly 
for  himself."  "  The  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  his  people,"  and  calls  them  "  my  jewels  " 
(MaL  iii.  17).  5.  They  live  in  intimate  communion  with  him.  "  A  people  near  unto 
him  "  (Ps.  cxlviii.  14) ;  "  bound  up  in  the  bundle  of  life  unth  the  Lord  thy  God."  6. 
They  are  preserved  safely  from  the  malicious  designs  of  their  enemies,  and  from  all 
evil.  "  Should  a  man  aiise  to  pursue  thee  and  seek  thy  soul,"  &c.  The  expression 
is  derived  from  the  common  usage  of  men,  who  put  valuable  things  together  and 
keep  them  near  their  persons  to  prevent  their  being  lost  or  injured.  "  Your  life  is 
hid  with  Christ  in  God  "  (Col.  iii.  3);  7.  They  have  a  common  participation  in  the 
strength  and  blessedness  afforded  by  his  jjiesence  and  favour.  Their  life  is  of  the 
highest  kind — life  in  the  truest,  fullest  sense,  directly  derived  from  him  who  is  "  the 
Fountain  of  life,"  and  involving  all  real  good.  "  In  thy  presence,"  &c.  (Ps.  xvi.  11.) 
The  life  of  others  is  but  "  a  race  to  death,"  and  they  are  "dead  while  they  live." 
8.  They  are  designed  for  useful  service;  not  merely  to  be  looked  upon  and  admired, 
but  employed  according  to  the  will  of  the  owner.  It  is  for  this  that  they  are  pre- 
served. 9.  They  have  "  the  promise  of  eternal  life."  Their  spiritnal  fellowship 
with  God  and  with  each  other  in  this  life  is  an  earnest  of  its  continuiince  and  perfec- 
tion in  the  life  to  come.  "  God  is  not  the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living."  The 
pious  Jew  dies  with  the  words  of  the  text  upon  his  lips,  and  has  them  inscribed 
upon  his  tomb.  "  Whosoever  is  so  hidden  in  the  gracious  fellowship  of  the  Lord  in 
this  life  that  no  enemy  can  harm  him  or  injure  his  life,  the  Lord  will  not  allow  to 
perish,  even  though  temporal  death  should  come,  but  will  then  receive  him  into 
eternal  life  "  (Keil).  "  And  so  shall  we  ever  be  with  the  Lord."  10.  Their  destiny 
(like  their  character)  is  the  opposite  of  that  of  the  ungodly.  "  Concerning  the  bodies 
of  the  righteous  it  is  said,  '  He  shall  enter  into  peace ;  they  shall  rest  in  their  beds ' 
(Isa.  Ivii.  21)  ;  and  of  their  souls  it  is  said,  '  And  the  soul  of  my  lord  shall  be  bound 
in  the  bundle  of  life  with  the  Lord  thy  God.'  But  concerning  the  bodies  of  the 
wicked  it  is  said,  '  There  is  no  peace,  saith  God,  to  the  wicked.'  And  of  their  souls  it 
is  said,  '  And  the  souls  of  thine  enemies,  them  shall  he  sling  out,  as  out  of  the  middle 
of  a  sling  '"  (Talmud,  quoted  by  Hurwitz). — D. 

Vers.  32,  33.  (Cabmel.) — Moral  restraints.  1.  Between  the  purpose  to  transgres* 
and  the  intended  act  of  transgression  there  is  usually  an  interval,  and  in  that  interval 
there  may  occur  physical  restraints,  rendering  the  act  impossible  but  not  affecting 
the  purpose  or  disposition ;  or  moral  restraints,  affecting  the  purpose,  and  often  alter- 


iH.  ZXT.  1—44.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  498 

ing  it  and  thereby  preventing  the  act.  The  latter  alone  truly  teats  and  reyeals  tha 
character.  And  of  this  nature  was  the  restraint  put  upon  David  when  he  was  on  his 
way  to  inflict  vengeance  on  Nabal  and  his  household  for  the  afiront  which  he  had 
received.  2.  His  terrible  purpose  seems  surprising  after  his  forbearance  toward 
Saul  (oh.  xxiv.  7,  22).  But  the  conquest  of  temptation  is  not  unfrequently  the 
occasion  of  subsequently  succumbing  to  it.  This  happens  whei.  any  one  supposes 
that  he  is  no  longer  in  danger  from  it,  and  ceases  to  watch  against  it,  and  depend  on 
God  for  his  safe-keeping.  "  David  was  not  secure  against  the  temptation  to  personal 
vengeance  and  to  self-help,  although  he  had  previously  resisted  it.  The  lesson  of 
his  own  weakness  in  that  respect  was  all  the  more  needed  that  this  was  one  of  tlie 
most  obvious  dangers  to  an  ordinary  Oriental  ruler  (oh.  xxiv.  21).  But  David  wa? 
not  to  be  such,  and  when  God  in  his  good  providence  restrained  him  as  he  had  almost 
fallen,  he  showed  him  the  need  of  inward  as  well  as  of  outward  deliverance,  and 
the  BufBciency  of  his  grace  to  preserve  him  from  spiritual  as  from  temporal 
dangers  "  (Edersheim).     Consider  special  moral  restraints  as — 

I.  Much  needed  even  by  a  good  man,  because  of — 1.  External  incentives  to  sin. 
The  language  of  Nabal  was  adapted  to  excite  anger  and  revenge,  as  his  servant 
plainly  perceived  (ver.  17).  2.  Sudden  impulses  of  passion,  under  which  one  of 
ardent  temperament  especially  is  in  danger  of  taking  a  rash  oath  (ver.  22),  and 
rushing  towards  its  accomplishment  without  fully  considering  what  he  does,  or  "in- 
quiring of  the  Lord  "  whether  it  is  right.  3.  Natural  deficiency  of  strength  to  resist 
temptation,  and  natural  liability  to  self-deception.  Reason  and  conscience  should 
always  hold  the  rein,  but  how  often  is  it  torn  from  their  grasp  by  fiery  passions  1 
-David  probably  also  thought  for  the  moment  that  it  was  right  to  avenge  the  wrong 
which  had  been  done  ;  but  even  i£  Nabal's  ofEence  were  the  greatest  conceivable,  he 
was  not  yet  constituted  king  and  judge  of  the  people,  much  less  ought  he  to  inflict 
so  fearful  a  vengeance  for  a  private  ofEence.  "  Lord,  what  is  man  ?  What  need 
have  we  to  pray,  Lord,  lead  us  not  into  temptation  I  " 

II.  Variously  vouchsaped  according  to  his  need.  What  is  most  needed  is  the 
restoration  of  reason  and  conscience  to  their  proper  place  and  power,  end  this  is 
often  brought  about  by — 1.  Providential  circumstances,  leading  to  reflection  and  the 
recognition  of  the  will  of  God.  2.  Wise  and  faithful  counsel  (vers.  26 — 31), 
indicating  that  will,  addressed  to  conscience,  and  persuading  to  the  adoption  of  a 
worthier  course.  3.  Inward  influence,  exerted  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  giving  the  in- 
clination and  strength  to  walk  in  "  the  good  and  right  way."  "  Lo,  all  these  things 
worketh  God  oftentimes  with  man,"  &c.  (Job  xxxiii.  29).  And  with  him  whose 
heart  is  not  "  fully  set  to  do  evil "  he  worketh  not  in  vain. 

III.  Gratefully  ascribed  by  him  to  God.  "  Blessed  be  the  Lord  God  of  Israel," 
Ac.  He  is  grateful  to  the  messenger  of  God,  but  first  and  chiefly  to  God  himself ; 
and  his  gratitude  is  sincere  and  fervent  on  account  of — 1.  The  evil  which  has  been 
prevented.  2.  The  good  which  has  been  conferred.  3.  The  abounding  mercy  which 
has  been  experienced.  "  Do  you  think  that  any  one  will  praise  God  in  heaven  with 
80  loud  a  voice  as,!  shall  ?  "  said  one  (who  had  been  speaking  of  the  course  of  fla- 
grant transgression  from  which  by  Divine  mercy  he  had  been  reclaimed).  "  Yes," 
was  the  reply,  "  I  hope  to  do  so,  because  by  Divine  mercy  I  have  been  kept  from  it." 
"  It  is  not  a  converting,  but  a  crowning  grace ;  such  an  one  as  irradiates  and  puts  a 
circle  of  glory  about  the  head  of  him  upon  whom  it  descends  ;  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost 
coming  down  upon  him  in  the  '  form  of  a  dove,'  and  setting  him  triumphant  above 
the  necessity  of  tears  and  sorrow,  mourning  and  repentance,  the  sad  after-games  of 
a  lost  innocence  "  (South,  '  Prevention  of  Sin  an  Invaluable  Mercy '). — D. 

Ver.  29. — The  bundle  of  life  and  the  sling.  The  appeal  of  Abigail  had  all  the 
more  persuasiveness  that  she  avowed  her  sympathy  with  David's  cause,  and  her 
faith  in  the  Divine  purpose  to  make  him  king.  Such  a  conviction  was  by  this  time 
widely  difEused  in  the  land  among  those  who  feared  Jehovah  and  honoured  the 
prophet  Samuel.  We.  have  seen  that  it  was  confessed  by  Saul  himself,  and  by 
Jonathan  it  was  cherished  with  generous  pleasure.  But  Nabal  would  not  have  it 
mentioned  in  his  presence.  In  his  eyes  David  was  a  mere  runaway  servant  of  the 
king  who  had  turned  freebooter.     His  wife  showed  the  vigour  of  her  mind,  the 


4M  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxy.  1—44, 

clearoeas  of  her  judgment,  and  the  strength  of  her  faith  in  not  fearing  the  displea- 
sure of  Nabal  or  the  wrath  of  King  Saul,  but  declaring  her  confident  belief  that  the 
Lord  would  raise  David  to  be  ruler  over  Israel.  On  this  ground  she  entreated  him 
not  to  burden  his  conscience  or  sully  his  name  with  a  hasty  deed  of  blood.    What  a 

Sower  of  figurative  expression  those  Eastern  believers  had ;   and  not  least  those 
evout  women  whose  spirits  were  stirred  by  urgent  occasions  to  ardent  utterance 
— Deborah  in  her  triumph,  Hannah  in  her  song,  Abigail  in  her  appeal  1 

I.  Thk  figuke  of  bafett.  a  soul  bound  up  in  tlie  bundle  of  life  with  Jehovah. 
What  could  a  Nabal's  churlishness,  or  even  a  Saul's  pursuit,  avail  against  a  man 
whose  life  God  guarded  by  night  and  day  ?  If  we  use  Abigail's  phrase  we  extend 
its  meaning.  The  question  with  her  was  of  David's  preservation  to  fill  the  throne  of 
Israel ;  but  it  is  not  for  us  under  the  New  Testament  to  set  our  hearts  on  earthly 
rank.  Our  treasure  is  in  heaven.  Our  inheritance  is  reserved  for  us  till  our  Lord's 
return.  Our  days  are  few  and  uncertain.  But  we  have  an  eternal  life,  freely  given 
to  u§  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  and  the  bundle  of  life  means  for  us  the  unity  of  all  the  living 
anes  in  Christ,  the  totality  of  the  life  which  "  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  They  who 
are  bound  up  therein  have  been  taken  out  of  the  bundles  of  sin  and  death,  extricated 
from  what  is  evil  and  therefore  doomed  to  destruction,  and  have  been  by  the  power 
of  the  Holy  Ghost  joined  to  Christ  and  the  Church.  Happy  day  that  sees  this  done  1 
Strong  security  that  follows !  Who  is  he  that  can  harm  us  if  we  are  Christ's,  bound 
up  in  the  bundle  of  life  with  God  our  Saviour  ? 

II.  The  fioubb  of  bejection.  Abigail  made  no  further  reference  to  Nabal.  He 
was  her  husband,  and  in  no  case  could  he  be  formidable  to  David.  AH  she  asked 
was  that  the  son  of  Jesse  would  magnanimously  overlook  his  churlishness.  But  the 
whole  country  rang  with  reports  of  the  angry  pursuit  of  David  by  the  king,  and 
Abigail  predicted  that  his  enemies  would  have  discomfiture  and  rejection  from  the 
Lord  his  God.  With  raire  felicity  of  allusion  she  spoke  of  their  souls  as  flung  away, 
as  a  stone  is  cast  "  out  of  the  middle  of  a  sling."  The  very  mention  of  the  weapon 
with  which  David  had  gained  his  first  groat  success  must  have  stirred  his  faith  and 
courage.  The  figure,  as  the  history  shows,  was  remarkably  appropriate  to  the 
career  of  David's  chief  enemy,  Saul.  "As  he  that  biiideth  a  stone  in  a  sling,  so  is 
he  that  giveth  honour  to  a  fool  "  (Prov,  xxvi.  8).  Now  honour  had  been  given  to 
Saul.  He  was  anointed  and  exalted  to  the  throne,  and  yet  was  at  heart  unwise  and 
disobedient.  So  was  the  stone  laid  in  the  pan  of  a  sling.  After  a  while  we  see  the 
stone  whirled  round  in  the  sling,  »'.  e.  we  see  Saul  tro\iblcd  and  tossed — wayward> 
disturbed,  passionate,  insanely  jealous.  Tlie  end  was  now  drawing  near,  and  the 
stone  was  about  to  be  cast  out  of  the  sling  in  despair  and  death  on  Mount  Gilboa. 

On  vers.  32,  33  Dr.  South  has  left  us  s  sermon  entitled,  '  Prevention  of  sin  an 
invaluable  blessing.'  In  the  "  application  "  of  it  the  preacher  shows  that  a  much 
higher  satisfaction  is  to  be  found  from  a  conquered  than  fron-  a  conquering  passion. 
"  Eevenge  is  certainly  Ihe  most  luxurious  morsel  that  the  do\-il  can  put  into  a 
sinner's  mouth.  But  do  W6  think  that  David  could  have  found  half  the  pleasure  in 
the  execution  of  his  revenge  that  he  expresses  here  upon  the  disappointment  of  it? 
Possibly  it  might  have  pleased  him  in  the  prcBont  heat  and  hurry  of  his  rage,  but 
must  have^displeascd  him  infinitely  more  in  the  cool,  sedate  reflections  of  his  mind.  ' 
Another  point  which  South  enforces  is  that  the  temper  with  which  we  receive  provi- 
dential prevention  of  sin  is  a  criterion  of  the  gracious  or  ungracious  condition  of  our 
hearts.  "  Whosoever  has  anything  of  David's  piety  will  be  perpetually  plying  the 
throne  of  grace  with  such  like  acknowledgments  as — Blessed  be  that  Providence 
which  delivered  me  from  such  a  lewd  company  or  such  a  vicious  acquaintance  I  And 
blessed  be  that  God  who  cast  stops  and  hindrances  in  my  way  when  I  was  attempt- 
ing the  commission  of  such  and  such  a  sin ;  who  took  me  out  of  such  a  course  of 
life,  such  a  place,  or  such  an  employment,  which  was  a  continual  snare  and  tempta- 
tion to  me  I  And  blessed  be  such  a  preacher  and  such  a  friend  whom  God  made 
use  of  to  speak  a  word  in  season  to  my  wicked  heart,  and  so  turned  me  out  of  the 
paths  of  death  and  deatraotioa,  and  saved  m«  in  spit*  of  the  world,  the  devil,  and 
ujrMlfl"— F. 


OB.  zxn.  1 — ^25.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


4*7 


EXPOSITION. 
Datid  a  8econd  Timk  sfabes  Saw's  Lir  (oh.  zxTi.>i 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Saul,  on  inpokmation  from  the  Ziph- 
ITES,  Again  seeks  to  destroy  David  (vers. 
I — 3).  Ver.  1. — The  Ziphites  came  unto 
SanL  There  are  so  many  points  of  simi- 
larity between  this  narrative  and  that  con- 
tained in  ch.  xxiii  19— 2i  ;  xxiv.  1 — 22, 
that  it  has  been  argued  that  in  these  two 
accounts  we  have  substantially  the  same  fact, 
only  modified  by  two  different  popular  tra- 
ditions, and  not  recorded  until  a  late  sub- 
sequent period,  at  which  the  nairator,  unable 
to  decide  which  was  the  true  form  of  the 
story,  determined  u^on  giving  both.  The 
main  points  of  similarity  are — (1)  The  treach- 
ery of  the  Ziphites  (ch.  xxvL  1  ;  zziii  19). 
(2)  David's  position  in  the  hiU  HachUah 
(ch.  xxvi  1,  3  ;  xxiii.  19).  (3)  Saul's  march 
with  3000  men  (ch.  xxvi  2 ;  xxiv.  2).  (4) 
The  speech  of  David's  men  (ch.  xxiv.  4  ; 
xxvi.  8).  (5)  David's  refusal  to  lay  hands  on 
the  anointed  of  Jehovah  (ch.  xxiv.  6  ;  xxvi 
9,  11).  (6)  Saul's  recognition  of  David's 
voice  (ch.  xxiv.  16  ;  xxvi.  17).  (7)  David's 
comparison  of  himself  to  a  flea  (ch.  xxiv. 
14 ;  xxvi  20).  Besides  these  there  are 
several  remarkable  verbal  coincidences  ;  but 
some  other  matters  which  have  been  enumer- 
ated are  either  such  as  must  have  happened, 
supposing  the  two  events  to  have  occurred, 
or  are  even  points  of  difference.  Of  these 
there  are  many.  Thus  the  first  occasion  on 
which  David  spared  Saul's  life  was  in  a  cave 
at  En-gedi;  the  latter  was  in  Saul's  entrenched 
camp.  In  this  second  narrative  David's  re- 
turn to  Maon  was  the  natural  result  of  his 
marriage  with  Abigail,  and  when  the  Ziphites 
report  his  presence  there  to  Saul,  which  they 
were  sure  to  do  for  fear  of  David's  vengeance 
for  their  former  betrayal  of  him,  he  awaits 
Saul's  attack,  whereas  before  he  fled  in  haste, 
and  was  saved  for  the  moment  by  the  wonder- 
ful ravine  which  Conder  has  so  unmistakably 
verified  (see  on  ch.  xxiii  26),  and  finally  by 
an  invasion  of  the  Philistines.  Mr.  Conder  s 
visit  to  the  ground,  and  the  way  in  which 
the  difficulties  in  the  previous  narrative  are 
cleared  up  by  what  he  saw,  sets  the  historical 
credibility  of  that  account  above  all  reason- 
able doubt.  Had  there  been  a  mountain 
between  DaVid  and  his  pursuers,  he  would 
have  been  safe  enough  ;  but  as  it  was  he  was 
in  full  sight  of  his  enemies,  and  the  ravine 
alone  enabled  him  to  escape  &om  Saul's 
vengeance.  The  number  of  Saul's  army, 
3000,  w:a8  the  number  of  the  chosen  men 
whom  he  always  had  in  attendance  upoa 
him  (ch.  xiii.  2) ;  and  it  is  Saul  who  eucaui^s 
I  aAM. 


on  the  hill  Hachilab,  while  David,  Inftead 

of  being  all  but  caught  as  before,  had  scouts 
to  watch  Saul's  movements,  and  was  himself 
safe  in  the  wilderness  on  the  south.  On 
the  previous  occasion  Saul  had  withdrawn 
from  his  men,  but  here  he  lies  in  his  camp 
surrounded  by  them,  when  David,  accom- 
panied only  by  Abishai,  undertakes  this  bold 
enterprise,  which  was  entirely  in  accordance 
with  his  growing  sense  of  security.  The 
argument,  moreover,  that  Saul  must  have 
been  a  "moral  monster"  thus  to  seek 
David's  life  after  his  generous  conduct  to- 
wards him  keeps  out  of  view  the  fact  that 
Saul  was  scarcely  accountable  for  his  actions. 
We  have  seen  that  he  was  subject  to  fits  of 
madness,  and  that  the  form  which  it  took 
was  that  of  deadly  hatred  against  Davi(L 
Even  this  was  but  a  form  of  the  ruling 
passion  which  underlies  all  Saul's  actions, 
namely,  an  extreme  jealousy  of  everything 
that  in  the  slightest  degree  seemed  to  trench 
upon  his  royal  prerogative  and  supremacy. 
To  what  an  extreme  length  his  ferocity  was 
capable  of  proceeding  in  punishing  what  he 
regarded  as  an  overt  act  of  resistance  to  his 
authority  we  have  seen  in  the  account  of  the 
massacre  of  the  priests  at  Nob  with  their  wives 
and  children  (ch.  xxii  18, 19).  No  worse  act 
is  recorded  of  any  man  in  history,  and  we  may 
hope  that  Saul  would  not  have  committed 
such  a  crime  had  not  his  mental  faculties 
been  disturbed.  Nor  was  Saul  alone  in  his 
estimate  of  what  was  due  to  him  as  Jehovah's 
Messiah;  David  had  e(jually  high  views  of 
Saul's  rights  and  position,  and  regarded 
them  as  fenced  in  by  religious  sanctions. 
But  in  Saul's  case  the  passion  had  grown  till 
it  had  become  a  monomania,  and  as  he 
brooded  over  his  relations  to  David,  and 
thought  of  him  as  one  that  was  to  usurp  his 
crown,  and  was  already  a  rebel  and  an  out- 
law, the  sure  result  was  the  return  of  his 
hatred  against  David,  and  when  news  was 
brought  him  that  his  enemy  was  so  near, 
he  gladly  welcomed  another  opporttmity  of 
getting  him  into  his  power.  On  the  hill  of 
Hachilah.  See  ch.  xxiii  19.  It  is  there 
said  to  be  "on  the  right  hand,"  but  here 
"  over  against,"  t.  e.  facing  the  desert  which 
lies  on  the  north-eastern  coast  of  the  Dead 
Sea. 

Vers.  2 — 4. — Three  thousand  chosen  men. 
Not  chosen  for  this  expedition,  but  the  force 
which  Saul  always  kept  under  arms  (ch.  xiii. 
2).  By  the  way.  The  high  road  which  led 
down  to  Arad.  David  abode  in  the  wilder- 
ness. Hebrew,  "abides."  Instead  of  fleeing 
in  liast*  ait  before,  he  lemains  apparently  on 
■  S 


498 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  xxyi.  1 — 26. 


the  higher  gronnd,  as  he  speaks  in  ver.  6  of 
f/oing  dmon  to  Saul's  camp.  And  he  saw. 
/.  e.  learned,  was  told.  It  was  only  when  his 
scouts  brought  him  their  report  that  he  knew 
that  Saul  was  come  ia  very  deed,  or  "  for  a 
certainty  "  (see  ch.  xxiii.  23). 

Ver.  6.  —  David  arose.  It  seems  as  if 
David  could  scarcely  believe  that  Saul  would 
thus  a  second  time  pursue  him ;  but  when 
the  scouts  informed  him  that  it  was  really 
so,  he  went  in  person  to  reconnoitre  Saul's 
camp.  From  the  opposite  hill  he  was  able 
to  see  that  he  lay  in  the  trench,  i.  e.  the  bar- 
ricade formed  by  the  wagons.  At  night  Saul's 
place  would  be  in  the  centre,  with  Abner 
near  him,  while  the  rest  would  lie  sleeping 
around,  but  all  of  them  within  the  ram- 
part. When  David  reconnoitred  them  they 
would  probably  be  arranging  their  wagons 
to  form  this  barricade. 

Ver.  6. — Ahimelech  the  Hittite.  Though 
a  portion  of  this  once  powerful  people  (Gen. 
XV.  20  ;  Judges  L  26)  was  reduced  to  the 
position  of  hondmen  (l  Kings  ix.  20),  yet 
others  had  retained  their  independence,  and 
their  kings  even  are  spoken  of  (ibid.  x. 
29  ;  2  Kings  vii.  6).  As  Ahimelech  is  men- 
tioned before  Abishai,  he  must  have  held 
an  honourable  place  with  David,  as  did 
subsequently  another  Hittite,  Uriah  (2  Sam. 
xi.  3),  Abishai  the  son  of  Zeruiah  Zeruiah 
is  described  in  1  Chron.  ii.  16  as  sister  to 
Jesse's  sons,  but  apparently  only  by  adop- 
tion, as  both  she  and  Abigail  seem  to  have 
been  daughters  of  the  king  of  Ammon 
(2  Sam.  xvii.  25),  whence  probably  the  ab- 
sence of  any  direct  reference  to  their  father. 
Abishai,  who  was  probably  about  David's 
age,  and  his  two  brothers  were  high  in  rank 
among  David's  heroes  (1  Chron.  xi.  6,  20, 
26),  and  apparently  he  was  one  of  the  three 
captains  who,  when  David  was  in  the  cave  of 
AduUam,  broke  through  the  host  of  the 
Philistines  to  fetch  him  water  from  the  well 
of  Bethlehem.  Who  will  go  down  ?  It  is 
evident  that  David  and  his  men  remained 
upon  the  mountains,  which  extend  from 
Maon  far  to  the  south-west.  Saul's  camp, 
being  "by  the  way,"  i.  e.  near  the  road, 
would  be  on  the  lower  ground.  David 
having  personally  examined  it,  and  seen 
that  flie  watches  were  ill  kept,  asks  which 
of  the  two  will  accompany  him  for  the  more 
hazardous  enterprise  of  penetrating  into  it. 
Ahimelech  seems  prudently  to  have  declined, 
but  Abishai  at  once  offers  his  services. 

Vers.  7,  8. — The  two  accordingly  go  by 
night,  or  "  at  night,"  as  soon  as  night  came 
on,  and  find  Saul  asleep  within  the  trench, 
t.  e.  inside  the  wagon-rampart,  as  in  ver.  5, 
and  his  spear,  the  sign  of  his  royal  authority, 
stuck  in  the  ground  ;  not  at  his  bolster,  but 
"at  his  head  ;"  and  so  in  vers.  11,  12,  16. 
The  word  literally  signifiea  "the  place  where 


the  head  is."  Like  David's  men  in  ch,  xziv. 
i,  Abishai  sees  in  Saul's  defenceless  con' 
dition  a  proof  that  it  was  God's  will  that  he 
should  die,  but  there  is  a,  difference  of  lan- 
guage in  the  Hebrew  which  the  A.  V.  does  not 
represent.  There  the  word  rendered  deliver 
is  really  give;  here  it  is  "hath  locked  up." 
At  once.  Hebrew,  "once."  Abishai  would 
pierce  him  through  with  a  single  stroke  so 
thoroughly  that  no  second  blow  would  be 
necessary.  The  purpose  of  this  would  be  to 
prevent  an  outcry. 

Vers.  9 — 11. — David  forbids  thq  deed 
as  before  (ch.  xxiv.  6),  because  of  Saul's 
office.  As  we  there  saw,  this  was  an  ingrained 
principle  in  David's  mind  on  which  he  con- 
stantly acted.  Present  with  equal  strength 
in  Saul's  mind,  it  was  the  cause  of  moral 
ruin  to  the  one,  and  of  a  noble  forbearance 
and  self-control  to  the  other.  David  there- 
fore leaves  him  in  Jehovah's  hand,  sajring, 
As  Jehovah  liveth,  Jehovah  shall  smite  him ; 
or  his  day,  &c.  Literally,  "As  Jehovah 
liveth  (I  will  not  smite  him),  but  Jehovah 
shall  smite  him  ;  either  his  day  shall  come 
and  he  shall  die  ;  or  he  shall  go  down  into 
battle  and  perish."  Whenever  he  falls,  it 
shall  be  Jehovah's  doing,  whether  he  die  a 
natural  death,  or  a  violent  one  in  battle. 
"  The  smiting  of  Jehovah  "  does  not  imply  a 
sudden  death.  God  smites  men  with  disease 
(2  ^^.ings  XV.  6)  and  other  troubles.  What 
David  means  is  that  he  will  leave  the  matter 
entirely  to  God,  but  that  if  Saul's  death  is 
to  be  a  violent  one,  he  must  fall  honourably, 
not  by  the  hand  of  a  subject,  but  in  battle 
with  Israel's  enemies.  Jehovah  forbid. 
The  same  phrase  as  in  ch.  xxiv.  6.  Cmse 
of  water.  /.  e.  water-bottle,  as  in  1  Kings 
XLX.  6. 

Ver.  12. — And  no  man  saw  it,  &c  The 
Hebrew  text  describes  the  occurrence  in  a 
much  more  lively  manner  :  "And  none  saw, 
and  none  knew,  and  none  awaked. "  A  deep 
sleep  from  Jehovah,  &c.  So  surprising  a 
fact  as  that  two  men  could  peneta-ate  into 
the  very  centre  of  a  considerable  army,  and 
remove  the  king's  sceptre  and  water-bottle 
from  his  side,  could  only  be  accounted  for 
by  the  interference  of  Providence  in  their 
behalf. 

Vers.  13— 16.— The  top  of  a  hill.  He- 
brew, "  the  top  of  the  hill,"  the  particular 
mountain  from  which  David  had  recon- 
noitred Saul's  camp  (ver.  5).  A  great  space 
being  between  them.  At  En-gedi  Saul  was 
alone,  and  had  placed  himself  in  David's 
power;  he  therefore  had  followed  him  closely. 
Here  Saul  had  his  army  round  him,  and 
David  had  entered  his  camp  by  stealth.  It 
is  not.  therefore,  till  he  had  placed  an  ample 
interval  between  them  that  he  calls  to  Abner, 
and  asks  in  derision,  Art  thou  not  a  man  ? 
The  irony  ia  enfeebled  by  the  inseition  oi 


XXVI.  1—25.] 


THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


499 


the  word  valiant  (comp.  ch.  iv.  9).  No 
special  Talour  was  needed  ;  any  one  worthy 
of  the  name  of  man  ought  to  nave  guarded 
his  master  better.  Who  is  like  to  thee — 
Hebrew,  "  who  is  as  thou  "  —  in  Israel  t 
Among  all  Saul's  subjects  there  was  no 
one  so  powerful  and  highly  placed  as  the 
commander-in-chief,  and  he  ought  to  have 
shown  himself  worthy  of  his  pre-eminence. 
Justly,  therefore,  for  neglecting  his  duty 
and  exposing  the  king  to  danger,  he  and 
his  people  were  worthy  to  die.  Hebrew, 
"  sons  of  death  "  (see  on  ch.  xx.  81).  Finally 
David  bids  him  search  for  the  king's  spear 
and  water-bottle,  that  he  may  understand 
how  completely  Saul  had  been  in  his  power. 
It  has  been  suggested  that  Abner  was 
probably  a  personal  enemy  of  David,  with 
whom  he  could  never  have  held  the  high 
position  which  he  occupied  with  his  near 
relative  Saul.  Possibly  instead  of  dissuading 
Saul  from  persecuting  David,  he  stirred  up 
his  ill  feelings.  Still  absolutely  there  is 
nothing  in  this  banter  which  was  not 
justified  by  Abner's  official  position. 

Vers.  17 — 19. — Is  this  thy  voice  t  So  oh. 
xxiv.  16.  In  the  darkness  the  only  way  of 
recognising  David  was  by  his  voice.  If 
Jehovah  have  stirred  thee  np,  &c.  This  is 
one  of  the  many  passages  indicative  of  the 
intensity  with  which  the  Israelites  had 
grasped  the  idea  of  the  omnipresence  of  the 
t)eity,  and  of  his  being  the  one  power  by 
whose  energy  all  things  exist  and  aU  acts 
are  done  (see  on  ch.  ii.  2).  Alike  evil  and 
good  come  from  God,  for  he  alone  is  the 
source  of  all ;  but  it  does  not  therefore 
follow  that  everything  which  he  makes 
possible,  or  to  which  his  providence  seems 
to  lead,  is  therefore  right  for  man  to  do 
(ch.  xxiv.  4,  6).  On  the  contrary,  all  leadings 
of  providence  are  to  be  judged  by  God's 
immutable  law,  and  the  conduct  of  a  Shimei 
may  be  absolutely  wrong  and  unjustifiable, 
even  though  "  Jehovah  had  bidden  him  do 
it"  (2  Sam.  xvi.  11).  If,  indeed,  an  external 
command  come  by  the  hand  of  a  properly 
accredited  person,  it  may  take  the  same  high 
position  as  the  published  law  of  God,  and  so 
over-ride  the  conscience  ;  but  Shimei's  bid- 
ding came  through  the  working  of  his  own 
passions,  and  was  no  more  binding  than  the 
moving  of  David's  mind  by  Jehovah  to 
number  Israel  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  1).  David, 
then,  here  sets  forth  the  two  only  possible 
oases :  first,  Saul  may  be  stiiTed  up  by 
Jehovah  to  persecute  David,  i.  e.  the  tempta- 
tion may  come  by  the  working  of  his  own 
mind  under  those  strong  impulses  which  to 
the  Israelite  had  in  them  always  someMiing 
Divine.  But  this  was  an  impulse  to  break 
God's  law,  and  was  therefore  to  be  resisted  ; 
and  just  as  in  modern  phrase  we  should  bid 
a  person  when  strongly  moved  to  some  act 


to  carry  it  to  God's  throne  in  prayer,  so 
David  urges  Saul  to  seek  for  the  quieting  of 
his  emotions  in  religion.  Under  holy  in- 
fluences these  fierce  passions  would  pass 
away,  and  Jehovah  would  accept  an  offer- 
ing. Hebrew,  "  would  smell  it,"  because  the 
ofiering,  minchah,  consisting  of  flour  and 
frankincense,  was  burnt  for  a  sweet  odour 
before  God.  But,  secondly,  Saul  might  be 
stirred  up  by  the  calumnies  of  wicked  men, 
in  which  case  David  prays  that  they  may  be 
cursed  before  Jehovah;  because  by  forcing 
him  to  leave  the  covenant  land  of  Israel  they 
virtually  say  to  him,  Go,  serve  other  gods. 
To  a  mind  so  intensely  religious  as  David's, 
not  only  was  the  private  devotion  of  the 
heart  a  necessity,  but  also  the  taking  part  in 
the  public  worship  of  the  Deity  (Ps.  xlii  2  ; 
Ixiii.  2 ;  Ixxziv.  2) ;  and,  therefore,  to  deprive 
him  of  this  pri^ege  and  expel  him  from 
the  inheritance  of  Jehovah,  i.  e.  the  earthly 
limits  of  Jehovah's  Church,  was  to  force  him, 
as  far  as  his  enemies  could  do  so,  to  be  a 
heathen  and  a  worshipper  of  strange  gods. 

Ver.  20.— Let  not  my  blood  fall  to  the 
earth  before  the  face  of  Jehovah.  Hebrew, 
"far  from  the  presence  of  Jehovah."  The 
point  of  David's  appeal  is  not  that  his  life 
may  be  spared,  but  that  he  may  not  thus  be 
driven  far  away  &om  the  land  where  Jeho- 
vah manifests  himself ;  nor  does  he  seem  so 
much  to  contemplate  Saul's  putting  him  to 
death  as  the  probability  that  sooner  or  later 
the  life  of  an  exile  will  be  cut  short  by  one 
or  other  of  the  many  dangers  by  which  he  is 
surrounded,  A  flea.  Hebrew,  "a  single 
flea,"  as  in  ch.  xxiv.  14.  A  partridge. 
Many  emendations  of  the  text  nave  been 
proposed  on  the  supposition  that  partridoes 
are  only  to  be  found  in  plains.  But  Mr. 
,  Conder  tells  us  that  partridges  are  among 
the  few  living  creatures  which  still  tenant 
these  wilds  ;  and,  speaking  of  the  precipitous 
cliffs  which  overhang  the  Dead  Sea,  he  says, 
Here,  among  "  the  rocks  of  the  wild  goats, 
the  herds  of  ibex  may  be  seen  bounding,  and 
the  partridge  is  still  chased  on  the  mountains, 
as  David  was  followed  by  the  stealthy  hunter 
Saul"  ('Tent  Work,'  u.  90 ;  we  also  ch. 
xxiii.  19). 

Yer.  21. — I  have  sinned.  Sanl'g  answer 
here  is  very  different  from  that  in  ch.  xxiv. 
17 — 21,  where  the  main  idea  was  wonder  that 
David  should  with  such  magnanimity  spare 
the  life  of  an  enemy  so  manifestly  delivered 
into  his  hand.  Here  a  sense  of  vexation 
seems  uppermost,  and  of  annoyance,  not 
merely  because  his  purpose  was  frustrated, 
but  because  his  own  military  arrangements 
had  been  so  unsoldierUke.  I  have  played 
the  fooL  His  first  enterprise  had  ended  in 
placing  his  life  in  David's  power,  and  it  was 
folly  indeed  a  second  time  to  repeat  ike 
attempt.  But  thongh  the  worda  of  Saul 
KE  2 


aoo 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  xtvi.  1 — i& 


convey  the  idea  rather  of  vexation  with  him- 
self than  of  sorrow  for  hia  malicionsness,  yet 
in  one  point  there  is  a  sign  of  better  things. 
He  bids  David  return,  evidently  with  refer- 
ence to  the  grief  expressed  with  such  genuine 
feeling  by  David  at  being  driven  away  from 
Jehovah's  land.  It  was  of  course  impossible, 
as  Saul  had  given  David's  wife  to  another, 
and  David  had  himself  married  two  other 
women,  but  at  least  it  expiessed  a  right  and 
kindly  feeling. 

Vers.  22 — 24.— Sehold  the  king's  spear. 
Rather,  "Behold  the  spear,  0  king."  The 
other  is  an  unnecessary  correction  of  the  Kri. 
Having  restored  to  Saul  this  ensign  of  hia 
authority,  David  prays  that  Jehovah  may 
render  to  every  man  his  righteousness, 
i.  e.  may  requite  David  for  his  upright  con- 
duet  towards  Saul,  and  by  implication 
punish  Saul  himself  for  his  unjust  conduct. 
And  also  his  faithfulness,  his  fidelity,  and 
steady  allegiance.  This  refers  exclusively  to 
David,  who  gives  as  proof  of  his  faithfulness 
to  his  king  that  he  had  spared  his  life  when 
it  wai  dehvered  into  his  power.     In  retnm 


for  which  act  God,  he  affirms,  will  protect 
his  life.  Ver.  24  would  be  better  translated, 
"And  behold,  as  thy  life  was  great  (in 
Talne)  in  my  sight  this  day,  so  shaU  my  life 
be  great  (in  value)  in  the  sight  of  JehovaA, 
and  he  shall  deliver  me  out  of  every  strait," 
every  nan'owness  and  difficulty  into  which 
Saul's  persecution  might  drive  him. 

Ver.  25.— Thou  Shalt  both  do,  &c  Better, 
"  Thou  shalt  both  do  mightily,  and  thou 
shalt  surely  prevail."  The  words  are  very 
general  as  compared  with  those  in  ch.  ixiv. 
20,  21,  where  Saul  expressed  his  conviction 
that  David  would  be  king,  and  intrusted 
his  family  to  his  care.  The  poverty  of  sen- 
timent here,  and  the  mere  vexation  expressed 
in  ver.  21,  justify  Eeil's  remark  that  Saul's 
character  had  deteriorated  in  the  interval, 
and  that  he  was  more  hardened  now  than  on 
the  previous  occasion.  And  so  they  parted — 
David  still  leading  the  life  of  a  fugitive,  for 
Saul's  retwrnia  ver.  21  was  the  most  evan- 
escent of  good  purposes,  while  the  king  went 
back  to  his  place,  his  home  at  Gibeah. 


HOMItETICa 

Vers.  1 — 12.— The  moral  use  of  Biblical  difficulties.  The  facts  are — 1.  At  the  re- 
quest of  the  Ziphites,  Saul  goes  out  in  pursuit  of  David,  who  by  spies  ascertains  his  true 
position.  2.  David,  observing  Saul's  camp,  goes  to  it  by  night  with  Abishai  while 
al!  are  asleep.  3.  Abishai  urges  David  to  seize  the  opportunity  to  slay  Saul,  but  is 
rebuked  by  the  declaration  that  if  Saul  dies  it  shall  be  in  such  way  as  God  may 
ordain,  and  not  by  the  self-chosen  hand  of  David.  4.  David  carries  off  Saul's  spear 
and  cruse  of  water.  Expositorg  raise  the  question  as  to  whether  this  narrative  is 
identical  in  point  of  time  and  main  circumstance  with  that  of  cK.  xxiii.  19 — 26  ; 
xxiv.  1 — 15.  That  question  is  dealt  with  elsewhere.  Our  business  is  with  the  fact  of 
the  difficulty  and  with  the  teaching  it  involves.     We  may  therefore  consider — 

I.  The  moral  use  of  Biblical  difficulties.  The  difficulty  raised  in  reference  to 
this  section  is  only  one  of  a  class  on  which  for  ages  much  ingenuity  and  learning 
have  been  spent,  and  which  have  been  the  occasion  of  no  little  trouble  and  anxiety 
to  certain  minds  in  consequence  of  their  supposed  bearing  on  the  reality  of  revela- 
tion and  the  authority  of  Scripture.  The  enemies  of  Christianity  have  not  been 
slow  to  take  advantage  of  any  apparent  discrepancies  or  confused  statements.  The 
following  considerations  may  be  of  service  from  a  practical  point  of  view : — 1.  These 
various  difficulties  teach  us  the  vanity  of  our  wisdom  in  relation  to  the  unfolding  of 
the  purposes  of  God.  God  has  certainly  revealed  his  will  to  mankind,  and  wrought 
out  a  merciful  purpose  in  Christ.  None  but  those  who  reject  plainest  evidence  can 
doubt  that  he  has  been  pleased  to  give  this  revelation  concerning  his  merciful  purpose 
in  the  Bible  as  we  have  it.  The  presence  of  variations  in  narrative,  as  here  and  in 
Gen.  i.  and  ii.,  and  in  the  Gospels,  is  the  fact  which  causes  great  perplexity.  Now 
had  we  the  construction  of  a  vehicle  of  revelation  intended  for  man,  our  wisdom 
would  have  suggested  its  freedom  from  all  such  difficulties  to  its  reception.  Is  not 
this  the  real  feeling  of  many  ?  Man  would  have  left  no  room  for  hesitation.  AH 
should  have  been  so  clear  that  no  adverse  criticism  should  be  possible.  Facts,  how- 
ever, are  against  this  wisdom.  It  is  shown  to  be  inadequate  to  deal  with  the  vast 
problems  of  universal  life.  God's  ways  are  not  our  ways.  2.  These  difficulties 
enable  us  to  believe  in  the  lumesty  of  the  writers  of  the  sacred  history.  As  soon  as 
Bur  wisdom  is  assessed  we  discern  in  the  variations  and  free  representations  of  the 
same  or  aimilar  events  clear  evidence  that  the  book  could  not  have  been  the  work  of 


OH.  XXTI.  1—26.)  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  MM 

cnnning  men  intent  on  making  ont  •  consistent  theoiy  of  their  own.  For  saoh  ataa 
wonld  have  made  each  docament  to  square  in  detail  with  the  one  preceding,  and  com- 
pilers intent  on  furthering  a  theory  handed  down  by  tradition  would  have  been  careful 
to  exclude  all  separate  documents  not  manifestly  coherent  with  others.  S.  We  can  UM 
the  Bible,  with  these  variations  in  it,  mth  deeper  interest  because  of  the  intensely 
human  character  of  its  narratives.  Had  all  been  so  sifted  and  reduced  to  such 
mathematical  precision  and  sameness  of  statement  as  to  eliminate  any  possible 
appearance  of  discrepancy,  we  should  have  felt  the  non-human  character  of  the 
historic  record.  As  it  is,  we  see  human  life  in  its  pages,  and  trace  human  idiosyn- 
cracies  in  its  varieties  of  representation,  and  as  "  one  touch  of  nature  makes  the 
whole  world  kin,"  so  this  human  element  in  the  Bible  lays  hold  of  men,  and  excites 
in  them  a  greater  interest  in  its  narratives.  4.  The  careful  reader  also,  by  means  of 
these  variations,  sees  in  stronger  Iwht  the  one  spiritual  purpose  running  through  the 
whole.  The  great  revelation  of  God  in  Christ  is  more  conspicuous  m  its  oneness 
and  continuity  by  reason  of  the  very  diversities  and  sometimes  irreconcilable  dif- 
ferences of  the  narrative.  Our  appreciation  of  the  spiritual  is  the  higher  because 
we  see  that  not  one  great  truth  is  in  the  slightest  degree  affected  by  any  verbal, 
chronological,  or  historical  difSculties.  Admit  them  all,  if  need  be,  and  the  real 
saving  truth  is  as  clear  as  the  sun  at  noonday.  6.  The  difficulties  in  question  are  a 
means  of  wholesome  discipline  All  historic  studies  furnish  scope  for  we  exercise  of 
caution,  discrimination,  patience,  reticence,  and  suspended  judgment  because  of  the 
necessary  incompleteness  of  all  historic  records.  This  is  especially  true  of  the 
Bible,  the  more  so  as  we  do  not  always  know  the  particular  reason  of  the  selection 
or  omission  of  items,  while  we  do  know  that  we  have  not  a  thousandth  part  of  the 
actual  events  associated  with  the  unfolding  in  the  long  line  of  human  history  of  the 
great  purpose  of  God  in  Christ.  The  light  thrown  on  obscure  passages  by  advancing 
discoveries  is  an  additional  reason  for  the  exercise  of  patience  and  cautious  reserve. 
God  is  educating  us  by  the  intricate  lessons,  written  often  with  an  appearance  of 
confusion,  in  the  rocks  that  form  the  crust  of  the  globe  ;  and  likewise  in  the  peculiar 
manner  in  which  he  has  been  pleased  to  allow  his  revelation  to  man  to  be  incorporated 
by  human  hands  with  narratives  of  events. 

II.  The  special  tbuth  embodied  in  the  facts  which  constitute  the  difficulty  or 
THIS  SECTION.  The  object  of  the  narrative  is  evidently  to  point  out  that  David  was 
under  a  strong  temptation  to  forestall  the  order  of  Providence  by  forcing  events  with 
his  own  hand,  and  that  he,  with  true  spiritual  heroism,  resisted  the  suggestions  of  expe- 
diency. As  we  have  dwelt  on  this  topic  in  treating  of  ch.  xxiv.  1—8,  and  xxv.  36 — 
44,  it  may  suflBce  here  to  note  how,  in  this  triple  reference  to  the  same  form  of  trial, 
the  historian  was  impressed  with  the  persistence  of  this  peculiar  temptation  during 
this  period  of  David  s  life.  Doubtless  other  unrecorded  instances  of  the  same,  in  one 
form  or  another,  occurred  during  the  period  of  his  persecution,  but  these  three  repre- 
sentations are  enough  to  indicate  the  fact.  The  persistence  of  the  temptation  to 
desire  the  disposal  of  events  to  be  in  our  own  hands,  by  wishing  something  to  be 
done  which  God  does  not  do,  or  to  take  the  disposal  into  our  hands  by  actually  doing 
what  is  not  warranted  by  religious  principle,  but  only  by  the  rules  of  a  contracted 
expediency,  is  real  in  the  lives  of  many  of  God's  servants.  Our  Saviour  himself 
was  tempted  to  it  again  and  again.  There  is  an  hypothesis  that  even  Judas  was 
induced  to  betray  Christ  to  force  him  to  assert  his  power,  and  so  hasten  the  estab- 
lishment of  his  kingdom.  The  trials  of  the  persecuted  Church  suggested  the  expe- 
diency of  rising  in  armed  endeavour  to  defend  and  extend  their  principles.  The 
slow  progress  of  Christianity  suggests  to  some  the  adoption  of  methods  other  than 
apostolic.  The  safe  rule  for  us  is  that  of  David — God  carries  on  his  cause  on  earth 
according  to  laws  which  he  himself  has  ordained,  and  no  improvement  can  be  made 
on  them,  even  though  their  working  appears  to  us  to  be  too  slow  and  painful.  Saul 
was  anointed  by  God's  command  ;  David  was  chosen  to  succeed  Saul.  He  who  ap- 
pointed Saul  had  power  to  end  his  life ;  till  he  did  this  of  his  own  will,  and  in  his  own 
way,  David  must  wait  as  the  coming  king.  So  the  laws  of  the  human  mind,  of  the 
social  forces  at  work  in  the  world,  and  of  the  spiritual  agencies  that  operate  on  the 
■oul  of  man  are  of  God ;  the  cause  of  Christ  among  men  is  to  be  established  by 
action  in  harmony  with  these ;  we  are  to  resist  any  temptation  to  leek  tu  let  them 


602  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxtl  1—26. 

aside  by  the  introduction  of  agenries  not  spiritual,  and  are  not  to  wish  that  otnoi 
agencies  operating  according  to  other  laws  were  in  existence.  The  principle  of 
living  and  acting  according  to  law  will  also  apply  to  private  life  and  enterprise. 

General  lessons : — 1.  A  reverent  spirit  will  prove  a  good  solvent  of  many  Biblical 
difiSculties,  and  will  extract  many  lessons  from  them.  2.  Where  there  is  not  concern 
for  spiritual  life  the  verbal  and  historical  difiSculties  of  the  Bible  will  not  assume 
great  importance.  3.  It  is  a  matter  of  gratitude  that  the  way  of  life  is  clear  to  the 
most  unlettered  of  men  (Isa.  xxxv.  8).  4.  While  we  are  waiting  and  doing  our  beat 
as  God's  servants,  his  providence  is  quietly  at  work  to  realise  the  purpose  of  our  life. 
6.  In  dealing  with  men  who  urge  expediency,  it  is  safe  to  appeal  to  Ood'a  word 
and  his  unceasing  government  of  men.  6.  No  man  ever  regretted  fidelity  to  prin- 
ciple ;  many  have  mourned  over  the  bitter  fruits  of  expediency. 

Vers.  13 — ^25. — Jfflictiont  and  righteowmeu.  The  facts  are — 1.  David  seeks  to 
arouse  the  attention  of  Saul  by  an  appeal  to  Abner,  blended  with  reproof  of  his 
negligence.  2.  Saul,  on  recognising  David's  voice,  is  answered  by  him  in  terms 
expressive  of  loyal  homage.  3.  David  appeals  to  Saul  with  respect  to  his  conduct, 
pointing  out  its  harshness  and  unreasonableness.  4.  Saul,  valuing  his  own  life 
just  spared,  admits  the  force  of  the  plea,  and  promises  to  desist  from  persecution. 
6.  David  reasserts  his  integrity,  and  expresses  the  hope  that  God  would  accept  his 
motives  and  actions.  6.  Sam  acknowledges  the  moral  superiority  of  David,  and 
professes  to  foresee  his  success  in  life.  As  the  persistence  of  trial  is  set  forth  by 
the  various  items  of  the  history,  so  the  integrity  of  David  is  also  variously  illustrated. 
Afilictions  and  righteousness  are  most  conspicuous  features  of  his  experience  during 
the  period  prior  to  his  accession  to  power ;  beautifully  suggestive  to  us  of  the  con- 
ditions of  our  attaining  to  fitness  for  the  higher  service  of  Christ  (Acts  xiv.  22).  The 
general  teaching  of  the  section  may  be  arranged  under  the  following  statements: — 

I.  That   IT   IS  CONSISTENT   WITH   SUBMISSION  TO  THE  WILL  OF   GoD   TO  ENDEAVOUR 

TO  RBMOVB  THE  HUMAN  CAUSES  OF  TEOUBLK.  The  life  and  writings  of  David  prove 
his  trust  in  God  and  acquiescence  in  his  appointments ;  at  the  same  time  he  spared 
no  pains  to  get  rid  of  the  troubles  of  his  life  by  removing  the  causes  of  them  as 
existing  in  the  mind  of  Saul.  In  this  fresh  appeal  he  declares  to  Saul  that  if  God 
be  the  mover  of  his  spirit  to  do  these  things  (ver.  19),  he  has  no  more  to  say,  only 
let  it  be  proved.  His  appeal  to  Abner  was  an  additional  effort  to  remove  the  trouble, 
since  not  Saul  only,  but  the  general  and  army  would  now  see  in  his  abstinence  from 
violence  the  purity  of  his  motives.  The  same  course  is  proper  for  all  in  tribulation. 
Trials  are  permitted,  and  are  blessed  in  their  efEects  when  rightly  received  (Heb.  xii. 
6 — 11) ;  but  we  have  to  do  with  preventible  causes,  and  may  seek  to  remove  them. 
Even  the  failure  of  efiort  to  remove  causes  of  trouble  which,  being  human,  ought 
not  to  operate,  in  becoming  itself  a  trial  is  the  more  blessed  in  its  efEects  because  of 
our  having  done  our  duty.  God's  secret  purposes  and  methods  are  not  the  rules  of 
our  action,  and  any  fruitless  action  of  ours  performed  in  reverent  submission  to  his 
unsearchable  will  is  itself  a  means  of  grace,  because  of  his  turning  it  to  spiritual 
profit. 

II.  That  THBEB   IS  A  DOITBLE   BASIS  OF  APPEAL  TO  MEN  BENT  OH  A  WKONQ  COUBSE 

which  should  regulate  our  dealings  with  them.  David  addresses  himself  to  Saul's 
sense  of  right  and  to  his  reasoning  powers.  "What  have  I  done?"  The  answer 
was  clear  in  Saul's  conscience.  "  Now,  therefore,  I  pray  thee,  let  my  lord  the  king 
hear  the  words  of  his  servant.''  The  reasoning  powers  of  Saul  gave  heed  and  were 
convinced  by  the  subsequent  argument.  In  our  private  controversies,  in  our  efforts 
to  win  men  over  to  Christ,  and  in  our  treatment  of  the  young,  we  are  on  safe  ground 
when  we  address  the  moral  and  rational  nature.  A  wise  appeal  to  the  two  cannot  be 
wholly  lost.  Man  is  compelled  by  force  of  his  nature  to  recognise  right  when  placed 
before  the  eye  of  conscience,  and  the  laws  of  thought  insure  the  acquiescence  of 
reason  when  the  argument  is  intrinsically  as  well  as  formally  sotmd.  It  is  this 
necessary  recognition  of  truth  and  right  which  forms  the  philosophical  ground  for 
faith  in  the  final  triumph  of  Christianity,  and  wise  teachers  as  well  as  privat* 
Christians  may  labour  on  in  ouniidence  as  long  as  they  present  the  truth  of  God  in 
sn  samest  and  prayerful  spirit. 


OH.  xxTL  1—26.]  THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  603 

III.  That  THB  DEFECTIVE  MOBAL   CONDITION  OP  WEAK  MINDS   LAYS  THEM  OPBN   TO 

THE  PEENICI0D8  CONTROL  OF  BASE  MEN  OF  BTEONGEB  MIND.  David  hit  the  mark  when 
he  said,  "If  they  he  the  children  of  men."  The  strong-willed  men  at  the  court  of 
Saul,  and  referred  to  in  the  Psalms,  had  obtained  influence  over  him,  and  by  lies  and 
slanders  had  embittered  his  spirit  against  David.  But  it  was  the  decayed  piety  and 
persistently  impenitent  spirit  in  Saul  which  exposed  him  to  this  danger ;  for  even  a 
weaker  intellect  will  resist  the  stronger  in  matters  of  moral  conduct  when  the  heart 
is  sound  in  its  spiritual  tendencies.  A  man's  moral  condition  has  more  to  do  with  his 
superiority  to  the  devices  and  urgencies  of  the  strong  and  crafty  than  his  knowledge 
or  force  of  intellect.  Moral  affinities  are  powerful  for  good  or  evil,  and  moral  repul- 
sions are  life's  safeguards  for  the  good.  Hence  the  supreme  importance  of  a  new 
heart  and  a  right  spirit.  Hence,  also,  the  profound  wisdom  of  the  New  Testament 
teaching  and  the  mercy  of  the  provision  for  our  renewal.  The  bearing  of  this  on 
our  education  of  youth,  on  personal  resistance  of  temptation,  and  on  the  means  for 
counteracting  the  influence  of  powerful  but  unholy  men,  is  obvious. 

IV.  That  a  recognition  of  eight  and  ■wrong  in  conduct  May  be  peefect'ly 

SINCERE,  BUT  DESTITUTE  OF  GOVERNING  POWER  OVER  THE  LIFE.        Under  the   appeal 

to  conscience  and  reason  Saul  admitted  his  wrong  and  folly,  and  David's  right  and 
wisdom.  Being  just  then  keenly  alive  to  the  value  of  deliverance  from  death,  he 
was  prompted  to  let  right  and  reason  exercise  a  legitimate  sway  over  his  thoughts, 
and  thus  was  honest  in  his  declaration.  Yet  the  recognition  was,  so  to  speak,  intel- 
lectual, and  not  moral.  It  was  admission  of  truth,  not  response  to  its  power  over  the 
life.  Men  are  not  governed  in  conduct  by  thoughts,  or  propositions,  or  formal  con- 
fessions of  right  and  propriety,  but  by  positive  tendencies  of  their  moral  nature. 
And  as  Saul's  tendencies  were  not  altered  by  the  interview  with  David,  his  recogni- 
tion of  right  failed  to  become  a  power  over  his  conduct  in  days  hence.  We  often 
see  how  men  delude  themselves  by  regarding  a  recognition  of  right  as  tantamount 
to  a  healthy  moral  condition  for  the  time  being.  Here  again  we  come  upon  the 
fundamental  truth  that  a  radical  change  of  nature  is  the  only  hope  of  salvation  and 
safeguard  of  daily  life. 

V.  That  THE   PAIN    OF  SEPAEATION   FROM   THE    PEIVILEGES   OF  WOESHIP  18  ONK   OF 

THE  SEVEREST  TRIALS  OF  GODLY  MEN.  Of  hunger  and  tfiirst  David  said  nothing,  nor 
of  loss  of  social  position ;  but  he  dwelt  with  emphatic  language  on  the  grievous 
wrong  of  driving  him  from  "  the  inheritance  of  the  Lord,"  virtually  saying,  "  Go, 
serve  other  gods.  As  the  hart  panteth  after  the  water-brooks,  so  did  his  soul  pant 
after  God  (Ps.  xli.  1 — i).  As  the  patriot  feels  the  anguish  of  exile,  so  more  keenly 
does  a  servant  of  God  feel  banishment  by  man  from  the  fellowship  and  hallowed 
joys  of  the  sanctuary.  Those  in  authority  should  be  very  careful  lest  by  harsh  con- 
duct they  drive  away  into  godless  regions  of  thought  and  association  men  of  noble, 
reverent  spirit.  Origen,  Luther,  and  others  have  shared  the  bitterness  of  David ; 
and  even  our  Lord  was  cast  out  from  the  Jewish  Church,  and  was  taunted  with 
the  suggestion  of  going  to  "  teach  the  Gentiles  "  (John  vii.  36).  Our  love  to  the 
tiouse  of  the  Lord  and  for  the  communion  of  saints  is  a  test  of  the  reality  of  our 
piety. 

VI.  That   INTEGRITY    OF  CONDUCT    IS  A   CONDITION    OF  RECEIVING    God's  BLESSING, 

AND  MAY  WITH  ALL  HUMILITY  BE  ASSERTED.  David  was  most  deeply  conscious  of 
being  a  loyal,  loving  subject,  free  from  ambition  or  desire  to  do  other  than  good  to 
Ill's  king.  He  referred  to  his  sparing  Saul  in  evidence  of  this,  and  now,  as  in  the 
presence  of  God,  afSrms  that,  so  far  as  his  conduct  toward  Saul  was  concerned,  he 
was  quite  prepared  to  abide  by  the  Divine  rule  of  rendering  to  every  man  "  his 
righteousness  and  his  faithfulness."  So  far  as  his  own  personal  deliverance  from 
tribulation  was  to  be  measured  to  him  according  to  his  treatment  of  Saul,  he  was 
quite  satisfied  that  it  would  be  complete.  Here  is  no  trusting  to  personal  goodness 
for  pardon  and  eternal  life,  no  glorying  in  his  own  virtues  ;  but  a  strong  assertion  of 
his  integrity  of  conduct  in  one  particular,  and  a  belief  that,  so  far  as  integrity  in 
this  case  was  a  condition  of  being  blessed,  he  would  not  come  short  of  the  blessing. 
The  OH  Testament  is  one  with  the  New  in  the  conditions  of  pardon  and  eternal 
life,  and  also  in  the  condition  of  godly  men  being  prospered  in  their  way.  When 
challenged  with  reference  to  a  particular  deed,  it  is  legitimate  to  aflBrm  our  righteous« 


604  THE  FIKST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [cH.  xxvL  1—26. 

neas  with  all  golemnitjr,  and  with  a  deep  seDse  of  our  general  nnworthiness  before 
God. 

VII.  That  MEN  WHOSE  LIVES  ARE  CONSCIOUSLY  WBONO  AND  DNSATISFACTOBT_  IN- 
WARDLY RECOGNISE  THE  SUPERIORITY  OP  THOSE  THEY  OPPOSE,  and  discem  the  signs 
of  coming  guccess.  Saul  felt  David  to  be  the  nobler  man,  and  under  the  transitory 
influence  of  truth  he  openly  avowed  what  was  always  felt  (ver.  25).  Much  of  the 
resentment  cherished  against  him  had  arisen  from  the  conviction,  so  unwelcome  to 
the  envious,  of  his  being  endowed  with  qualities  that  would  justify  the  anointing  by 
Samuel.  The  silent  homage  to  goodness  is  universal.  Instances  have  occurred  in 
biographies  testifying  that  while  in  former  antagonism  to  Christian  truth  and  Christian 
men  the  writer  was  sensible  of  the  beauty  and  power  of  Christian  character,  and  saw 
in  it  elements  of  future  happiness  not  in  his  own.  The  tone  of  the  opposition  to 
Christ  and  his  apostles  reveals  the  same  fact.  The  character  built  up  by  a  true  piety 
is  a  creation  of  God,  and  is  among  his  noblest  works,  as  it  is  also  most  permanent. 
The  more  we  can  present  such  a  character  before  men,  the  more  shall  we  multiply  the 
evidences  of  Christianity,  and  reveal  to  mankind  in  what  lies  the  germ  of  permanent 


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHOUa 

Vers.  1 — 12.  (The  hill  op  Hachilah.) — Tht  man  ■worthy  of  the  teq>tre.  "And 
David  took  the  spear  and  the  cruse  of  water  from  Saul's  bolster"  (ver.  12J.  1. 
David's  innocence  with  respect  to  any  evil  design  against  Saul  was  fully  vindicated 
at  their  previous  meeting.  Saul  himself  was  melted  to  tears,  confessed,  "  Thou  art 
more  righteous  than  I,"  &c.,  prayed  that  the  Lord  might  reward  his  preserver,  and 
declared,  "  I  know  well  that  thou  shalt  surely  be  king  "  (ch.  xxiv.  17 — 20)  ;  but  his 
insincerity,  instability,  and  perversity  were  such  that  as  soon  as  he  was  informed  by 
the  treacherous  Ziphites  that  David  was  again  in  the  hill  of  Hachilah  (ch.  xxiii.  19), 
he  started  in  pursuit  with  his  3000  men  (ch.  xiii.  2).  His  sin  was  now  greater 
than  before  because  of  its  opposition  to  has  clearer  conviction  of  the  integrity  of 
David  and  the  purpose  of  God,  asd  there  are  indications  in  this  interview  of  the 
increased  obduracy  of  his  heart.  2.  The  aim  of  David  is  not  so  much  to  afford  a 
further  vindication  of  himself  as  to  stay  the  persecution  of  Saul,  and  induce  him  to 
act  in  accordance  with  his  former  confession  (ver.  1^).  For  this  purpose  he  proves 
to  him  that  although  he  might  have  the  power  to  deprive  him  of  his  authority  and 
life,  he  has  no  wish  to  do  so,  and  is  his  most  faithful  guardian  (ver.  16)  ;  appeals  to 
his  best  feelings,  and  warns  him  that  he  is  fighting  against  God  and  exposing  him- 
self to  his  righteous  judgment.  He  takes  away  his  spear-sceptre  (an  emblem  of 
royal  authority — Gen.  xlix.  10 ;  Num.  xxiv.  17 ;  Ps.  xlv.  6)  and  his  cruse  of  water 
(a  necessary  sustenance  of  life — ch.  xxv.  11),  but  only  to  restore  them  into  his  hand 
(ver.  22).  3.  In  acting  thus  David  shows  his  incomparable  superiority  to  Saul,  and 
that  he  alone  is  worthy  to  reign  over  Israel,  even  as  he  has  been  ordained  to  succeed 
to  that  exalted  dignity.  "  Behold  now,  once  more,  our  David,  as  he  goes  away  with 
Saul's  spear,  the  emblem  of  his  sovereign  power.  At  that  moment  he  presents  a 
symbolically  significant  appearance.  Unconsciously  he  prophesied  of  his  own  future, 
while  he  stands  before  us  as  the  projected  shadow  of  that  form  in  which  we  must 
one  day  behold  him.  In  the  counsel  of  the  invisible  Watcher  it  was  indeed  irre- 
vocably concluded  that  the  Bethlehemite  should  inherit  Saul's  sceptre,  and  here  we 
see  before  us  a  dim  pre-intimation  of  that  fact "  (Krummacher).  As  the  man  most 
worthy  to  rule,  and  furnishing  in  some  respects  a  pattern  to  others,  he  was  distin- 
guished (see  ch.  xiii.  14)  by — 

I.  Pre-eminent  ability  (vers.  4 — 7).  In  the  enterprise  which  he  undertook 
during  the  night  (either  with  the  express  intention  of  doing  what  he  did,  or  from 
some  internal  impulse)  he  displayed  those  qualities  for  which  Saul  and  his  ablest 
general,  Abner,  were  noted,  and  in  a  higher  degree  than  they,  viz. — 1.  Sagacity,  skill 
(Ps.  Ixxviii.  72),  and  practical  wisdom ;  perceiving  what  was  defective  m  the  con- 
dition of  his  adversaries  and  how  to  talce  advantage  of  it.  Tact,  although  by  no 
means  one  of  the  highest  mental  endowments,  is  an  indispensable  qualification  in  a 
successful  ruler.    2.   Vigilance.     His  experiences  in  the  desert  had  taught  him  to  be 


OH.  XXVI.  1—26.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  5M 

ever  on  the  alert,  and  he  watched  while  others  slept  (vers.  4,  16).  3.  Courage. 
"  Who  will  go  down  with  me  to  Saul  to  the  camp  ?  "  (ver.  6).  Even  the  brave 
Hittite  dared  not  accept  the  challenge,  and  only  Abishai  (afterwards  David's  pre- 
server— 2  Sam.  xxi.  17)  would  accompany  him.  They  went  fearlessly  (like  Jonauian 
and  his  armour-bearer)  right  into  the  midst  of  danger.  4.  Energy  and  activity,  by 
which  alone  he  could  achieve  success.  Mental  and  physical  strength  ii  of  Qod, 
should  be  ascribed  to  him  and  employed  for  him. 

"  For  by  thee  I  can  scatter  a  troop, 
And  by  ray  God  do  I  break  down  walll  ^ 
Who  maketh  my  feet  like  hinds'  feet, 
And  setteth  me  on  my  high  places  ; 
YHio  traineth  my  hands  for  war, 
So  that  mine  arms  can  bend  a  bow  of  brau" 

(Perowne,  Pa.  zviii  2S,  S8,  M). 

II.  LowLT  BBVERBNCB,  submission,  and  obedience.  "  The  Lord  forbid  that  I  ihonld 
stretch  forth  mine  hand  against  the  Lord's  anointed  "  (ver.  11 ;  ch.  xziv.  6).  There 
was  in  David  (as  there  should  be  in  others') — 1.  An  unbounded  reverence  for  God  as 
the  source  of  power,  justice,  order,  and  all  excellence.  This  was  the  principle  from 
which  his  conduct  toward  Saul  proceeded.  2.  Profound  respect  for  every  authority 
ordained  by  God.  Saul  had  been  anointed  king,  and  was  still  openly  reigning  by 
Divine  permission  (his  rejection  having  been  only  privately  declared  to  him)  ;  his 
person  was  therefore  regarded  by  David  as  sacred.  "  Liable  as  the  Israelite  kings 
were  to  interference  on  the  part  of  priest  and  prophet,  they  were,  by  the  same  Divine 
power,  shielded  from  the  unholy  hands  of  the  profane  vulgar ;  and  it  was  at  once 
impiety  and  rebellion  to  do  injury  to  the  Lord's  anointed  "  (Kitto, '  Cyo.  of  Bib.  Lit.'). 
"  He  gives  two  reasons  why  he  would  not  destroy  Saul,  nor  permit  another  to  do  it : — 
(1)  It  would  be  a  sinful  affront  to  God's  ordinance.  (2)  It  would  be  a  sinful  anticipa- 
tion of  God's  providence  "  (M.  Henry).  3.  Due  subordination  of  the  claims  of  every 
such  authority  to  the  claims  of  God ;  which  both  rulers  and  subjects,  who  have 
proper  revirenoe  for  him,  must  observe.  4.  Entire  subjection  of  personal  impulses, 
purposes,  and  aims  to  the  will  of  God,  in  the  assurance  that  he  will  "render  to  every 
man  his  righteousness  and  his  faithfulness  "  (ver.  23).  "  Commit  thy  way  unto  the 
Lord,"  &c.  (Ps.  xxxvii.  5—9). 

III.  Noble  genebosity.  "  Destroy  him  not,"  &c.  (vers.  8 — 11 ;  Pb.  Ivii.,  inscrip- 
tion, Altaschith  =  Destroy  not ;  see  Hengstenherg).  The  opportunity  of  slaying 
his  enemy  was  again  placed  in  his  hands,  and  in  sparing  him  a  second  time  David 
showed  still  greater  forbearance  than  before,  because  of — 1.  The  renewed  persecu- 
tion to  which  he  was  subjected,  and  the  increased  hopelessness  of  turning  Saul  from 
his  purpose.  "  I  say  not  unto  thee,  Until  seven  times,"  &c.  (Matt,  rviii.  22 — 36). 
2.  'The  peculiar  circumstances  of  the  case.  He  was  there  alcme  with  Abishai  in  the 
night,  and  his  companion  entreated  that  he  might  be  permitted  to  give  but  one 
stroke  (ver.  8).  None  else  would  witness  the  deed.  Moral  restraint  alone  prevented 
his  permission'  of  it.  3.  His  not  entertaining  the  temptation  for  a  moment ;  even 
the  thought  of  it  could  find  no  place  in  his  breast.  Recent  experience  had  evidently 
'strengthened  his  spirit  (ch.  xxv.  32).  4.  His  fixed  determination  to  leave  the  matter 
entirely  with  God  (ver.  10).  "  It  is  evident  that  David's  faith  in  God  was  one  of  thp 
great  roots  out  of  which  all  these  fruits  of  forbearance  and  compassion  grew.  He- 
was  confident  that  God  would  in  his  own  way  and  in  his  own  time  fulfil  the  promises 
which  had  been  made,  and,  therefore,  instead  of  taking  the  matter  into  his  own 
hands,  he  could  rest  in  the  Lord  and  wait  patiently  for  him "  (C.  Vince).  And  he 
alone  who  vrill  exercise  power  in  mercy  as  well  as  in  justice  is  worthy  to  have  it 
intrusted  to  him. 

IV.  Divine  appeoval.  "  A  deep  sleep  from  the  Lord  was  fallen  upon  them  "  (ver. 
12),  indicative  of  the  fact  that  the  Lord  "favoured  David's  enterprise."  He  was 
providentially  preserved  from  harm,  and  this,  along  with  many  other  circumstances 
(all  concurring  with  his  eminent  personal  qualifications),  manifested  it  to  be  the  will 
of  God  that  he  should  rule  over  his  people.  The  sceptre  which  he  had  no  desire  to 
wrest  from  the  hand  of  Saul  would  be  given  to  him  by  the  hand  of  God,  and  be  "  • 


60«  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xxvi.  1—26. 

sceptre  of  uprightness."  The  highest  realisation  of  these  principles  appears  in  One 
greater  than  David,  and  alone  "  worthy  to  receive  "  the  sceptre  of  universal  dominioil 
(oh.  ii.  10 ;  2  Sam.  iiiii.  2 ;  Phil.  ii.  9 ;  Heb.  i.  8 ;  Rev.  v.  6,  12).— D. 

Vers.  13 — 16.  (The  hill  op  Hachilah.) — Manliness.  "Art  not  thou  a  man?" 
(ver.  15).  A  man  should  prove  wortliy  of  himself ;  his  nature,  power,  dignity,  and 
responsibility.  Every  man  should  do  so  (not  only  every  one  who,  like  Abner,  occupies 
an  exceptional  position),  for  every  man  (fallen  though  he  be)  is  great.  "  Let  us  not 
disparage  that  nature  which  is  common  to  all  men  ;  for  no  thought  can  measure  its 
grandeur.  It  is  the  image  of  God,  the  image  of  his  infinity ;  for  no  limits  can  be 
set  to  its  unfolding.  He  who  possesses  the  Divine  powers  of  the  seal  is  a  great 
being,  be  his  place  what  it  may.  You  may  clothe  him  with  rags,  may  immure  liim 
in  a  dungeon,  may  chain  him  to  slavish  tasks ;  but  he  is  still  great.  Man  ia  a  greater 
name  than  president  or  king  "  (Channing,  '  Self -culture '). 

"  A  beam  ethereal,  sullied  and  absorpt ; 
Though  sullied  and  dishonoured,  still  Divine  I "  (Young). 

In  order  that  he  may  act  according  to  his  true  nature,  and  not  unworthily  of  it — 1. 
The  hody  must  he  the  servant  of  tlie  soul.  It  was  designed,  with  its  various  passions, 
to  obey,  and  not  to  rule ;  and  to  keep  it  "  in  subjection '  (1  Cor.  ix.  27)  requires 
watchfulness,  self-control,  and  manly  strength. 

"  Call  to  mind  from  whence  ye  sprang ; 
Ye  were  not  form'd  to  live  the  life  of  brutes, 
But  virtue  to  pursue  and  knowledge  high  "  (Dante,  '  Inferno '). 

2.  The  mind  must  he  faithful  to  the  truth;  esteeming  it  as  more  precious  than  gold, 
searching  for  it  as  for  hid  treasure,  receiving  it  on  proper  evidence,  cleaving  to  it 
when  discovered,  and  confessing  it  without  fear.  Here  is  room  for  the  exercise  of 
the  highest  virtue  or  martial  courage.     "In  understanding  be  men"  (1  Cor.  xiv.  20). 

3.  The  heart  must  he  set  on  the  supreme  good ;  resisting  and  overcoming  the  tempta- 
tion to  set  its  affections  on  wealth,  pleasure,  fame,  that  "  satisfy  not "  (Pa.  iy.  6)> 

"  Let  thy  heels  spurn  the  earth,  and  thy  raised  ken 
Fix  on  the  lure  which  heaven's  eternal  King 
Whirls  in  the  rolling  spheres. 

0  ye  misguided  souls  I 
Infatuate,  who  from  such  a  good  estrange 
Your  hearts,  and  bend  your  gaze  on  vanity, 
Alas  for  you  I  "  (Dante). 

4.  The  conscience  must  he  reverenced  as  the  Icing  ;  its  integrity  defended  against  all 
foes,  its  voice  obeyed  at  all  rislis,  and  its  favour  desired  above  all  earthly  dignities. 
"  Pieverence  thyself"  (ch.  xxii.  22).  5.  The  will  must  be  fixed  on  doing  the  will  of 
God — resolutely,  firmly,  and  constantly  ;  in  striving  against  sin,  advaiioing  in  holi- 
ness, and  promoting  his  kingdom.  "  Watch  ye,  stand  fast  in  the  faith,  quit  you  like 
men,  be  strong  "  (1  Cor.  xvi.  13). 

"  Be  as  the  tower  that,  firmly  set, 
Shakes  not  its  top  for  any  blast  that  blows." 

6.  The  character  must  he  conformed  to  that  of  "  the  man  Christ  Jesus"  the  highest 
and  only  perfect  pattern  of  true  manhood  (John  xiii.  16 ;  Ephes.  iv.  13  ;  Phil.  ii.  6), 
and  the  Saviour  and  Helper  of  all  who  endeavour  to  be  like  him.  7.  The  preserU 
life  must  be  a  preparation  for  ike  future.  Man  is  made  to  live  for  ever,  and  it  is  not 
manly  to  live  only  for  the  passing  moment.  He  who  sleeps  at  his  post  of  duty  and 
neglects  to  watch  and  pray  is  surely  "worthy  to  die"  (ver.  IG).  "Look  up  to 
heaven,  look  down  to  hell,  live  for  eteinity  1 " — D. 

Vers.  13—25.  (The  hill  of  Hachilah.)— Z)ami'«  last  meeting  with  Saul  1. 
This  meeting  took  place  at  night.  The  encampment  of  Saul  was  over  against  the 
desert  by  the  way  (ver.  3).    The  light  of  the  stars,  or  of  the  moon,  and  the  flickenng 


-H.  XXVI.  1-26.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  fi07 

oekmp-fireB,  together  with  the  intense  silence  of  the  place,  would  enable  the  quick  eje 
and  ear  of  David  to  perceive  its  position  and  defenceless  condition.  And  it  may 
have  been  early  morning  when,  on  nis  return  from  his  adventurous  and  successful 
enterprise,  the  voice  of  David  rang  across  the  ravine  which  separated  him  from  it. 
"Answerest  thou  not,  Abner?'     2.  The  conversation  that  followed  occurred  in  the 

Eiesence  of  the  followers  of  Saul,  and  was  doubtless  heard  by  them,  on  awaking, 
ke  Abner,  out  of  tlie  deep  sleep  that  had  fallen  upon  them  (ver.  12).  At  the  former 
interview  Saul  was  alone  with  David  and  his  men,  and,  having  no  reason  for  concern 
about  the  manner  in  which  his  royal  dignity,  of  which  he  was  always  so  jealous, 
might  be  regarded  by  others,  his  feelings  were  less  restrained  and  his  expressions 
more  explicit.  What  was  now  said  must  have  shown  them  the  evil  of  the  course  he 
pursued ;  it  was  a  public  testimony  against  the  wickedness  of  the  men  who  incited 
him  to  it  (ver.  19),  and  could  not  but  convince  them  of  David's  integrity  and  future 
success  (ver.  25).  3.  It  took  place  under  circumstances  which  made  it  impossible 
for  Saul  to  do  him  harm.  David's  distrust  of  him  was  such  that  he  took  care  to  gain 
a  safe  position  before  speaking.  The  temptation  to  get  him  into  his  power  was 
always  too  strong-  for  Saul  to  resist.  He  was  not  morally,  but  physically,  restrained 
from  effecting  his  purpose  (oh.  xxv,  32).  David  could  have  destroyed  Saul,  but  he 
would  not ;  Saul  would  have  destroyed  David,  but  he  could  not ;  he  was  under  the 
dominion  of  a  depraved  will,  even  when  he  expressed  his  determination  to  abandon 
his  evil  designs,  and  seemed  to  himself  and  others  sincerely  penitent.  In  this  inter- 
view then  we  see — 

I.  The  conscious  integrity  of  an  upright  heart.  After  asking,  "Wherefore 
doth  my  lord  pursue  after  his  servant?"  &c.,  David  said,  "If  the  Lord  have  stirred 
thee  up  against  me,"  &c.  (vers.  19,  20)  ;  and  again,  "  The  Lord  render  to  every  man 
his  righteousness,"  &c.  (vers.  23,  24).  His  conscious  integrity  appears  in — 1. 
Earnestly  urging  the  adoption  of  proper  means  to  overcome  temptation.  "  Pray  to 
God  that  he  take  the  temptation  from  thee  "  (Bunsen).  "  Let  no  man  say  when  he 
is  tempted,  I  am  tempted  of  Q-od,"  &c.  (James  i.  13, 14).  But  God  often  affords  him 
opportunity  to  manifest  the  evil  that  is  in  his  heart,  with  a  view  to  his  conviction  of 
sin  and  turning  from  it ;  and  "  if  he  does  not  repent,  the  ^orma  in  which  sin  exhibits 
itself  are  no  longer  under  his  control,  but  under  God's  dispensation,  who  determines 
them  as  pleases  him,  as  accords  with  the  plan  of  his  government  of  the  world,  for 
his  own  honour,  and,  so  long  as  he  is  not  absolutely  rejected,  for  the  good  of  the 
sinner "  (^Hengstenberg).  And  he  has  respect  to  the  offering  that  is  presented  to 
him  in  nghteousness  (Gen,  iv.  7).  The  meat  offering  (rninchah)  here  meant  "  was 
appended  to  the  burnt  and  peace  offerings  to  show  that  the  object  of  such  offerings 
was  the  sanctification  of  the  people  by  f ruitfulness  in  well-doing,  and  that  without 
this  the  end  aimed  at  never  could  be  attained  "  (Fairbaim).  David  spoke  from  his 
deep  experience  of  temptation,  his  faithful  endeavour  after  holiness,  his  exalted 
estimation  of  the  Divine  favour  and  help,  and  was  as  desirous  that  Saul  should  stand 
in  a  right  relation  to  God  as  of  his  own  deliverance  from  persecution  (Ps.  cxli.  2). 
"  The  way  in  which  he  addresses  Saul  is  so  humble,  so  gentle,  and  so  reverent  that 
we  may  sufiSciently  thence  recognise  the  goodness  of  his  heart."  2.  Solemn  invoca- 
tion of  Divine  judgment  on  wicked  men  who  incite  to  wickedness.  "  If  it  be  the 
children  of  men,"  &c.  (ver.  19).  This  is  in  accordance  with  the  tone  which  pervades 
the  imprecatory  psalms,  and  should  be  interpreted  in  the  light  of  his  personal  conduct 
toward  Saul,  his  zeal  for  the  kingdom  and  righteousness  of  God,  the  facts  of  the 
Divine  treatment  of  evil  men,  similar  expressions  in  the  New  Testament  (Matt.  li. 
21  ;  xxiii.  13 — 39  ;  Acts  viii.  20 ;  1  Cor.  v.  6 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  4),  and  the  inferior  position 
occupied  by  saints  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation  (see  commentaries  on  the 
Psalms  by  Tholuck,  Perowne,  and  others).  "  When  David's  whole  career  is  intelli- 
gently and  fairly  viewed,  it  leaves  on  the  mind  the  impression  of  a  man  of  as  meek 
and  placable  a  temper  as  was  ever  associated  with  so  great  strength  of  will  and  such 
strong  passions"  (Binnie,  'The  Psalms').  "  David  is  the  Old  Testament  type  of  the 
inviolable  majesty  of  Christ,  and  therefore  his  imprecations  are  prophetic  of  the 
final  doom  of  the  hardened  enemies  of  Christ  and  his  Church.  As  such  they  are 
pimply  an  expansion  of  the  prayer,  '  Thy  kingdom  come.'  For  the  kingdom  of  God 
comes  not  only  by  the  showing  of  mercy  to  the  penitent,  but  also  by  3ie  executing 


608  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxvl  1—26 

of  judgment  on  the  impenitent"  (Kurtz).  S.  Fervent  entreaty  of  an  enemy  to 
abcmdon  his  unjust,  unpitying,  and  unworthy  dedgns.  "  Now,  therefore,"  &c.  (ver. 
20).  "  This  speech  of  David  was  thoroughly  suited  to  sharpen  Saul's  conscience  and 
lead  him  to  give  up  his  enmity,  if  he  still  had  an  ear  for  the  voice  of  truth  "  (Keil). 
i.  Gonjldently  appealing  to  the  perfect  justice  of  God  and  his  merciful  interposition 
on  his  behalf.  "  The  Lord  render  to  every  man,"  &c.  (vers.  23,  24).  This  is  not 
the  language  of  boastfulness  or  self- righteousness,  but  "  the  answer  of  a  good  con- 
Bcience  toward  God."  He  desired  that  God  would  deal  with  him  as  he  had  dealt  with 
others  (Ps.  vii.  4,  6),  and  fully  vindicate  his  "  righteousness  and  faithfulness  "  by 
delivering  him  "  out  of  all  tribulation."  Only  one  who  was  consciously  upright  in 
lieart  could  speak  thus ;  and  similar  expressions  often  occur  in  the  Psalms  (Ps.  xvii. 
1 — 5).  "  The  Psalmist  is  not  asserting  his  freedom  from  sin,  but  the  uprightness 
and  guilelessness  of  his  heart  toward  God.  He  is  no  hypocrite,  no  dissembler ;  he  is 
not  consciously  doing  wrong  "  (Perowne).  In  addition  to  the  eight  psalms  previously 
mentioned  as  referred  by  their  inscriptions  to  the  time  of  Saul's  persecution,  there 
are  two  others,  viz.,  Ps.  LXlll.,  '  Longing  in  the  wilderness  for  the  presence  of  God 
in  the  sanctuary '  (see  inscription ;  vers.  19,  20): — 

•'  0  God,  thou  art  my  God  ;  early  will  I  seek  thee. 
My  soul  thirsteth  for  thee,  my  flesh  pineth  for  thes. 
In  a  dry  and  weary  land  where  no  water  is. " 

Ps.  xvni.,  '  An  idealised  representation  of  the  experience  of  Divine  deliverances ' 
(see  inscription ;  2  Sam.  xxii.).  Other  psalms  have  also  been  referred  by  many  to 
the  same  period  as  "  the  fruitful  soil  of  David's  psalm  poetry,"  viz.,  Ps.  vi.,  xi.,  xii., 
xiii.,  xvii.,  xxii.,  xxvii.jXxxi,  XXXV.,  xl., lvi.,lviii.,  lix.,  lxiv.,lxix.,  cix.,  cxx.,  cxl.,  cxli. 
II.  The  UNCONSoions  insincerity  of  an  evil  heart.  "And  Saul  said,  I  have 
sinned,"  &c.  (vers.  21,  26).  He  acknowledged  the  sin  and  folly  of  his  past  conduct 
(though  not  with  tears,  as  before),  invited  David  to  return,  and  promised  no  more  to 
do  him  harm,  uttered  a  benediction  upon  him,  and  predicted  that  he  would  "do  great 
things  and  prevail"  (omitting,  however,  any  allusion  to  his  royal  dignity,  as  on  the 
former  occasion) — "  at  once  a  vindication  of  David's  conduct  in  the  past,  and  a  fore- 
cast of  his  glory  in  the  future."  He  doubtless  meant  at  the  time  what  he  said,  but 
it  is  to  be  observed  that — 1.  The  most  corrupt  heart  is  capable  of  good  ivipressions, 
emotions,  and  purposes.  History  and  observation  afford  innumerable  instances  of 
the  fact.  2.  It  is  apt  to  he  the  suly'ect  of  them,  under  special  circumstances  (ch.-xxiv. 
16 — 22),  and  particularly  when  convinced  of  the  futility  of  sinful  endeavours,  and 
restrained  by  a  power  which  cannot  be  efiectually  resisted.  "  Behold,  thou  hast 
spoken  and  done  evil  things  as  thou  couldest "  (Jer.  iii.  5).  So  long  as  the  power  to 
do  evil  things  is  possessed,  it  is  exercised ;  but  when  it  is  taken  away  men  often  seem 
sincerely  penitent  and  fully  determined  to  do  good.  But  how  seldom  does  the 
"goodness  "  exhibited  in  such  circumstances  prove  really  sincere  and  enduring  I  3. 
The  experience  of  them  is  no  certain  evidence  to  a  man  himself  or  others  of  a  right 
state  of  heart.  They  are  liable  to  deceive,  and  can  only  be  depended  upon  when 
expressed  and  confirmed  by  corresponding  and  continuous  acts.  Strong  feeling  is 
often  temporary  and  never  transformed  into  settled  principle.  4.  T/ie  removal  of  the 
influences  by  which  they  are  produced,  and  the  occurrence  of  favourable  opportunities 
for  the  manifestation  of  the  true  character,  commonly  prove  its  utter  insincerity.  It 
was  thus  with  Saul.  He  did  not  repent  in  deeds  of  righteousness,  nor  "  bring  forth 
fruits  meet  for  repentance."  On  the  contrary,  ho  soon  afterwards  renewed  his  per- 
secution, and  ceased  not  until  David  was  wholly  beyond  his  power  (ch.  xxvii.  1). 
"  They  return,  but  not  to  the  most  High :  they  are  like  a  deceitful  bow  "  (Hosea  vii. 
16).  He  was  under  the  dominion  of  an  evil  disposition  and  depraved  will,  and  witc 
•veiy  broken  promise  of  amendment  his  moral  condition  became  worse,  until  ho  8an< 
into  despair.     "  The  only  good  thing  in  the  world  is  a  good  will "  (Kant^ 

"  But  ill  for  him  who,  bettering  not  with  time, 
Corrupts  the  strength  of  heaven-descended  Will, 
And  ever  weaker  grows  through  acted  crime, 
Or  seeming  genial  venial  fault, 
Becurring  and  suggesting  still  1 


OH.  XXVI.  1—25.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  409 

H«  Menu  as  one  whose  footstepa  halt, 

Toilinc  in  immeasurable-Band, 

And  o^r  a  weaiy,  ^ultiy  land. 

Far  beneath  a  blazing  vaolt, 

Sown  in  a  wrinkle  of  the  monstrons  hill, 

The  city  sparkles  like  a  grain  of  salt "  (Tennyson^  A 

Ver.  21.  (The  hill  of  Hachilah.) — Playing  the  fool.  "  Behold,  I  have  played 
the  fool,  and  have  erred  exceedingly."  At  his  first  wrong  step  it  was  said  to  Sanl 
by  Samuel,  "  Thou  hast  done  f  oolishljr "  (ch.  xiii.  13)  ;  and  now  (a  man  o£  about 
sixty  years  of  age),  looking  back  upon  a  long  course  of  disobedience  and  self-will, 
and  more  especially  upon  his  recent  persecution  of  David,  he  himself  said,  "  I  have 
sinned.  .  .  Behold,  I  have  done  foolishly,  and  have  erred  exceedingly^."  "  There  is 
no  sinner  so  hardened  but  that  God  gives  him  now  and  then  a  ray  of  illumination  to 
show  him  all  his  error."  And  under  its  influence  many  a  man,  in  reviewing  the  past, 
has  been  constrained  to  make  a  similar  confession.  With  reference  to  the  case  of 
Saul,  a  man  plays  the  fool — 1.  When  he  suffert  illusive  thoughts  and  dn/ul  passiont 
to  find  a  place  within  him.  This  was  the  root  of  Saul's  wasted  and  miseraole  life. 
How  different  would  it  have  been  if  he  had  adopted  proper  means  to  expel  Buch 
thoughts  and  passions  from  his  breast,  and  prevent  their  return  I  "  How  long  shall 
thy  vain  thoughts  lodge  within  thee  ?  "  (Jer.  iv.  14).  2.  When  he  listens  to  the  false 
represeiUations  of  wicked  men,  insinuating,  it  may  be,  suspicions  of  bis  best  friend, 
and  urging  him  to  regard  him  as  his  worst  enemy  (ch.  xxiv.  9).  3.  When  he  acts  in 
opposition  to  what  he  knows  to  he  right.  Saul  had  done  so  continually,  following  the 
impulses  of  "  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,"  instead  of  the  dictates  of  reason  and  con- 
science. "  Therefore  to  him  that  knoweth  to  do  good,  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin  " 
(James  iv.  17).  4.  When  he  rests  in  feelings  merely,  and  does  not  translate  them 
into  deeds  (ch.  xxiv.  17).  They  are  "dead  without  works.""  Every  delay  to  act 
in  accordance  with  them  weakens  their  power,  renders  it  less  likely  that  they  will  ever 
be  acted  upon,  and  prepares  the  way  for  the  return  of  the  "  evil  spirit."  6.  When 
he  makes  good  resolutions  and  immediatdy  breaks  them  (ver.  21),  thereby  destroying 
his  moral  power,  and  hardening  himself  in  sin.  6.  When  he  contends  against  the 
Divine  purposes  in  the  vain  hope  of  succeeding  (ver.  25).  Sooner  or  later'he  must 
be  crushed.  "  Who  hath  hardened  himself  against  him  and  prospered  ?  "  (Job  ix. 
4).  7.  When  he  expects  to  find  happiness  except  in  connection,  with  holiness.  The 
illusion  is  dispelled,  if  not  before,  at  the  hour  of  death  and  the  dawn  of  eternity, 
and  he  has  to  confess  his  folly  when  it  is  too  late  to  repair  it. — t). 

Ver.  21.— .4  fool  returns  to  hit  folly.  I.  Thb  Biblb  is  full  of  eeduplioation. 
It  teaches  by  line  upon  line,  precept  upon  precept,  and  narrative  upon  narrative. 
There  are  repetitions  of  the  same  story  or  song.  There  are  also  separate  and  inde- 
pendent narratives  which  go  over  similar  ground,  and  teach  the  same  lessons,  the 
second  confirming  the  first.  Joseph  is  described  ns  having  had  duplicate  dreams 
with  one  and  the  same  meaning.  So  also  Pharaoh.  Nebuchadnezzar's  dream  of 
empires  is  followed  by  Daniel's  dream  of  the  same.  And  there  are  duplicate  parables 
of  Jesus  Christ.  Then  actual  events  described  are  followed  by  other  events  so  closely 
resembling  them  that  they  mi^ht  almost  be  taken  for  the  same — e.  g.  Abraham's 
weakness,  Sarah's  danger,  and  Pharaoli's  respect  for  the  sanctity  of  marriage  (Gen. 
xii.)  seem  to  be  all  repeated  (Gen.  xx. ),  with  the  Abimelech  of  Gerar  substituted  f  oi 
the  Pharaoh  of  Egypt.  And  then  all  the  incidents  are  told  again  of  Isaac  and 
Bebekah,  and  the  Abimelech  of  their  time  (Gen.  xxvi.).  We  have  Moses  fetching 
water  from  the  rock  in  Horeb,  and  the  same  prophet  fetching  water  from  a  rock  at 
Eadesh  Bamea;  Jesus  Christ  anointed  by  a  woman  in  the  house  of  Simon  the 
Pharisee,  and  the  same  Divine  Master  anointed  by  a  woman  in  the  house  of  Simon 
the  leper.  Again,  we  have  Jesus  feeding  6000  men,  besides  women  and  children, 
from  a  small  stock  of  bread  and  fish,  and  then  the  same  Lord  feeding  4000, 
besides  women  and  children,  from  a  similar  inadequate  supply.  The  similar- 
ity of  the  story  in  this  chapter  to  that  which  we  have  read  in  the  twenty-fourth 
chapter  of  this  book  need  not  surprise  ns,  or  raise  a  suspicion  that  they  are  inde- 
pendent reports  of  the  same  adventure  admitted  into  the  pages  of  the  history  by  a 


610  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  [c«.  xxn.  1—26. 


clumsy  compiler.  The  reduplication  is  in  hannony  with  Biblical  nsag^ ;  nay,  moM, 
it  is  in  harmony  with  historical  truth. 

II.  History  is  full  of  repetition.  In  private  life  the  same  conditions  recur 
with  startling  precision ;  and  in  public  affairs  the  same  emergencies  occur  again  and 
again,  and  lead  to  the  same  line  of  action,  the  same  remedies,  and  even  the  same 
blunders.  Why  should  it  be  thought  incredible,  or  even  improbable,  that  Saul  fell 
back  into  his  former  mood  of  hostility  to  David  ?  Alas,  what  is  more  common  than 
that  fools  forget  admonition,  and  return  to  their  folly ;  sinners,  after  promises  of 
amendment,  relapse  into  their  old  sins  ?  The  amendment  goes  against  secret  inclin- 
ation, whereas  the  sin  indulges  some  constitutional  propensity  or  passion.  So  it  is 
tixat  a  man  who  has  grown  too  fond  of  strong  drink,  after  abstaining  from  it  for  a 
time,  goes  back  to  his  bottle.  A  libertine,  after  a  short  attempt  to  live  purely,  goes 
back  to  his  intrigues.  And  in  like  manner  Saul,  being  passionately  jealous,  forbore 
from  the  pursuit  of  David  only  for  a  season,  and  then,  at  the  first  ofEer  of  help  from 
the  Ziphites,  went  back  to  his  cruel  pursuit  of  the  son  of  Jesse.  There  are  cases  in 
which  history  repeats  itself  on  the  favourable  side,  in  a  return  to  goodness ;  but  such 
is  man,  that  the  more  frequent  experience  is  of  a  return  to  evil  courses,  obliterating 
the  very  traces  of  a  short-lived,  superficial  repentance. 

III.  SUFEBFICIAL  REPENTANCE  MAT  VB  EXPECTED  TO  END    IN  RELAFSK.      We  mean 

by  superficial  repentance  a  mere  emotianal  effect,  while  the  root  of  sin  lies  nndis- 
turbed  in  the  unrenewed  will.  A  man  of  impulsive  constitution  can  repent  in  this 
fashion  again  and  again,  with  no  conscious  insincerity,  and  yet  remain  at  heart  the 
same ;  nay,  grow  worse  in  the  very  habit  of  lamenting  without  abandoning  his  beset- 
ting sin.  There  is  some  indication  of  such  a  falling  off  in  Saul.  On  the  first  occasion, 
when  his  life  was  spared  at  Engedi,  he  shed  tears  over  David's  magnanimity  and  his 
own  folly,  and  he  openly  confessed  that  the  man  whom  he  had  sought  to  kill  was 
more  righteous  than  himself,  and  was  destined  to  fill  the  throne.  On  the  second  occa- 
sion, at  Hachilah,  he  was  ready  again  to  confess  his  fault  and  to  promise  abandonment 
of  his  unnatural  and  unjust  pursuit  of  David,  but  we  hear  nothing  of  tears.  There  is 
a  ring  of  vexation  rather  than  of  contrition  about  his  confession :  "  I  have  sinned.  I 
have  played  the  fool."  Cases  of  superficial  repentance  leading  to  relapse  and  dete- 
rioration are  not  rare.  Emotion  fades  away  ;  and  some  temptation  is  sure  to  oome, 
as  the  Ziphites  came  to  Saul  and  induced  him  to  resume  what  he  had  renounced.  So 
it  happens  that  converts  from  among  the  heathen,  who  are  changed  only  on  the  surface, 
and  not  in  heart,  but  are  baptized  and  endure  well  for  a  while,  relapse  under  temptation 
into  their  old  customs.  Criminals  in  our  own  country,  who  have  to  all  appearance 
sincerely  repented,  and  have,  after  undergoing  punishment,  begun  a  new  course  of 
life,  relapse  after  a  wliile  into  the  old  roguery,  tired  of  honest  industry.  In  fact, 
it  is  not  so  difiicult  to  induce  men  to  turn  over  a  new  leaf  as  to  keep  them,  after 
turning  it,  from  turning  back  again. 

IV.  One  mat  much  admire  noblb  conduct  and  yet  never  imitate  it.  Saul 
retained  enough  of  his  early  magnanimity  to  feel  the  moral  superiority  of  David's 
behaviour — his  grand  forbearance  and  chivalrous  loyalty.  He  acknowledged  the 
contrast  between  David's  conduct  and  his  own,  and  yet  he  never  imitated  what 
he  admired.  He  turned  back  from  the  pursuit,  as  he  had  done  before,  but  ho  did 
not  reinstate  his  son-in-law  in  the  honour  to  which  he  was  entitled,  or  relieve  him 
of  the  harassing  sense  of  insecurity.  So  we  often  see  that  it  is  one  thing  to 
recognise  and  applaud  what  is  good,  another  thing  to  do  it.  How  many  admire 
great  and  generous  characters  in  history,  poetry,  and  romance,  and  yet  themselves 
remain  small-minded  and  ungenerous  I  How  niuny  applaud  good  men  and  kind 
actions,  and  yet  continue  in  their  own  bad  habits  and  selfish  lines  of  conduct, 
without  any  vigorous  effort  to  follow  what  they  praise  I  After  all,  a  man  is  him- 
self, and  not  another,  and  as  his  heart  is,  so  will  his  action  be.  Unless  the  tree  be 
made  good  from  the  root,  it  is  vain  to  expect  good  fruit  on  its  branches. 

V.  A  self-accuser  mat  be  prouder  than  one  who  protests  his  innocence. 
A  careless  reader  might  think  better  of  Saul  confessing  his  folly  so  frankly  than  of 
David  appealing  to  God  for  his  integrity.  But  he  who  appeared  so  humble  was  still 
proud  and  obstinate,  and  he  who  maintained  his  rectitude  was  of  a  lowly  and  tender 
heart.     A  certain  amount  of  self-reproach  is  quite  easy  to  a  pliant  nature,  which 


OH.  xxvii.  1—11]  THB  FIRST  BOOK  0?  SAMUIL, 


fit 


takes  emotion  quickly  on  its  surf  ac«,  and  yet  ia  qnite  unchanged  beneath.  Such  was 
Saol'a  confession,  which  did  not  for  a  moment  change  his  character  or  delay  his  fate. 
On  the  other  hand,  aelf-yindication  against  misrepresentation  and  nnjust  treatment 
may  issue  from  a  man  who  entirely  abhon  seU-righteousness  and  self-praise.  It  is 
this  which  we  trace  in  David  and  the  prophets ;  in  the  Apostle  Paul,  and  in  the 
greatest  and  lowliest,  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  A  servant  of  God  breaks  no  rule  of 
humility  when  he  repels  calumny,  and  asserts  his  innocence  or  hia  integrity.  In 
this  view  read  the  seventeenth  and  eighteenth  Psalms,  the  latter  of  which  has  a  signi- 
ficant title — "  Of  David,  the  servant  of  God."  All  the  Psalms  are  for  the  servants  of 
the  Lord.  Sometimes,  alas,  they  can  chant  none  but  those  which  are  penitential, 
because  sin  has  prevailed  against  them  and  defiled  them.  But  in  their  experience 
of  the  mercies  and  deliverances  of  the  Lord  they  can  sing  praises ;  and  in  tiie  con- 
sciousness of  the  cleanness  of  their  hands,  their  innocence  and  integrity  of  purpose 
and  action  towards  their  feUow-men,  they  may  even  venture  to  go  through  the 
hundred  and  nineteenth  Psalm  in  all  that  wonderful  strain  of  devout  feeling  which 
combines  with  cries  for  Divine  pardon  and  direction,  assertions  of  loyal  obedieno* 
and  entira  aincerity. — F. 

EXPOSITION. 
David  mnM  a  Rkfuoic  at  Ziklag  (ob.  xxvn.). 


CHAPTER  XXVIL 

Datid  again  sebks  feoteotion  at  Oath 
(vers.  1 — 4).  Ver.  1.— David  said  in  his 
heart.  Hebrew,  "  to  his  heart,"  to  himself 
(see  ch.  L  13).  I  shall  perish  by  the  hand. 
The  verb  is  that  used  in  ch.  xiL  26  ;  xxvi. 
10,  but  instead  of  hythe  hand  the  Hebrew 
has  into  the  hand.  Hence  the  versions  gen- 
erally render  it,  "I  shall  some  day  fall  into 
the  hand,"  Really  it  is  a  prceffnans  con- 
structio:  "  I  shall  perish  by  faUiug  into  the 
hand  of  SauL"  It  was  the  second  treachery 
of  the  Ziphites  which  made  David  feel  that, 
surrounded  as  he  was  by  spies,  there  was  no 
safety  for  him  but  in  taking  that  course  to 
which,  as  he  so  sorrowfully  complained  to 
Saul,  his  enemies  were  driving  him  (ch. 
xxvi  19).  His  words  there  show  that  the 
thought  of  quitting  Judaea  was  already  in  his 
mind,  so  that  this  chapter  follows  naturally 
on  ch.xxyi,  and  not,  as  some  have  argued, 
upon  ch.  xxiv. 

Yen.  2 — 4. — ^Aehish,  the  son  of  Maoch. 
l^o  doubt  the  Achish  of  ch.  xxL  10  ;  but  if 
the  same  as  Achish,  son  of  Maachah,  in  1 
Kings  ii.  39,  as  is  probably  the  case,  he  must 
have  Ured  to  a  good  old  age.  As  it  is  said 
in  1  Chron.  xviii  1  that  David  conquered  the 
Philistines,  and  took  from  them  Gath  and 
other  towns,  it  would  seem  that  he  stiU 
permitted  Achish  to  remain  there  as  a  tribu- 
tary king,  while  Ziklag  he  kept  as  his  private 
property  (ver.  6).  On  the  former  occasion, 
when  David  was  alone,  Achish  had  paid 
him  but  scant  courtesy ;  but  now  that  he 
came  with  600  wamors,  each  with  his 
household,  and,  therefore,  with  numerous 
followers,  he  shows  him  every  respect,  and 
for  the  time  David  and  his  men  settle  at 
Oath,  and  Sanl  gives  ever  his  pursuit  know- 


ing that  If  he  followed  him  Into  Philistine 
territory  he  would  provoke  a  war,  for  which 
he  was  not  now  prepared.  It  has  been 
pointed  out  that  David  probably  introduced 
from  Gath  the  style  of  music  called  Gittith 
(Fs.  viil,  Ixxxl,  Ixxxiv.,  titles). 

Achish  assigns  Ziklao  to  Davis  as  a 
EESiDENCB  (vers.  6—7).  Veri  6,  6. — If  I 
have  now  found  grace  in  thine  eyes.  Now 
is  not  an  adverb  of  time,  but  means  "  I 
pray,"  i  «.  If  verily  I  have  found  favour 
with  thee.  David's  position  was  one  of 
difficulty.  The  fame  of  hia  exploits,  and 
of  Saul's  vain  pursuit  of  him,  made  Achish 
no  doubt  regard  him  as  a  bitter  foe  of  the 
Israelite  king,  and  expect  valuable  assistance 
from  him  ;  whereas  David  was  unwilling 
to  take  up  arms  even  against  Saul,  and  much 
less  against  his  own  countrymen.  He  is 
anxious,  therefore,  to  get  away^from  a  too 
close  observation  of  his  acts,  and  requests 
Achish  to  give  him  a  place  in  some  town  in 
the  country.  Hebrew,  "a  place  in  one  of 
the  cities  in  the  field."  "Why  should  thy 
servant,  &c.  David's  presence  with  so  large  a 
following  must  in  many  ways  have  been  incon- 
venient as  well  as  expensive  to  Achish.  In 
some  small  countiy  town  David  and  his  men 
would  maintain  themselves.  Achish  accord- 
ingly gives  him  Ziklag,  a  small  place  assigned 
first  of  all  to  Judah  (Josh.  xv.  31),  but 
subsequently  to  Simeon  (ibid.  xix.  5).  Its 
exact  position  is  not  known.  It  seems  to 
have  been  valued  by  David's  successors,  as 
it  is  noted  that  it  still  belonged  unto  the 
kings  of  Judah.  This  phrase  proves  that 
the  Book  of  Samuel  must  have  been  com- 
piled at  a  data  subsequent  to  the  revolt  of 
Jeroboam,  while  the  concluding  words,  unto 
this  day,  equally  plainly  indicat*  •  date 
prior  to  the  Babylonian  ezil*. 


619 


THB  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[CH.  XXVII.  1 — 12 


V«.  T.— A  fUl  year.  Hebrew,  "dayi." 
SaaU  argneB  in  favonr  of  its  meaning  gomt 
days,  and  Josephoa  says  the  time  of  David'i 
Btay  in  Fhilistia  was  "four  monthi  and 
twenty  days ; "  but  already  in  cIl  i  8 ;  ii 
19,  we  have  had  the  phrase  "from  days 
day-ward"  in  the  sense  of  yearly,  and  com_p. 
Levit.  xxT.  29  ;  Judges  xvii  10 ;  also  ibvi. 
xix.  2,  where  the  A.  \.  translates  the  Hebrew 
daysfwir  mmUhs  as  meaning  ' '  four  months  " 
onfy.  Probably,  as  here,  it  is  a  year  and 
four  months,  though  the  omission  of  the 
coninnction  ia  a  difficulty .  So  too  for  ' '  after 
a  tune"  (ihid.  xiv.  8)  it  should  be  "after  a 
year" — Hebrew,  after  days. 

Expeditions  of  David  fbom  Zielao 
(vers.  8-12).  Ver.  8.— Went  *p.  The 
Geshnrites  iiihabited  the  high  table -land 
which  forms  the  north-eastern  portion  of 
the  wilderness  of  Paran.  Like  the  Eenites, 
they  seem  to  have  broken  up  into  scattered 
tribf  ?  as  we  find  one  portion  of  them  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  Bashan  (Dent,  iii  14), 
and  another  in  Syria  (2  Sam.  rv.  8).  Pro- 
bably, like  the  Amalekitea,  they  were  a 
Bedouin  race,  and  so  great  wanderers. 
Hence  the  verb  translated  invaded  is  liter- 
ally "spread  themselves  out"  like  a  fan, 
so  as  to  enclose  these  nomads,  whose  safety 
lay  in  flight.  Gemtes.  The  written  tert 
has  Girzites,  which  the  Kri  has  changed 
into  Gezrites,  probably  from  a  wish  to  con- 
nect a  name  never  mentioned  elsewhere  with 
the  town  of  Gezer.  But  Gezer  lay  far  away 
in  the  west  of  Ephraim,  and  the  connection 
suggested  in  modem  times  of  the  Girzites 
with  Mount  Gerizim  in  Central  Palestine  is 
more  probable.  They  would  thus  be  the 
remains  of  a  once  more  powerful  people, 
dispossessed  by  the  Amorites,  but  who  were 
now  probably  a  veiy  feeble  remnant.  For 
thou  nations,  &c.  The  grammar  and  trans- 
lation of  this  clanse  are  both  full  of  diffi- 
culties, but  the  following  rendering  is  perhaps 
the  least  objectionable :  "  For  these  were 
(the  families)  inhabiting  the  land,  which 
were  of  old,  as  thou  goest  towards  Shur,"  &c. 
Families  must  be  supplied  because  the  par- 
ticiple intiahiting  ia  feminine.  What,  then, 
the  narrator  means  to  say  is  that  these  throe 
Bedouin  tribes  were  the  aboriginal  inhabit- 
ants of  the  north-western  portion  of  the 
rlesert  between  Eg5'pt  and  South  Palestine 
On  the  Amalekites  see  ch.  zv  2.  We 
need  not  wonder  at  finding  them  mentioned 
again  so  soon  after  Saul's  expedition.  A 
race  of  nomads  would  sustain  no  great  harm 
from  an  expedition  which  soon  began  to 
occupy  itself  with  capturing  cattle  On 
Shnr  see  ch.  xv.  7. 

Yen.  9, 10. — David  smote  the  land.  These 
expeditions  were  made  partly  to  occupy  his 
men,  but  chiefly  to  obtain  the  means  of 
s  ubsifteaee.     They  also  seem  to  have  brought 


David  gnat  renown,  forin  1  Chron.  ziL  1 — S2 

we  read  of  warriurs  fivm  far  distant  tribes 
coming  to  him  to  swell  his  forces,  and  the 
enthusiasm  for  Um  was  even  such  that  a 
band  of  men  swam  across  the  Jordan  to 
join  him  (ibid.  ver.  16) ;  while  others  from 
Manasseh  deserted  to  him  from  Saul's  army 
before  the  battle  of  Mount  Gilboa,  so  thai 
at  last  he  had  with  him  "  a  great  host,  like 
the  host  of  God"  (ibid.  vers.  19—21).  He 
came  to  Achish.  To  give  him  a  portion 
of  the  spoiL  And  Achish  said.  Like  the 
verb  wetii  up  in  ver.  8,  the  word  indicates 
repeated  action.  David  made  many  expedi- 
tions against  these  wild  tribes,  and  on  each 
occasion,  when  presenting  himself  at  Gath, 
Achish  would  inquire.  Whither  have  ye 
made  a  road — t.  e.  an  inroad,  or  a  raid — to- 
day 1  As  it  stands  the  Hebrew  means,  "  Do 
not  make  an  inroad  to-day ; "  but  the  cor- 
rection of  the  text  given  in  the  A.  V.  has 
considerable  authori^  fivm  the  versions.  The 
Jeratuneelites,  mentioned  again  in  ch.  xzz. 
29,  were  the  descendants  of  Hezron,  the 
firstborn  of  Pharez,  the  son  of  Jud^  (1 
Chron.  iL  9),  and  so  were  one  of  the  great 
famiUes  into  which  the  tribe  of  Judah  was 
divided.  Apparently  they  occupied  the  most 
southerly  position  of  its  territory.  The  Ken- 
ites  (see  on  ch.  xv.  6)  are  here  described  as 
being  in  close  alliance  with  the  men  of  Judah. 
Probably  they  lived  under  their  protection, 
and  paid  them  tribute.  The  south  is  literally 
"the  Kegeb,"  the  dry  land,  so  called  from  the 
absence  of  streams  (comp.  Fs.  cxxvl  i),  which 
formed  not  only  the  southernmost  part  of  the 
territory  of  Judah,  but  extended  far  into  the 
Arabian  desert.  Achish  natnraU;  understood 
it  as  the  proper  name  forthat  part  of  the  Negeb 
which  belonged  to  Judah,  whereas  David 
meant  it  as  it  is  translated  in  the  A.  Y., 
where  there  is  no  obscurity  as  to  its  meaning. 
Vers.  11,  12.— To  bring  tidings.  The 
A.  Y.  is  wrong  in  adding  the  word  tidings, 
as  the  Hebrew  means  "to  bring  them  to 
Gath."  Prisoners  to  be  sold  as  slaves  formed 
an  important  part  of  the  spoil  of  war  in 
ancient  times.  But  David,  acting  in  accord- 
ance with  the  cruel  customs  of  warfare  in  his 
days,  and  which  he  practised  even  when  he 
had  no  urgent  necessity  as  here  (see  2  Sam. 
viiL  2),  put  all  his  prisoners  to  death,  lest, 
if  taken  to  Gath  and  sold,  they  should 
betray  him.  The  A.  Y.  makes  his  conduct 
oven  more  sanguinary,  and  supposes  that  he 
sufTored  none  to  escape.  And  so  will  be  his 
manner  all  the  while  he  dwelleth.  The 
Hebrew  is  "  he  dwelt,"  and  thu.s  the  render- 
ing of  the  A.  Y.,  though  supported  by  the 
Masoretic  punctuation,  is  untenable.  But 
tins  punctuation  is  of  comparatively  recent 
date,  and  of  moderate  authority.  The  words 
really  belong  to  the  narrator,  and  should  be 
translated,  "And  so  was  bis  manner  all  Um 


OH.  ZXTU.  1—18.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


51S 


dayi  that  he  dwelt  in  the  field  of  the  Philis- 
tinei."  It  seems  that  Achish  was  completely 
deceived  by  David,  and  supposing  that  his 
conduct  would  make  him  hateful  for  ever  to 


his  own  tribesmen  of  Judah,  and  so  preclude 
his  return  home,  he  rejoiced  in  him  as  one 
who  would  always  remain  his  faithful  vaual 
and  adherent. 


HOMILETICS. 

Vers.  1—4. — Loss  of  faUh.  The  facto  Bre — 1.  David,  fearing  lest  he  should  fall 
jy  the  hand  of  Saul,  deems  it  better  to  go  to  the  land  of  the  Philistines.  2.  He  and 
his  family  and  attendants  are  received  by  Achish  at  Gath.  3.  Saul,  hearing  of  this, 
seeks  him  no  more.  There  is  a  latent  thought  in  many  minds  that  the  great  and  good 
men  of  whom  the  Bible  speaks  ought  to  figure  in  Scripture  as  only  models  of  excel- 
lence, and  hence  a  sense  of  disappointment  is  experienced  when,  in  its  fidelity  to  facts, 
the  Bible  relates  their  failings  and  sins.  Here  we  have  David  in  despair  of  preserving 
his  life  by  the  means  hitherto  adopted ;  and  in  his  evidently  long  and  painful  medi- 
tations on  the  path  of  prudence  (ch.  xxvi.  19 ;  of.  xxvii.  1)  he  comes  to  the  conclu- 
sion to  avoid  collision  with  Saul  by  fleeing  to  an  enemy's  country.  This  is  not 
absolute  despair,  but  despair  of  preserving  life  for  the  realising  of  one's  vc<cation 
by  the  means  consistent  with  that  vocation  and  the  character  suited  to  it.  loss  of 
faith  in  righteous  means  is,  so  far,  loss  of  faith  in  Grod. 

I.  Protracted  and  painful  conflicts  may  be  involved  in  attaining  to  the 
HIGHEST  PUEPOSB  IN  LIFE.  To  become  king  in  Israel  and  bless  the  world  with  wise 
rulership  was  the  high  purpose  revealed  to  David  ;  and  for  moral  reasons  the  long 
discipline  of  trial  was  inevitable.  The  position  into  which  he  was  often  brought 
seemed  to  render  the  accomplishment  of  life's  purpose  impossible,  and  the  nearer  the 
goal  the  more  severe  the  risks  of  life.  The  more  numerous  his  men  and  able  his 
captains,  the  greater  difficulty  in  preventing-  collision  with  Saul,  and  the  more  im- 
possible to  find  food  apart  from  trespass  on  property.  A  righteous  cause  was  there- 
fore a  suffering  cause.  This  is  the  case  with  us.  Often  Christians  have  been  evi- 
dently called  to  a  work  for  God,  and  yet  become  so  beset  with  perils  that  the  end  for 
which  they  live  seems  impossible  of  realisation.  How  the  heart  becomes  pained  and 
oppressed  with  incessant  struggle  with  evils  that  stand  in  the  way  of  a  rise  to  per- 
fect holiness  I  The  enemy  is  ever  upon  us,  and  humanly  speaking  it  seems  as  thoagh 
we  some  day  shall  fall  by  his  hand  in  spite  of  all  endeavours  of  the  past. 

II.  There  are  recognised  means  bt  which  the  highest  purpose  of  life  is  to 
BE  attained.  David  was  to  wait  God's  time,  and  not  force  the  hand  of  providence. 
To  make  such  movements  as  to  avoid  collision  with  Saul,  to  look  up  to  God  for  pro- 
mised or  implied  help  when,  in  spite  of  care,  life  is  threatened,  and  to  seize  occasions 
for  softening  the  heart  of  his  foe,  even  if  for  a  season  only — these  means  hitherto  had 
been  honoured  with  success,  and,  so  far  as  we  can  see,  were  the  only  lawful  means. 
In  attaining  to  our  ultimate  position  as  Christians  we  have  to  follow  the  spiritual 
methods  of  the  New  Testament  in  humble  dependence  on  God — watchfulness,  absten- 
tion from  evil,  evasion  of  deadly  arrows  and  poison  of  adders,  and  whatever  will  keep 
the  soul  holy  and  true  for  Christ.  In  doing  our  work  in  the  world  we  have  to  avoid 
falling  into  the  power  of  the  great  enemy  by  severe  simplicity,  love  of  truth,  spirit- 
uality of  mind,  and  prayerful  use  of  the  gospel.  So,  in  reference  to  any  specific  holy 
end  in  view,  the  means  used  are  to  be  in  harmony  with  the  goodness  of  the  end.  We 
are  not  to  do  evil  that  good  may  come. 

III.  Under  the  pressure  and  pain  op  long  conflict  wb  become  exposed  to 
THE  temptation  TO  SEEK  BELIEF  BT  NEW  METHODS.  Probably  some  degree  of  mental 
and  physical  exhaustion,  accompanied  with  increasing  worries  of  providing  for  a  large 
following,  laid  David  open  to  the  thought  of  fighting  the  battle  with  his  difficulties 
on  new  ground.  There  is  a  risk  to  the  cultivation  of  our  spiritual  life  arising  from  the 
weariness  consequent  on  long  trial.  The  tension  may  seem  to  justify  and  necessitate 
diminished  watchfulness  and  prayer — virtually  a  departure  to  new  ground.  In  work 
for  Christ,  good  men,  when  oppressed  and  worn  down,  and  not  attaining  to  their  goal, 
are  induced  to  think  of  expedients  hitherto  not  approved,  and  apparently  more  easy  in 
•pplication.  This  temptation  gains  force  when,  amidst  the  mental  confusion  inciden* 
to  weakness  and  dissppointmant,  the  ralu*  of  the  securities  given  na  by  God  is  not 

1  SIM.  IK 


614  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xrra.  1— If 

duly  aasessed.  More  oongideratton  on  the  part  of  David  of  what  eecuritj  was  implied 
in  his  being  the  anointed,  and  in  the  repeated  aBSuiance  of  Ood's  intention  to  rails 
him  to  the  throne,  would  nave  induced  the  conviction  that,  using  ordinary  means  in 
Judah,  he  imut  be  safe  from  SauL  Temptations  gain  power  when  we  fail  to  consider 
that  the  promises  of  salvation  and  of  blessing  on  our  toil  are  yea  and  amen  in  Christ 

JeBUB. 

IV.  A  SLIGHT  OAIXTINO  WITH  TEMPTATION  DUEINO  A  LONG  CONFLIOT  MAT  ISSUE  IN 

A  NEGLECT  OK  PBAYEB  FOE  GUIDANCE  AND  BtTPPOBT.  The  fall  of  good  men  is  Seen, 
but  the  real  causes  are  not.  The  probability  is  that  during  his  absorption  in  details 
he  may  have  lost  the  spirit  of  devotion  which  hitherto  had  distinguished  him,  and 
hence  his  decision  in  this  case  without  seeking  coimsel  by  the  Urim.  The  secret 
departure  of  the  heart  from  Ood  is  fraught  with  mischief  and  trouble.  We  then 
devise  means  of  our  own  and  distrust  those  which  God  has  blessed.  Then  it  is  that 
we  become  faint  and  despondent  and  impatient,  and,  while  not  renouncing  our  life's 
calling  of  God,  yet  we  pursue  it  in  a  manner  inconsistent  with  our  profession.  Near 
to  God  in  private  life,  humble  dependence  on  his  daily  strength  and  guidance,  this 
alone  f osten  faith  in  his  wisdom  and  protection,  and  saves  from  recourse  to  expedients 
that  reflect  on  his  care. 

General  lessons : — 1.  Temporary  ease  in  a  righteous  cause  may  mean  loss  of  spiritual 
power  and  a  beginning  of  disaster.  2.  A  course  of  duty  hitherto  successful  for  the 
specific  purpose  in  view,  though  very  painful,  ought  never  to  be  exchanged  for  an- 
other line  of  conduct.  3.  If  we  would  endure  hardness  as  good  soldiers  we  must  be 
one  in  fellowship  with  the  Captain  of  our  salvation.  '  4.  In  the  service  of  God  the 
weight  of  evidence  is  in  favour  of  confidence  and  against  fear,  and  we  misread  God's 
word  and  discipline  when  fear  prevails. 

Vers.  6 — 12, — The  perUs  of  expediency .  The  facts  are — 1.  David,  being  unwilling 
to  live  in  the  royal  city,  seeks  and  obtains  Ziklag  as  his  place  of  abode.  2.  During 
his  stay  there  he  makes  war  on  neighbouring  tribes.  3.  He  gives  Achish  the  im- 
pression that  he  was  acting  in  hostility  to  Judah,  and  so  creates  the  belief  that  hence- 
forth he  must  be  an  ally  of  the  Philistine.  The  painful  backsliding'  of  David  is  a 
reminder  of  the  frailty  of  the  best  of  men,  and  should  induce  great  watchfulness 
over  the  subtle  springs  of  thought  and  feeling.  The  prominent  teaching  of  this 
section  may  be  arranged  thus: — 

I.  The  pebils  of  self-chosen  means  of  safety.  David's  passing  over  the  border 
was  a  step  unwillingly  taken,  originating  in  the  proper  belief  that  when  possible 
dangers  ought  to  be  avoided,  but  chiefly  in  the  fear  that  the  oft-experienced  help  in 
Judah  would  not  be  continued  there.  The  imperfect  spiritual  condition  which  ren- 
dered groundless  fear  possible  also  induced  a  self-choice  of  means  of  safety  irre- 
spective of  g^dance  of  prophet  or  Urim.  But  no  sooner  is  the  step  taken  than 
dangers  thicken.  A  sojourn  with  Achish  meant  dependence  for  support,  exposure  to 
treacheiy,  increasing  obligations  to  serve  a  heathen  king,  the  evils  to  religious  life  of 
association  with  idolaters,  and  consciousness  of  self-debasement.  We  have  to  learn 
that  the  path  of  duty  may  be  encompassed  with  difiBoulties,  but  is  always  better  than 
any  course  we  may  from  love  of  ease  strike  out  for  ourselves.  The  Church  has 
never  gained  anything  but  ultimate  loss  and  dishonour  in  evading  the  pains  and 
sorrows  of  high  spiritual  service  by  a  spirit  of  conformity  to  the  world.  The  mer- 
chant beset  with  risks  incurs  worse  dangers  by  passing  over  the  line  of  truthfulness 
and  fraud.  The  soul  sensible  of  its  spiritual  dangers  and  annoyed  by  restless  tempt- 
ations finds  no  real  relief  in  leaving  the  "  way  everlasting  "  for  the  expedients  sug- 
gested by  a  deceitful  heart. 

II.  The  shame  of  suppressing  cub  ibub  oharacteb  and  the  object  fob  which 
WE  LIVE.  Obviously  David  was  careful  not  to  let  Achish  know  that  he  was  the 
anohited,  and  wis  living  in  hope  of  rising  to  the  throne  of  Israel.  For  as  Israel  was 
the  declared  and  natural  enemy  of  Philistia,  this  would  be  to  foster  the  means  of  his 
future  overthrow.  It  was  impossible  for  a  man  of  fine  sensibilities  to  thus  suppress 
Ks  real  character  and  objects  without  constant  sense  of  shame,  and  even  dread  lest 
by  some  means  he  should  be  deteutea  and  suddenly  assailed.  Occasionally  for 
politioal  raaaona  Hen  have  adopted  a  policy  of  concealment,  though  even  in  thii 


OH,  xxyn.  1—12.]         THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUKL.  Sift 

department  of  life  it  is  attended  with  loss  of  self-respect  and  considerable  periL 
There  are  temptations  for  religious  men  to  hide  their  religion,  to  pass  unknown  aa  pro- 
fessors, to  assume  for  a  while  the  habits  and  enter  into  too  intimate  associations  with 
the  irreligious.  In  festive  scenes,  in  plans  of  business,  in  converse  with  strangers, 
there  majr  arise  a  feeling  of  shame,  or  a  thought  of  inexpediency,  which  not  merely 
restrains  from  a  natural  expression  of  Christian  feeling  consonant  to  the  occasion,  but 
even  prompts  to  an  efEort  to  give  the  impression  that  we  are  not  religious.  The  sin 
of  this  suppression  of  our  Christianity,  this  hiding  of  the  great  end  for  which  we 
profess  to  live,  cannot  but  bring  most  grievous  trouble  to  the  soul,  aa  it  ao  manifestly 
dishonours  the  name  by  which  we  are  called. 

III.  Thk  futility  of  all  expedients  fob  courting  the  favoub  of  the  ibbk- 
Lioious.  David's  scheme  was  to  live  in  favour  with  the  Philistines,  and  to  this  end 
he  represented  himself  as  their  friend  and  the  foe  of  their  foe.  Not  only  did  ho 
produce  the  false  impression  of  having  attacked  Judah, — an  act  of  untruthfulness, — 
but  he  did  himself  and  brethren  the  cruel  wrong  of  representing  himself  as  alien  to 
them.  For  awhile  Achish  was  misled,  but  his  people  were  suspicious  (ch.  xxix.  8), 
and  the  result  was  a  loss  of  reputation  to  David.  Good  men  cannot  compromise  their 
position  with  irreligious  men  and  secure  or  confer  any  permanent  advantage  thereby. 
The  consideration  and  interest  they  manifest  for  a  season,  resting  on  false  represent- 
ations, will  soon  yield  to  suspicions,  distrust,  and  contempt.  If  it  be  thought  that 
accommodations  of  life  to  the  standard  of  the  unspiritual  will  tend  to  benefit  them, 
events  will  prove  the  thought  to  be  delusive.  "  Be  not  conformed  ta  the  world  "  is 
the  wise  policy,  as  it  is  the  solemn  duty,  of  the  Christian. 

IV.  A  COMPROMISE  with  THE  IRRELIGIOUS  MAT  INVOLVE  THE  CONTRACTION  OF  VERY 

CNWELCOME  OBLIGATIONS.  From  the  day  that  David  sought  the  friendly  protection  of 
Achish  to  the  outbreak  of  war  with  Israel,  David  was  becoming  involved  in  obliga- 
tions which  could  only  be  set  aside  at  the  cost  of  a  reputation  for  deceit  and  ingrati- 
tude. He  had  to  play  a  double  part  to  save  his  own  life  and  to  avoid  the  fearful  sin 
of  raising  his  hand  against  his  own  countrymen  (cf .  vers.  11,  12 ;  xxviii.  1, 2).  There 
is  here  warning  for  the  Church  and  the  individual.  Christian  action  should  always  be 
BO  free  and  truly  based  on  righteous  principles  as  to  raise  no  claim  for  service  or 
friendship  inconsistent  with  the  holy  vows  of  consecration  to  Christ.  He  who  by 
suppression  of  his  religious  principles  puts  himself:  in  the  power  of  irreligious  com- 
panions or  associates  will  find. his  position  to  be  one  of  increasing  embarrassment ; 
and  after  a  painful  and  tortuous  line  of  conduct  it  will  be  necessary  to  lose  all  respect 
by  breaking  away  from  the  wicked  alliance  or  retain  friendship  by  a  ahipwreck  of 
faith.  "  The  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God  "  (James  iv.  4).  Young 
persons  who  are  thrown  much  among  the  irreligious  ahoold  ttko  to  heart  me  lessona 
of  David's  experience 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Ver.  1. — Unbelief  and  its  uniworthy  device.  This  history  metes  out  equal  justice, 
and,  having  shown  to  ns  the  perversity  of  Saul,  immediately  exposes  to  us  the  fault 
of  David,  for  he  also,  though  no  fool,  returned  to  folly.  In  both  cases  equity  and 
charity  allow  some  plea  of  extenuation.  Saul's  hostility  to  David  was  due  in  some 
measure  to  an  unsound  brain,  unable  to  shake  ofE  morbid  suspicion.  And  DavidSg 
mistrust  of  the  Divine  protection  was  the  result  of  a  very  sensitive  temperament 
tried  beyond  measure,  a  chafed  and  weary  spirit.  How  far  such  pleas  may  be  con- 
sidered in  weighing  actions  is  a  question  for  the  Divine  justice  rather  than  for  onr 
sentence.  Enough  for  us  to  recognise  them,  that  we  may  the  better  understand  how 
Saul  could  renew  a  pursuit  which  he  had  abandoned  with  tears,  and  how  David  could 
return  to  the  land  of  the  Philistines,  from  which  he  had  formerly  escaped  only  by 
simulating  madness. 

I.  The  FAULT  OF  David  was  unbelief.  It  was  not  his  habit ;  but  it  came  u^on 
him  as  a  fit  or  mood,  and,  while  it  lasted,  led  him  into  actions  unworthy  and  unwise. 
1.  He  broke  dotm  at  a  strong  point,  as  men  often  do.  His  faith  rose  to  a  heroio 
pitch  in  the  valley  of  Elah;  when  the  stripling,  as  a  believer,  encountered  the  bla»« 
piiApiiTigr  giant.    But  when  he  was  put  among  princes  his  faith  failed  under  appre- 

L  L  2 


ilf  THB  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxvii.  1— It. 

hensions  of  mortal  peril,  and  he  fled  to  Nob,  and  thence  to  the  Philistine  town  of 
Gath.  He  recovered  his  faith  in  God,  and,  assured  of  Divine  protection,  refused  to 
injure  Saul  when  the  king  on  two  occasions  was  within  his  power.  But  again  big 
faith  failed,  and  he  was  afraid.  There  is  no  mention  of  his  having  prayed,  or  con- 
sulted God  through  the  priest  as  at  other  times.  In  his  unworthy  fear  he  took  coun- 
sel with  himself,  and  "  said  in  his  heart "  that  he  would  surely  perish.  Such  is  man. 
He  falls  at  a  strong  point.  Noah  stood  in  his  integrity  against  a  whole  world  of  sin- 
ners, but  when  he  had  no  world  to  stand  against  he  fell,  and  disgraced  himself  by 
intemperance.  Moses  was  the  meekest  of  men  and  most  observant  of  the  word  of 
the  Lord,  and  yet  he  erred  at  Kadesh  in  respect  of  self-control  and  fidelity  to  the 
Divine  command,  so  forfeiting  his  entrance  into  Canaan.  Hezekiah  was  eminent  for 
prayerfulness  and  humility,  and  yet  he  fell  in  not  spreading  a  matter  before  the 
Lord,  but  giving  way  to  vain  boasting.  Simon  Peter  was  all  ardour  and  devotion  to  his 
Master,  and  yet,  just  after  honest  protestations  of  attachment,  he  lost  courage,  and 
denied  his  Lord.  In  like  manner  strong  believers  may  fall  into  a  fit  of  unbelief,  in 
which  past  blessings  are  forgotten,  promises  are  doubted  or  let  slip,  dangers  are  exag- 
gerated, and  the  heart,  instead  of  asking  counsel  of  the  Lord,  takes  counsel  with  itself, 
and  suggests  all  sorts  of  folly.  2.  Unbelief  seems  to  have  been  the  sin  to  which  David 
was  most  tempted  in  his  youth.  We  infer  this  both  from  this  history  and  from  the 
Psalter.  The  former  tells  how  he  more  than  once  despaired  of  his  life,  and  how 
Jonathan  exerted  himself  to  reassure  his  desponding  mind.  The  latter  reveals  to 
us  with  touching  candour  the  apprehensions  of  his  youth  in  those  psalms  which 
plainly  refer  to  his  wanderings  and  hairbreadth  escapes.  The  sorrows  of  death  had 
compassed  him,  and  the  floods  of  the  ungodly  made  him  afraid.  He  saw  his  enemies 
ready  to  swallow  him  up.  And  though  he  was  naturally  brave,  unbelief  enfeebled 
and  distracted  him,  so  that  his  "  heart  was  sore  pained  "  within  him.  Indeed  David's 
cries  to  God  in  the  Psalms,  and  his  way  of  repeating  to  himself  that  God  was  on 
his  side,  and  was  able  to  defend  and  deliver  him,  indicate  not  obscurely  his  inward 
struggle.  If  he  had  felt  no  fear  he  would  not  have  thought  of  writing,  "  I  will  not 
fear  what  man  can  do  to  me."  If  he  had  known  no  failure  of  faith  he  would  not 
have  said  so  much  as  he  has  of  crying  after  God  and  putting  his  trust  in  him.  We 
read  of  Abraham  simply  that  he  believed.  He  fell  on  his  face  and  listened  to  the 
voice  of  God  ;  then  he  acted,  journeyed,  obeyed  in  faith ;  but  we  do  not  find  him 
speak  of  his  believing.  David  had  a  struggle  to  hold  fast  his  confidence,  and  there- 
fore has  he  given  so  much  expression  to  the  life  of  faith  and  its  conflict  with  doabt 
and  fear. 

II.  Unbelief  leads  a  servant  of  God  to  dnwobtht  devices.  "  Nothing  better 
for  me  than  that  I  should  escape  to  the  land  of  the  Philistines."  Now  we  know 
that  God  did  order  and  overrule  this  flight  for  the  good  of  DaviJ  and  of  Israel ;  but 
none  the  less  was  it,  on  the  part  of  his  servant,  an  unworthy  action  springing  from 
unbelief.  Better  surely  to  have  lived  by  faith  in  the  forests  and  caves  of  Judsea  that 
live  by  sight  and  behave  like  a  freebooter  in  the  land  of  the  heathen  Philistines.  His 
stay  at  Ziklag,  the  town  assigned  to  him  by  the  king  Achish,  marks  a  oad  period  in 
the  life  of  David.  His  incursion  into  the  territory  of  certain  southern  tribes  was  most 
unjust  and  cruel.  The  injustice,  indeed,  may  not  have  been  apparent  to  his  mind ; 
for  David  and  his  men  had,  of  course,  been  educated  in  the  ideas  of  theii  own  ise 
and  country,  and  had  no  scruple  about  invading  and  laying  waste  any  territory  of  the 
heathen.  They  had  also  little,  if  any,  respect  for  the  lives  of  the  'leathen.  ^et 
David  must  have  sinned  against  his  conscience  in  the  cruel  massacre  of  the  southern 
tribes.  One  sin  leads  to  another.  And  the  son  of  Jesse  added  deceit  to  cruelty,  and 
exulted  in  covering  the  first  sin  by  the  second,  leaving  no  man  or  woman  alive  to 
contradict  the  tale  he  told  to  the  Philistine  king.  Lord,  what  is  man  ?  When  thou 
didst  not  hold  up  the  goings  of  tliy  servant,  into  what  miry  places  did  he  stray,  into 
what  a  ditch  did  he  fall  I  When  his  faith  failed,  what  a  breti-down  of  his  character 
and  conduct  I  Restraint  of  prayer,  self-direction,  then  rapine,  bloodshedding,  and 
falsehood  I  What  are  we  that  we  should  have  immunity  from  similar  deterioration  of 
character,  if  we  give  way  to  unbelief  ?  A  Christian  in  good  repute  takes  some  coarse 
that  we  should  have  thought  incredible  and  impossible.-  We  ask  in  amazement.  What 
ioiatttation  seized  him  f  or,  Out  it  bo  that  he  was  always  insincere,  and  wicked  at 


XXVII  1— i2.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  ill 


heart  under  a  cloak  of  seeming  goodness  ?  The  real  clue  to  his  miwiondact  lies  here— 
that  he  lost  hold  of  God  and  feU  through  unbelief,  allowed  himself  to  donbt  whether 
Qod  would  or  could  keep  him  in  some  strait,  and  took  to  trusting  and  keeping  himself. 
So  he  fell  into  unworthy  company,  or  betook  himself  to  unworthy  devices ;  and  the 
end  is  what  you  see — dishonesty,  duplicity,  prevarication.  Bemember  that  nothing 
is  so  hard  to  be  extirpated  from  the  heart  as  unbelief.  In  his  book  of  the  Holy  War 
Banyan  shows  that  when  the  town  of  Mansoul  was  in  the  devil's  power.  Incredulity 
was  first  made  alderman,  then  lord  mayor.  When  Immanuel  took  the  town,. Incre- 
dulity ^unbelief)  was  doomed  to  execution,  but  managed  to  break  out  of  prison,  and 
lurked  m  hiding-places  where  he  could  not  be  found.  When  the  devil  assaulted  the 
town  in  hopes  to  retake  it,  "  Old  Incredulity  "  reappeared,  and  was  made  general  of 
the  army.  After  the  assailing  army  was  defeated,  and  many  of  the  officers  and 
soldiers  in  it  were  put  to  death.  Unbelief  still  evaded  capture.  He  did  yet  dwell  in 
Mansoul,  though  he  "  hid  in  dens  and  holes." 

Afiplication ; — 1.  Let  believers  beware.  It  is  easy  to  slip  off  the  way  of  faith, 
and  it  may  seem  to  answer  well  for  a  time.  You  may  get  your  Ziklag  to  dwell  in, 
and  find  it  more  comfortable  than  the  hold  at  Engedi  or  tiie  hill  of  Hachilah,  but 
you  are  in  a  state  of  declension  from  God,  and  on  the  way,  as  David  was,  to  commit 
presumptuous  sin.  Matthew  Henry  remarks  in  his  sententious  way,  "  Unbelief  is  a 
sin  that  easily  besets  even  good  men.  When  without  are  fightings  and  within  are 
fears,  it  is  a  hard  matter  to  get  over  them.  Lord,  increase  our  faitii  1 "  2.  Let  un- 
believers be  warned.  If  unbelief  be  so  damaging  when  it  prevails  even  temporarily 
over  a  servant  of  God,  what  ruin  must  it  work  in  those  who  lie  always  under  ite 
power  I  "  He  that  believeth  not  in  the  Son  of  God  shall  not  see  life ;  but  th«  wrath 
of  God  abideth  on  him."— F. 

Vers.  1,  2.  (Thb  wildeenbss  of  Ziph.) — Despondmev.  "I  shall  now  perish  one 
day  by  the  hand  of  Saul"  (ver.  1).  It  is  seldom  (at  least  in  a  climate  like  ours) 
that  a  day  passes  in  sunshine  without  clouds.  And  human  life  is  as  varied  as  the 
aspects  of  the  sky.  The  best  of  men  are  liable  not  only  to  adversity  as  well  as 
prosperity,  but  also  to  seasons  of  spiritual  depression  as  well  as  of  spiritual  elation  ; 
and  the  one  often  follows  the  other  very  closely.  These  seasons  of  depression  ought 
not,  indeed,  to  be  attributed  to  a  Divine,  sovereign,  and  uncontrollable  influence. 
They  are  due  to  certain  causes  in  men  themselves  which  ought  to  be  watched 
against.  Yet  who  resists  them  constantly,  effectually,  and  completely  ?  Here  is 
David,  who  recently  said,  "  Let  the  Lord  deliver  me  out  of  all  tribulation,"  and  heard 
Saul  say,  "  Blessed  be  thon,  my  son  David,"  &o.  (ch.  xxvi.  24,  25),  talking  to 
himself  in  a  desponding  mood,  and  coming  to  the  conclusion  that  there  is  nothing 
better  for  him  than  to  flee  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines.  It  may  be  preferable  for 
■  man  to  "  commune  with  his  own  heart "  of  his  fears  and  doubts,  rather  than  pour 
them  indiscriminately  into  the  ears  of  other  people  ;  but  his  proper  course  is  not  to 
continue  brooding  over  them,  or  surrender  himself  to  their  power,  but  to  "  inquire  of 
the  Lord,"  and  "hope  in  God"  (Ps.  xlii.  11).  "More  of  these  no  man  hath  known 
than  myself,  which  I  confess  I  conquered  not  in  a  martial  posture,  but  on  my  knees  " 
(Sir  T.  Browne).  Concerning  the  state  of  mind  which  this  language  expresses, 
consider — 

I.  Wheriin  IT  CONSISTS.  1.  Fear  of  opproocMng  danger,  Saul  had  renewed  his 
persecution,  and  David  thought  that  he  should  be  "consumed."  There  was  apparently 
no  more  reason  why  he  should  think  so  now  than  there  had  been  before ;  but  the 
desponding  mind  projects  its  shadow  over  all  things,  and  magnifies  ordinary  into 
extraordinary  peril.  Imaginary  evils  are  often  occasions  of  greater  trouble  and 
temptation  than  real  evils,  and  more  difficult  to  overcome.  2.  Distrust  of  Divine 
care.  This  is  its  chief  element.  If  his  faith  had  been  in  vigorous  exercise  he 
would  have  said,  "  Whom  shall  I  fear?  "  (Ps.  xxvii.  1).  But  it  seems  to  have  com- 
pletely failed,  leaving  him  a  prey  to  overwhelming  anxiety  and  fear.  "  My  way  is 
hid  from  the  Lord,  and  my  judgment  is  passed  over  from  my  God"  (Isa.  xl.  27). 
"  Out  bones  are  dried,  and  our  hope  is  lost "  (Ezek.  xxxvii.  11).  3.  Depression  oj 
fersortal  enfrgp.  He  kas  lost  heart,  and  thinks  it  impossible  to  continue  safely  in 
the  land  of  Judah,  to  which  the  prophet  had  formerly  recalled  him,  and  where 


•It  TH£  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [OB.  xxtu.  1— 1» 

Divine  providence  has  appointed  his  lot.    The  fearful  and  faithless  shrink  from 
dilBculties  which  in  a  better  state  of  mind  they  encountered  boldly. 

II.  Whebbbt  it  IB  occAsiONBD.  The  influences  productive  of  it  are  partly — 1. 
External  and  physical.  Numerous  perils,  long  hardship,  constant  watchfulness, 
great  exertions,  Dodily  exhaustion  and  sufEering.  "  There  are  hours  in  which  physical 
derangement  darkens  the  windows  of  the  soul;  days  in  which  shattered  nerves  make 
life  simply  endurance."  Much  of  this  may  be  removed  by  the  adoption  of  proper 
methods,  and  where  its  removal  is  impossible,  special  grace  should  be  sought  that  it 
may  be  borne  _  cheerfully  and  patiently.  2.  Mental  and  emotional.  Perplexing 
thoughts,  conflicting  arguments,  unjust  and  ungenerous  treatment,  want  of  sympathy, 
deferred  hope,  reaction  from  excited  feeling.  "  Something  of  it  might  be  due  to 
those  alternations  of  emotion  which  seem  to  be  incidental  to  our  human  constitution. 
We  have  ebbings  and  flowings  within  us  like  the  tides ;  and  just  as  in  nature  the 
lowest  ebb  is  after  the  highest  spring-tide,  so  you  frequently  see,  even  in  the  best  of 
men,  after  some  lofty  experience  of  spiritual  elevation  and  noble  self-command,  an 
ebbing  down  to  the  lowest  depth  of  fear  and  flight "  (W.  M.  Taylor).  3.  Moral 
and  spiritual.  Omission  of  duty,  parleying  with  temptation,  contemplating  doubt- 
ful expedients  (ch.  xxvi.  19),  intimate  association  with  persons  of  little  or  no  piety, 
self-confidence,  bedimmed  spiritual  vision,  loss  of  spuitual  fervour,  "restraining 
prayer  before  God."  It  is  significant  that  nothing  is  said  about  David's  asking 
counsel  of  the  Lord  concerning  the  step  which  he  was  contemplating,  as  he  did  on 
other  occasions.  "  Josephus  tells  us  that  he  advised  with  his  friends,  but  no  writer 
informs  us  that  he  advised  with  God  "  (Delany).  His  state  of  mind  appears  to  have 
been  unfavourable  to  his  doing  so ;  and  it  is  probable  that  if  he  had  done  so  the 
course  on  which  he  had  half  resolved  would  have  been  forbidden.  Communion  with 
God  prevents  or  cures  despondency  and  averts  many  a  disastrous  step. 

III.  Wheeefoke  it  is  blambwortht.  For  that  it  is  so  there  can  be  no  doubt. 
In  it — 1.  Fast  deliverances  effected  by  God  are  ungratefully  forgotten.  Of  these 
David  had  experienced  many ;  they  were  assurances  of  continued  help,  and  in  better 
hours  he  regarded  them  as  such  (cb.  xvii.  37).  But  now  his  remembrance  of  them 
is  clouded  with  fear,  and  produces  neither  thankfulness  nor  confidence.  He  speaks 
to  his  heart,  but  says  not, "  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  forget  not  all  his  benefits." 
2.  The  faithful  promises  of  God  are  faithlessly  ignored.  He  who  doubts  them 
despises  the  Giver,  deprives  himself  of  the  treasures  of  wisdom,  strength,  and 
blessedness  which  they  contain,  and  "  forsakes  his  own  mercy."  3.  The  great  name 
of  God  it  greatly  dishonoured.  It  is  a  "strong  tower,"  and  not  to  "  run  into  it,"  but 
to  continue  in  despondency,  as  if  it  were  inaccessible  or  incapable  of  affording 
adequate  protection,  is  to  oppose  the  purpose  for  which  it  is  made  known,  to  act 
unworthily  of  the  knowledge  of  it,  and  to  incur  just  reproach.  "  Who  art  thou,  that 
thou  shouldst  be  afraid  of  a  man  that  shall  die,  and  forgettest  the  Lord  thy  Maker  f  " 
(Isa.  li.  13).     Surely  nothing  dishonours  him  more. 

IV.  Wheebto  it  leads.  "  And  David  arose,"  &o.  (ver.  2).  He  thought  nothing 
could  be  better  for  him ;  but,  in  reality,  nothing  could  be  worse.  "  For  by  this  step 
he  would  alienate  the  affections  of  the  Israelites  from  him,  justify  the  reproaches  of 
the  enemy,  deprive  himself  of  the  means  of  grace  and  tiie  ordinances  of  religion, 
grieve  his  soul  with  the  vice  and  idolatry  of  the  heathen,  put  himself  out  of  the 
warrant  of  Divine  protection,  and  lay  himself  under  peculiar  obligation  to  those 
whom  he  could  not  serve  without  betraying  the  cause  of  God."  He  escaped  from 
one  danger  only  to  rush  into  another  and  much  greater.  Unbelieving  and  despond- 
ing fears  commonly — 1.  Incite  to  unwise  and  foolish  courses  of  action.  2.  Conduce 
to  temptation  and  transgression  (ver.  10).  3.  involve  in  embarrassment  and  great 
distrew  (oh.  zxviii.  1 ;  xxx.  1 — 6). 

"  Beware  of  desperate  steps.     The  darkest  day. 
Live  till  to-morrow,  will  have  passed  away." 

(Cowper,  '  The  Keedlesf  Alarm.') 
JUaAortatum  .• — 1.  Gnard  against  the  causes  of  despondency.      2.  At  its  first 
•pproaoh  torn  instantly  to  God  in  faith  and  prayer.    3.  Take  no  new  step  nnder  it! 
Influence,  nor  until  the  will  of  God  is  dearly  seen.    4.  "  Be  strong  in  Uie  Lord  and 
in  the  power  of  his  might." — D. 


a.  zxyn.  1—18.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  ftlf 

Vera.  3—12.  (Gath,  Ziklaq.)— 2>aw(f»  residence  among  the  PhMUtinet.  David 
had  taken  the  decisive  step,  crossed  the  border,  and  passed  with  hia  600  men 
and  their  families  ("  a  little  ambulant  kingdom  ")  into  the  Philistine  territory.  Hb 
position  was  very  different  now  from  what  it  had  been  five  or  six  years  before,  when 
he  came  to  6ath  as  a  lonely  fugitive  (ch.  zzi.  10) ;  and  he  was  gladly  received  by 
Acbish,  who  regarded  him  as  in  open  revolt  against  Saul  and  Israel,  and  expected  to 
obtain  from  him  valuable  assistance  in  his  future  conflicts  with  them.  And  here 
and  at  Ziklag  he  continued  sixteen  months  (ver.  7).  His  condition  (like  that  of 
other  good  men  who  enter  into  intimate  association  with  the  ungodly,  voluntarily, 
unnecesaarily,  and  for  the  sake  of  worldly  advantage ;  see  ch.  xv.  6)  was  marked 
oy— 

I.  Temfobabt  becuritt  (ver.  4).  By  placing  himself  under  the  protection  of 
Achish,  David  gained  his  end ;  for  Saul  dared  not  follow  him  lest  he  should  excite 
another  Philistine  war,  and  (phydcaUyjeaivAmeA,  though  still  retaining  an  evil  will) 
"sought  no  more  again  for  him."  His  outward  circumstances  were  completely 
changed.  Instead  of  the  uncertain,  anxious,  hazardous,  and  despised  life  which  he 
had  led  in  the  wilderness,  he  enjoyed  repose,  comfort,  safety,  and  respect  in  a  royal 
city.  To  obtain  advantages  such  as  these  men  often  swerve  from  the  appointed  path 
of  duty,  especially  in  times  of  persecution,  not  considering  at  what  a  cost  they  are 
obtained,  how  brief  is  their  duration,  or  how  great  the  trouble  by  which  they  maybe 
followed. 

II.  CoNSOioiTS  nccoNSiBTBNOT  (ven.  S — 7).  In  open  alliance  with  the  enemies  of 
Israel,  silently  witnessing  their  idolatrous  practices,  looked  upon  a*  a  traitor  to  his 
country,  and  ready  to  aid  them  against  it,  David  must  have  felt  what  a  contradiction 
there  was  between  his  apparent  and  real  character.  Yet  he  might  not  declare  him- 
self by  a  single  word  or  act,  for  thousands  of  watchful  eyes  were  always  on  him. 
He  did  not  feel  at  home,  and  requested  (under  the  plea  of  the  imsuitableness  and 
expensiveness  of  his  residence  with  his  large  retinue  at  Gath)  that  the  king  would 
give  him  "  a  place  in  some  town  in  the  country,"  his  real  motive  being  that  he  might 
be  "  out  of  the  way  of  observation,  so  as  to  play  the  part  of  Saul's  enemy  without 
acting  against  him."  At  Ziklag  he  would  be  less  under  restraint,  and  his  real  sen- 
timents less  likely  to  be  discovered,  though  even  there  he  might  still  be  suspected. 
No  outward  advantages  that  good  men  may  gain  by  their  alhance  with  the  ungodly 
can  afford  adequate  compensation  for  the  insincerity,  distraction,  restlessness,  and 
vexation  of  som  which  it  involves  (2  Pet.  ii.  8). 

III.  Sdccebbfiil  entebfbisb  (vers.  8,  9).  As  soon  as  he  was  settled  at  Ziklag  he 
made  warlike  expeditions  against  the  Amalekites,  Geshurites,  and  Gezritea,  "  of  old 
the  inhabitants  of  the  land  "  (unlike  the  Philistines)  ;  and  from  the  rich  booty  which 
he  procured  he  supplied  the  wants  of  his  men,  and  gave  valuable  presents  to  Achish 
(ver.  9).  His  setting  forth  on  these  expeditions,  and  the  cruel  severity  with  which 
he  executed  them,  must  be  judged  of  in  the  light  of  "  the  circumstances  of  those 
times,  and  the  constant  practices  of  nations  one  to  another,  specially  of  the  neigh- 
bouring nations  towards  the  Hebrews"  (Chandler),  and  of '  the  ban  under  which 
some  of  them  had  been  placed  (see  ch.  xv.  1,  32,  33).  ,  He  was  doubtless  animated 
therein  by  public  spirit  and  rehgious  zeal  (ch.  xxx.  26),  but  his  motives  were  not 
altogether  unmixed,  and  his  successes  brought  him  a  doubtful  honour  (ver.  12). 

IV.  Crafty  policy  (vers.  10,  11).  To  retain  the  confidence  of  Achish,  he  gave 
nim  the  impression  that  his  expeditions  were  directed  against  his  own  countrymen 
and  their  allies,  instead  of  against  Amalek  and  other  neighbouring  tribes ;  and  he 
was  thus,  through  distrust  of  God,  again  guilty  of  deceit  (ch.  xxi.  1,  10).  "  If  a  man 
will  put  himself  among  Philistines,  he  cannot  promise  to  come  forth  innocent " 

glall).  "  David  might  perhaps  seek  in  some  way  to  justify  himself  by  the  thought 
at  in  hia  ambiguous  manner  of  speech  he  made  use  only  of  an  allowable  stratagem, 
and  that  he  was  a  keatken  to  whom  he  veiled  the  truth.  But  he  will  yet  be  made  to 
experience  that  God  will  weigh  those  who  would  be  his  in  the  balances  of  the  sanc- 
tuary, in  which,  among  others,  that  inviolable  word  is  foimd  as  one  of  the  weights, 
'  Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness ' "  (Krummacher). 

V.  Increasing  powbb  and  importance.  While  at  Ziklag  he  received  large  rein- 
foioementa  (ch.  xxii.  1,  2 ;  1  Chron.  xii.  1—22),  some  of  whom  were  "  at  Banl'i 


sao 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  xxvni.  1 — U. 


brethren  of  Benjamin '' — evidently  from  dissatisfaction  with  the  turn  which  things 
had  taken  (see  also  2  Sam.  xv.  16 — 23).  "  As  a  matter  of  fact,  David  in  this  city 
laid  the  foundation  of  all  his  kingdom.  Here  he  could  already  rule  with  greater 
freedom  and  independence,  collect  fugitives  and  deserters  around  him  in  larger  and 
larger  numbers,  send  or  receive  embassies  like  a  prince  (ch.  xxx.  26 — 31),  and,  as  a 
ruler  over  soldiers  and  over  peaceable  citizens,, rehearse,  on  a  small  scale,  those  arts 
by  which  he  afterwards  acquired  and  maintained  his  great  kingdom"  (Ewald). 
Notwithstanding  all  this,  his  condition  was  one  of — 

VI.  Spiritual  disadvantaoe,  and  even  spiritual  deterioration.  That  wnich  he  had 
dreaded  as  the  worst  of  evils  (ch.  xxvi.  19)  had  come  about  by  his  own  voluntary 
act.  Although  he  was  not  forbidden  the  exercise  of  hw  religion  under  Achish  (oh. 
xxix.  6),  yet  his  circumstances  were  unfavourable  to  it ;  he  was  absent  from  the  land 
and  the  sanctuary  where  God  manifested,  his  gracious  presence  to  his  people  (ch.  xxvi. 
20  ;  Ps.  xlii.  2,  3),  and  his  whole  course  df  life  is  indicative  of  a  lower  tone  of  piety 
than  before.  "  Being  a  genuine  poet  and  lover  of  art,  he  took  advantage  of  all  his 
opportunities  in  this  direction,  and  exercised  himself  as  a  musician  in  the  Gittite  and 
the  Philistine  style  (Ps.  viii.,  inscription),  which  he  afterwards  transferred  from  there 
to  Jerusalem  "  (Ewald) ;  but  not  a  single  psalm  of  his  can  be  referred  to  this  period. 

VIL_  Danqebous  entanglements,  intense  suffering,  and  probably  also  serious 
delay  in  the  attainment  of  his  high  destiny  (ch.  xxviii.  1,  2 ;  Y-«"g,  3).  The  evils 
that  sprang  from  his  want  of  faith  and  patience  were  truly  great.  "  His  presence 
in  Judah  would  have  given  an  opportunity  which  Saul  could  hardly  have  refused,  for 
calling  him  forth  as  the  champion  of  Israel.  At  all  events  he  would  have  been  at 
hand  to  relieve  the  disaster,  and  would  doubtless  have  been  hailed  as  king  by  the 
united  voice  of  Israel.  As  it  was,  his  nation  suffered  a  terrible  defeat,  which,  instead 
of  doing  his  best  to  avert,  he  narrowly  escaped  taking  a  share  in  inflicting ;  his 
recognition  as  king  of  Israel  was  postponed  for  seven  years  and  a  half  at  the  cost  of 
a  civil  war  and  a  permanent  alienation  of  Judah  from  the  rest  of  Israel ;  and  mean- 
while he  was  involved  in  a  course  of  pitiable  deceit "  (Smith,  '  Old  Testament  Hist.'). 
Nevertheless  the  overruling  hand  of  God  must' be  recognised  in  all,  and  by  Divina 
mercy  he  was  dehvered  "  out  of  all  tribulation." 

"  Ay  me,  how  many  perils  do  unfold 
The  righteous  man,  to  make  him  daily  fall, 
Were  not  that  heavenly  grace  doth  him  nphold^ 
And  steadfast  truth  acquit  him  out  of  aU  I 
Her  love  is  firm,  her  care  continual. 
So  oft  as  he,  through  his  own  foolish  pride 
Or  weakness,  is  to  sinful  bands  made  uiroll"  (SpenaarX  Bt 


EXPOSITION. 

DOWNFILI.  ABD  DKATH  OF  SaCL  (CHS.  XXVIII. — XXXI.) 

Toi  Philiettinis  oatheb  toqetheb  fob  Wab.    Dibtbess  of  SAnL,  AHD  Visit  to 
THE  Witch  of  Endob  (oh.  xxviii.). 


CHAPTER  XXVIIL 

AOHISH    STTMMONS    DaYJD    TO    JOIN    HIM 
IN  THE  WAR  AGAINST  ISKABL  (verS.  1 — 2). 

Ver.  1. — In  those  days.  /.  e.  while  David 
was  dwelling  at  Ziklag.  The  Philistines 
gathered  their  armies  together.  This  was, 
as  Josephus  has  observed,  a  war  upon  a  much 
larger  scale  than  any  that  had  been  carried 
on  since  the  defeat  of  the  Philistines  in  the 
valley  of  Elah  ;  for  we  find  that  the  inva- 
sion was  made  from  the  north,  and  the  de- 
cisive battle  fought  not  in  the  usual  field  of 
^rations,  but  m  the  territory  of  the  tribe 


of  Issachar,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  JezreeL 
We  are  not  indeed  to  suppose  from  this  that 
the  Philistines  had  conquered  all  the  centra] 
districts  of  the  land,  and,  driving  Saul  befoK 
them,  at  last  brought  him  to  bay,  and  slew 
liim  in  the  north ;  for  though  Ishbosheth  wa« 
compelled  to  withdraw  to  Mahanaim,  a  city 
on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Jordan,  yet  Abner 
is  said  to  have  made  him  king  there  not  only 
over  the  trans-Jordanic  tribes,  but  also  "  over 
Jezreel,  and  over  Ephraim,  and  over  Benja- 
min "  (2  Sam.  ii.  9).  It  may  be  said,  how- 
ever, that  these  were  but  titular  claims ;  but 
the  Philistine  conquests,  as  described  in  eh. 


CH.  xxYin.  1—85.]         THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


xzzL  7,  if  not  confined  to  the  valley  of 
Esdraelon,  as  in  1  Chron.  x.  7,  were  never- 
theless all  of  them  to  the  north  of  Mount 
Gilboa,  thus  leaving  Ephraim,  Benjamin, 
and  Judah  untouched.  Nor  do  we  find  the 
Philistines  encamped  between  David  at  He- 
bron and  Ishbosheth  at  Mahanaim,  or  inter- 
fering in  their  contests  ;  and  it  is  only  when- 
David  was  made  king  over  the  whole  of 
Israel  that  they  again  assembled  their  forces 
to  dispute  the  empire  with  him,  and  twice 
suffered  defeat  (2  Sam.  v.  20,  25).  More  pro- 
bably, therefore,  they  marched  northward 
through  their  own'  territory,  raising  the 
whole  of  the  military  population  as  they 
went,  and  then,  turning  eastward,  broke  into 
the  Israelite  territory  by  the  valley  of  Jez- 
reel.  It  was  probably  the  rapid  decline  of 
Saul's  power  which  encouraged  the  Philis- 
tines to  attempt  once  again  to  place  their 
yoke  upon  the  neck  of  Israel ;  and  Saul,  con- 
scious that  God's  blessing  had  departed  from 
him,  in  pitiable  agony  sought  for  unholy  aid, 
but  finally,  with  his  sons,  made  a  last  brave 
defence,  and  died  a  soldier's  death.  Achish 
said  unto  David.  As  a  vassal  David  was 
bound  to  accompany  his  lord  to  the  field  ; 
and  Achish,  supposing  that  David  had  of 
his  own  accord  made  war  upon  Judah,  pro- 
bably assumed  that  the  invitation  was  one 
which  he  himself  desired.  To  battle.  Hebrew, 
■'in  the  army." 

Ver.  2. — Surely  thou  shalt  know.  Hebrew, 
"  Therefore  thou  shalt  know,"  i.  e.  if  the  case 
be  so,  thou  shalt  know,  &c.  The  render- 
mg  of  the  A.  V.  makes  David  repeat  the 
words  of  Achish,  which  literally  are,  "  know- 
ing thou  shalt  know,"  the  Hebrew  way 
of  making  a  strong  affirmation.  David's 
reply  is  really  ambiguous,  but  is  understood 
by  Achish  as  a  boastful  assent,  and  he  there- 
upon promises.  Therefore  will  I  make  thee 
keeper  of  mine  head,  i.  e.  captain  of  my 
body-guard,  for  ever.  Therefore  is  exactly 
the  same  word  as  that  used  by  David,  and 
has  just  the  same  meaning,  namely,  "  If  the 
case  be  so,"  if  thou  provest  thy  valour,  than 
I,  &c. 

Sattl  and  the  witch  of  Endok  (vers. 
3 — 25).  Ver.  3. — Samuel  was  dead.  A  repe- 
tition of  ch.  XXV.  1,  inserted  to  explain 
Saul's  conduct,  as  is  the  other  fact,  that 
Saul  had  pdt  away  those  that  had  familiar 
spirits,  &c.  We  are  not  told  when  Saul  did 
this  ;  but  at  the  commencement  of  his  reign, 
when  he  brought  the  ark  to  Nob,  he  was 
probably  earnest  generally  in  his  observance 
of  the  precepts  of  the  Mosaic  law.  Familiar 
spirits.  Hebrew,  6both,  the  plural  of  6h,  a 
leathern  bottle.  It  is  generally  taken  to 
refer  to  the  distended  beUy  of  the  conjurer, 
into  which  the  summoned  spirit  of  the  dead 
was  supposed  to  enter,  and  thence  speak ; 
for  wMch  reaaon  the  Septuagint  renders  the 


word  "ventriloquist,"  and  is  followed  by  most 
modem  commentators.  Wizards.  Hebrew, 
"  knowing  ones,"  from  the  verb  to  know; 
just  as  wizard  comes  from  the  old  verb  to 
wiss.  With  ignorant  people  unusual  know- 
ledge is  always  looked  upon  with  suspicion 
but  these  supposed  magicians  professed  u 
knowledge  to  which  they  had  no  claim. 

Ver.  4.  —The  Philistines  .  .  .  pitched  in 
Shunem.  Having  collected  their  forces,  the 
Philistines  entered  Palestine  as  we  have  seen, 
by  the  valley  of  Jezreel,  also  called  Esdra- 
elon, and,  marching  eastw&rd,  encamped  at 
Shunem.  This  was  a  village  in  the  Iribe  of 
Issachar  (Josh.  xix.  18),  rendered  famous  as 
the  abode  of  the  woman  who  made  a  little 
chamber  for  Elisha  (2  Kings  iv.  8);  and 
from  thence  also  came  Abishag(l  Kings  L  3). 
Conder  describes  it  as  being  at  present  only 
a  mud  hamlet,  with  cactus  hedges  and  a 
spring,  but  the  view  extends,  he  says,  as  far 
as  to  Mount  Carmel,  fifteen  miles  away 
('Tent- Work,'  L  123).  It  is  now  called 
SUlem,  a  name  given  to  it  also  by  Eusebius, 
and  lies  upon  the  slopes  of  the  little  Hermon, 
opposite  Mount  GUboa,  from  which  it  is 
separated  by  the  valley  of  JezreeL  This 
broad  plain  "  is  bounded  on  the  east  by  the 
range  of  Gilboa,  rising  1600  feet  above  the 
sea,  and  consisting  of  whito  chalk ;  while  on 
the  west  a  long  spur  runs  out  at  about  the 
same  average  elevation  with  Gilboa,  and 
wends  north-west  to  the  ridge  of  Carmel 
(Conder,  '  Handbook,'  p.  209).  As  the 
valley  is  about  250  feet  above  the  sea  level, 
Saul,  from  an  elevation  of  1200  feet,  would 
easily  see  the  camp  of  the  Philistines  pitched 
upon  the  slopes  of  the  opposite  range  at  a 
distance  of  about  four  miles. 

Vers.  6,  6. — When  Saul  saw,  &e.  It  is 
plain  from  this  that  the  Philistines  had  not 
forced  their  way  up  through  the  Israelite 
territory  ;  for  this  was  evidently  Saul's  first 
sight  of  their  forces,  and  his  alarm  was 
caused  by  finding  them  so  much  larger  than 
he  had  expected.  He  therefore  in  hii  anx- 
iety enquired  of  Jehovah,  but  received  no 
answer,  neither  by  dreams.     He  had  ex- 

Eected  these  to  be  vouchsafed,  possibly  to 
imself,  but  more  probably  to  some  class  ot 
prophets  (see  Jer.  xxiii.  25,  where  false  pro- 
phets claim  to  have  dreamed,  in  imitation 
no  doubt  of  true  prophets);  but  though 
dreams  were  thus  recognised  as  a  means 
for  communicating  God's  will  to  man,  yet, 
as  Erdmann  well  remarks,  "a  subordinate 
position  is  certainly  assigned  in  the  Old 
Testament  to  the  dream  as  the  medium  of 
the  Divine  influence  on  the  inner  life,  which 
in  sleep  sinks  into  a  state  of  passiveness. " 
Nor  by  TTrim.  Though  Abiathar  after  the 
massacre  of  his  family  nad  fled  to  David  with 
the  ephod,  it  is  quite  possible  that  Saul  may 
have  had  another  eplhod  mnia,  ud  have  set 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUBL.  laa,  xxtiu.  l*-a& 


np  a  fresh  sanctnaTy,  perhaps  at  Gibeon, 
with  Zadok,  of  the  family  of  Eleazar,  as  high 
priest.  This  would  account  for  Zadok  being 
joined  with  Ahimelech,  the  son  of  Abiathar, 
aa  one  of  two  high  priests  early  in  David's 
reign  (2  Sam.  viii  17).  It  is  remarkable, 
however,  that  Saul  does  not  mention  the 
Urim  himself  in  ver.  15,  and  very  probably 
it  is  named  here  not  because  the  ephod 
was  actually  used,  but  as  enumerating  all 
the  various  ways  by  which  men  inquired  of 
Jehovah.  Nor  by  prophets.  In  his  de- 
spair Saul  may  have  turned  to  some  reputed 
soothsayer  present  with  the  host,  but  his  wilful 
life  had  alienated  both  priest  and  prophet 
from  him.  And  this  is  the  meaning  of  the 
passage  in  1  Chron.  x.  14:  "Saul  enquired 
not  of  Jehovah;  therefore  he  slew  him." 
He  may  have  gone  through  the  form  of 
inquiring,  and  certainly  now  would  have 
been  glad  of  an  answer,  but  his  whole  mind 
was  determinately  set  upon  carrying  out  his 
awn  purposes,  and  he  would  never  permit, 
after  the  first  year  or  two  of  his  reign,  the 
royal  prerogativa  to  bend  to  the  will  of 
God. 

Vers.  7,  8. — Seek  me  a  woman  that  hath 
a  familiar  spirit.  Hebrew,"  owner  of  an  8b  " 
(see  on  ver.  3).  This  determination  of  Saul 
proves  how  obstinate  was  his  self-will.  He 
wanted  an  answer  simply  that  he  might 
know  what  was  about  to  happen,  not  that 
he  might  receive  guidance  and  counsel  from 
God.  From  his  bidding  them  seek  him  out 
•'  a  woman  mistress  of  an  6b,"  we  gather  that 
women  were  the  usual  claimants  to  these  oc- 
cult powers,  just  asnow  they  are  the  most  suc- 


cessful clairvoyantes.  Endor — "the  spring 
of  the  round,"  i,  e.  perhaps  of  the  dwelling, 
houses  being  originally  circular  in  shape,  like 


tents  —  lay  a  little  to  the  north-east  of 
Shunem,  and  it  was  therefore  a  hazardous 
matter  for  Saul  to  visit  it.  Conder  ('  Tent- 
Work,'  i  122)  says,  "  East  of  Kain  is  a 
village  of  mud  huts,  with  hedges  of  prickly 
pear.  This  is  Endor,  famous  in  connection 
with  the  tragic  history  of  the  death  of  SauL 
The  adventurous  character  of  Saul's  night 
journey  is  very  striking  when  we  consider 
that  the  Philistines  pitched  in  Shunem  on 
the  southern  slopes  of  the  mountain,  and 
that  Saul's  army  was  at  Jezreel ;  thus,  to 
arrive  at  Endor'  he  had  to  pass  the  hostile 
camp,  and  would  probably  creep  round  the 
eastern  shoulder  of  the  hill,  hidden  by  the 
undulations  of  the  plain,  as  an  Arab  will 
often  now  advance  unseen  close  by  you  in  a 
fold  of  the  ground."  He  proceeds  to  specu- 
late upon  the  cave  in  which  the  sorceress 
may  have  lived,  dismissing  those  in  the  town 
as  too  modem,  but  suggesting  one  on  the 
hill-side.  But  there  is  nothing  in  the  narra- 
tive to  suggest  that  she  lived  in  a  cave,  but 
Mtlur  Hm  ooatrai/,  and  the  idea  may  b* 


dismissed  as  due  to  the  imagination  4I 
painters.  As  the  journey  was  very  dan- 
gerous, Saul  disguised  himself,  and  went 
by  night,  accompanied  only  by  two  men ; 
and  nothing  could  more  plainly  set  before 
ns  his  mental  anguish,  and  also  his  intense 
desire  to  pry  into  the  secrets  of  futurity, 
than  this  strange  jutimey.  All  faith  and 
hope  are  gone,  and  a  feverish  excitement, 
ready  to  catch  at  any  aid,  however  lawless 
and  untrustworthy,  had  taken  their  place. 
In  this  state  of  mind  he  arrives  at  the 
woman's  dwelling,  and  says.  Divine  nnto 
me  T>7  the  6b.  Though  divination  was 
strictly  forbidden  (Dent,  zviii.  10,  \i),  yet 
we  find  the  diviner  (A.  V.  prudent)  in  high 
popular  estimation  in  Isa.  iiL  2  ;  and  it  was 
probably  a  lucrative  profession,  or  this  wo- 
man would  not  have  been  willing  to  incur  so 
great  a  danger  as  was  involved  in  its  prac- 
tice. Bring  me  him  np,  &c.  The  nincy 
that  we  can  see  the  spirits  of  the  dead  is  a 
most  natural  and  enduring  superstition,  and 
it  seems  generally  assumed  that  they  must 
have  some  knowledge  not  accessible  to  the 
living.  It  must  be  said  for  Saul  that  he  did 
not  become  the  victim  of  this  folly  until  after 
his  reason  was  disturbed,  and  as  a  punish- 
ment for  heinous  sins. 

Vers.  9,  10. — ^Thon  knowest  what  Sanl 
hath  done.  Not  only  had  Saul  in  the  earlier 
part  of  his  reign  been  earnest  in  his  zeal  for 
the  Mosaic  law,  but  even  now  it  seems  as  if 
a  witch  was  in  danger  of  death ;  for  he  has 
to  take  an  oath  before  she  will  acknowledge 
that  she  practises  any  illicit  art. 

Ver.  11. — Whom  shall  I  bring  np  to 
theet  Assured  by  Saul's  oath,  the  woman 
now  asserts  her  ability  to  call  up  the  spirits 
of  the  dead,  and  asks,  just  as  would  happen 
now  with  those  who  claim  similar  powers, 
who  it  is  to  be.  We  need  not  suppose  that 
she  possessed  either  greater  or  less  powers 
than  those  claimed  or  even  exercised  now  ; 
for  many  of  the  phenomena  of  clairvoyance, 
though  undoubtedly  natural,  stiU  belong  to 
an  unscientific,  and  therefore  vague  and  illu- 
sory, region.  Perhaps  on  this  very  account 
these  arts  have  always  had  an  extraordinaiy 
fascination  for  men,  and  been  practised  in  all 
ages  and  among  all  people  with  considerable 
skilL  Bring  me  np  SamneL  Samuel  had 
been  Saul's  friend  in  his  youth,  and  his  guide 
and  counsellor  In  those  happy  days  when  the 
young  king  walked  uprightly,  and  all  went 
well  with  him.  But  gradually  the  light 
yoke  of  respect  for  one  who  loved  him  be- 
came too  heavy  for  a  despotic  temperament, 
which  would  brook  no  will  but  its  own. 
Now  that  self-will  is  broken  ;  it  had  brought 
the  warrior  king  to  a  hopeless  despair,  and  in 
his  distress  his  mind  once  again  r«tums  to  its 
old  channels.  Intense  as  was  the  degradation 
for  MM  so  hao^tir,  is  disguise  liy  night,  •! 


CH.  xxTin.  1—26.]        THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUSL, 


fhe  risk  of  his  life,  to  seek  help  from  •  sor- 
ceresa,  he  bears  it  all  that  he  may  at  least 
foT  a  few  minutes  see  the  spirit  of  the  trae 
thongh  stern  monitor,  whose  memory  once 
again  filled  his  whole  heart 

Ver.  12.— When  the  woman  saw  Samnel, 
■he  cried  with  a  loud  voice.  Evidently 
the  last  thing  that  she  had  expected  was 
that  anything  else  should  happen  than  the 
usual  illusion  by  which  she  imposed  upon 
her  victims  ;  nor  is  it  certain  that  anything 
else  did  happen.  Her  assertion  that  she  saw 
Samuel  was  probably  false  ;  and  it  was  in 
feigned  excitement  that  she  cried  out,  Why 
hast  thou  deceived  me  t  for  thou  art  Saul. 
She  could  not  but  have  noticed  the'  tall 
stature,  the  digniiled  manner,  and  also  the 
intense  excitement  of  her  strange  visitor ; 
and  when  he  bade  her  call  up  the  spirit  of 
Samuel,  she  must  have  been  dull  indeed  not 
to  know  who  the  stranger  was. 

Ver.  13.— What  sawest  thou  1  Thus  far 
Saul  had  seen  nothing ;  and  as  the  words 
literally  are  What  seest  thouf  it  is  plain 
that  she  had  not  gone  into  another  room, 
as  some  have  supposed.  The  vision  was 
entirely  unsubstantial,  and  Saul,  hearing  her 
cry,  and  observing  her  excitement,  and  her 
steady  gaze  upon  some  object,  asked  what 
that  object  was.  Probably  she  was  at  some 
distance  from  him,  as  was  no  doubt  her 
custom  when  performing  her  incantations,  in 
order  that  what  she  did  might  not  be  too 
closely  observed ;  probably,  too,  she  burnt 
odours,  and  surroundedherself  with  the  smoke 
of  incense.  In  answer  to  Saul  she  says,  "I 
see  Eloliim  ascending  out  of  the  earth."  As 
the  participle  is  plural,  she  does  not  mean 
God ;  nor,  as  it  was  a  single  appearance,  is  the 
rendering  gods  correct.  What  she  means  is 
that  she  saw  some  grand  supernatural  ap- 
pearance rising  out  of  the  ground,  which  she 
calls  a  god  in  a  general  way,  without  attach- 
ing any  very  exact  meaning  to  the  term. 

Ver.  14.— What  form  is  he  ofl  Rather, 
"What  is  his  aspect?"  i.e.  his  look.  As 
the  term  a  god  conveyed  no  other  idea  than 
that  she  had  seen  something  majestic,  Saul 
asks  for  a  more  exact  description.  She 
answers  that  it  was  an  old  man  clad  in  a 
robe,  meil  (see  on  ch.  ii.  19).  Samuel  seems 
never  to  have  worn  the  prophetic  mantle 
(see  on  ch.  xv.  27),  but  always  the  m^. 
There  was  nothing,  therefore,  distinctive  in 
the  dress ;  but  as  she  says  that  she  has  seen 
an  old  man,  Saul  concludes  that  he  for  whom 
he  had  asked  had  appeared  to  him.  Instead 
of  Saul  perceived,  the  Hebrew  has  "Saul 
knew."  There  is  nothing  to  prove  that  Saul 
Pfally  saw  anything ;  all  that  is  said  is  that 
by  the  woman's  description  "  Saul  recognised 
that  what  she  had  seen  was  Samuel,  and  he 
bowed  himself  to  the  ground,  and  made 
obeisance." 


Yen.  16,  18.— Why  kait  tboa  disqnletad 
me  1  /.  «.  Why  hast  thou  caused  me  to  be 
disturbed  by  the  incantations  of  this  woman  I 
Neither  by  prophets  nor  by  dreams.  It  is 
suggested  in  the  Talmud  (Berach  zii.  2)  that 
Saul  omitted  all  mention  of  the  TJrim  from 
shame  at  having  murdered  the  priests.  la 
become  thine  enemy.  Bya  slight  difference 
of  reading  the  Septuagint  have,  "is  on  the 
side  of  thy  neighbour.  ' 

Vers.  17 — 19. — Jehovah  hath  done  to  him. 
Rather,  "  hath  wrought  for  himself;"  but  the 
LXX.,  Vulgate,  and  some  MSS.  read  "hath 
done  to  thee,"  as  in  ver.  18.  As  he  spake  by 
me.  See  ch.  xv.  28.  Saul's  rebellion  is  there 
said,  in  ver.  23,  to  be  a  crime  as  great  as 
the  vritchcraft  which  he  was  at  that  time  so 
zealously  punishing ;  here,  where  the  sentence 
is  being  carried  into  execution,  Saul  has  him- 
self become  guilty  of  what  in  his  better 
hours  he  so  abominated.  Jehovah  will  also 
deliver  Israel  with  thee.  Rather,  "will 
deliver  Israel  also  with  thee,"  i.  e.  the  nation 
is  to  share  thy  punishment.  To-morrow 
Shalt  thou  and  thy  sons  be  with  me.  /.  e. 
shall  be  dead.  Whence  this  voice  came  it  is 
difBcult  to  say.  St.  Augustine  thought  that 
the  woman  really  conjured  up  a  demon,  who 
took  the  form  of  Samuel.  Maimonides  treats 
the  whole  as  the  effect  of  Saul's  diseased 
imagination  ;  while  many  modem  comment- 
ators regard  it  as  a  well-played  piece  of 
jugglery  on  the  part  of  the  woman,  who 
recognised  Saul  at  once  on  his  entrance,  but 
professed  not  to  know  him  till  his  name  was 
revealed  to  her  by  the  pretended  apparition, 
in  whose  name  she  reproached  him  for  his 
crimes,  announced  to  him,  what  now  all  were 
convinced  of,  that  David  was  to  be  his  suc- 
cessor, and  foretold  his  defeat  and  death.  In 
the  face  of  such  a  passage  as  Dent,  xviii.  10 
— 12  we  cannot  believe  that  the  Bible  would 
set  before  us  an  instance  of  witchcraft  em- 
ployed with  the  Divine  sanction  for  holy 
purposes  ;  but  we  can  easily  believe  that  the 
woman  would  gladly  take  a  bitter  revenge  on 
the  man  who  nad  cruelly  put  to  death  all 
persons  reputed  to  have  such  powers  as  those 
to  which  she  laid  claim.  The  object  of  the 
narrative  is  plainly  to  set  before  us  the  com- 
pleteness of  Saul's  moral  downfall  and  de- 
basement. Here  is  the  man  endowed  with 
so  many  and  so  great  gifts  of  genius,  and  who 
in  so  many  things  started  so  well  and  behaved 
so  nobly,  the  victim  of  a  despairing  melan- 
choly ;  his  conscience  is  blackened  with  the 
wholesale  massacre  of  the  priesthood,  his 
imagination  is  ever  brooding  over  the  sick 
fancy  of  treason  plotted  by  his  son-in-law, 
whom  now  he  supposes  to  be  in  the  Philistine 
camp ;  his  enemies  have  invaded  his  territory 
in  extraordinary  numbers  and  upon  new 
ground ;  to  him  it  seems  as  if  they  have 
I  come  to  dethrone  him  and  place  his  cro«rn  on 


524 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[OH.  XXVIIL  1—26. 


David's  head.  In  this  dire  extremity  his 
one  wish  is  to  pry  into  futurity  and  learn  his 
fate.  There  is  no  submission  to  God,  no 
sorrow  for  disobedience,  no  sign  of  even  & 
wish  for  amendment ;  it  is  to  unholy  arts 
that  he  looks,  simply  that  he  may  know  what 
a  few  more  hours  will  make  known  to  all. 
Neglecting  his  duties  as  a  general  and  king, 
instead  of  making  wise  preparation  for  the 
coming  fight,  he  disguises  himself,  takes  a 
dangerous  and  wearisome  journey  round  the 
enemies'  camp,  arrives  at  his  destination  by 
night,  and,  exhausted  with  hunger  and  men- 
tal agitation,  seeks  there  for  the  knowledge 
unattainable  in  any  upright  manner  from  a 
reputed  witch.  He  has  rejected  God,  lost  all 
the  strength  and  comfort  of  true  religion,  and 
is  become  the  victim  of  abject  superstition. 
Whether  he  were  the  victim  also  of  the 
woman's  arts,  or  of  his  own  sick  fantasy,  is 
not  a  matter  of  much  consequence ;  the 
interest  of  the  narrative  lies  in  the  revelation 
it  makes  to.  us  of  Saul's  mental  and  moral 
state  ;  and  scarcely  is  there  in  the  whole  of 
Scripture  anything  more  tragic  than  this 
narrative,  or  any  more  intense  picture  of  the 
depth  of  degradation  to  which  a  noble  but 
perverse  intellect  is  capable  of  falling. 

Vers.  20— 26.— Saul  fell  straightway  all 
ilong,  i.  e.  at  full  length,  on  the  earth.  He 
fainted,  partly  from  mental  distress,  partly 


from  bodily  exhaustion,  as  h«  had  gone  all  th« 
day  and  all  the  night  without  food.  It  was 
this  long-continued  violent  emotion  of  feeling 
which  had  driven  Saul  to  this  rash  enterprise ; 
but  fasting  and  agony  of  mind  were  the  worst 
possible  preparation  for  a  visit  to  one  used  to 
cajole  her  victims  by  pretended  magical  arts, 
and  gifted,  as  people  of  her  class  usually  are, 
with  great  shrewdness.  But  practised  as  she 
was  in  deceit,  yet  even  in  her  triumph  over 
her  enemy  she  felt,  when  she  saw  him  swoon 
away,  a  natural  sympathy  for  his  misery  and 
weakness,  and  urged  him  to  take  food.  Per- 
haps she  saw  that  without  it  he  could  never 
have  got  back  to  the  Israelite  camp.  At  first 
he  refused,  but  the  necessity  of  it  was  so 
plain,  that  when  the  two  men  with  him  also 
urged  it,  he  at  last  consented.  So  he  arose 
from  the  earth,  and  sat  upon  the  bed.  During 
this  colloquy  he  had  remained  prostrate  upon 
the  ground,  but  now  he  seated  himself,  not  on 
a  bed,  but  upon  the  raised  bank,  or  divan, 
which  runs  along  the  wall  of  an  Oriental 
house,  and  is  furnished  with  carpets  and 
cushions  for  men  to  sit  or  lie  upon.  There 
he  rested,  a  prey,  we  may  well  believe,  to 
bitter  thoughts,  while  the  woman  hastily 
prepared  a  meal,  killing  a  calf  and  baking 
unleavened  cakes,  as  there  was  no  time  to 
leaven  the  dough.  And  so  "  they  ate,  and 
rose  up,  and  departed  that  night." 


HOMILETICa 

Vers.  1 — 5. — The  operation  of  moral  causes.  The  facts  are — 1.  On  war  arising 
between  the  Philistines  and  Israel,  Achish  reminds  David  of  his  obligation  to  assist 
him  in  battle.  2.  David,  although  answering  ambiguously,  is  trusted  by  Achish,  who 
promises  him  promotion.  3.  On  the  opposing  forces  being  assembled,  Saul's  heart 
faints  for  fear  of  his  enemy.  The  narrative  shows  that  both  David  and  Saul  were 
at  the  same  time  in  embarrassed  circumstances,  and  each  as  the  consequence  of  his 
sin.  They  were  bent  on  totally  diverse  objects,  but  neither  of  them  was  in  a  position 
of  safety.  The  penalties  of  transgression  were  being  paid.  We  see  here  an 
instance  of — 

I.  The  questionable  ambiguities  of  life.  David's  false  step  in  yielding  to 
unwarrantable  fear,  followed  as  it  was  by  actions  unworthy  of  his  fair  fame,  was 
now  developing  to  a  crisis  in  which  the  principles  of  his  entire  life  would  be  put  to 
an  unavoidable  test.  His  heathen  friend  and  protector  naturally  claimed  his  help  in 
the  coming  struggle  with  Israel.  Painfully  must  David  have  winced  as  Achish, 
trusting  to  his  honour  and  gratitude,  reminded  him  of  his  obligations.  Although  he 
had  simulated  hostility  to  Israel  for  his  own  selfish  purpose's,  and  had  done  himself 
and  his  countrymen  a  wrong  by  allowing  it  to  be  supposed  that  he  could  ever  be  their 
enemy,  yet  there  was  enough  of  fidelity  in  his  heart  to  save  him  from  so  dire  an  evil 
as  was  suggested  by  Achish.  To  escape  from  the  awkward  position,  recourse  was  had 
to  the  craft  of  an  ambiguous  statement,  to  which  he  and  Achish  attached  different 
meanings.  The  common  judgment  on  David's  conduct  will  be  adverse.  Even  though 
some  would  apologise  for  it  under  the  plea  of  danger,  yet  they  must  condemn  its 
essential  falsehood.  It  is  not  lawful  to  palliate  our  deceit  by  reference  to  difficulties 
created  by  our  own  misconduct.  Plain,  straightforward  words  and  conduct,  even  in 
times  of  perplexity,  are  not  only  morally  best,  but,  even  from  a  utilitarian  point  of 
view,  are  most  conducive  to  permanent  welfare.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  ambiguities 
•bound  in  life  more  than  becomes  a  Christian  profession.  There  is  conduct  as  well 
M  liuiguage  admitting  of  double  interpretation.    We  shonld  always  aim  to  be  and 


OB.  xxvin.  1—26.]         THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  625 

to  speak  so  as  not  to  bo  objects  of  suspicion.  To  say  exactly  what  we  mean  and  to 
act  with  singleness  of  purpose  is  to  approximate  towards  the  "simplicity  that  is  io 
Christ"  (cf.  Rom.  xii-  8;  2  Cor.  i.  12 ;  xi.  3). 

II.  Untimely  troubi.eb.  Troubles  are  in  the  way  at  any  time,  but  there  are  seasons 
when  their  presence  is  most  inconvenient.  It  was  annoying  to  David  that  war 
should  break  out  between  Israel  and  the  Philistines  just  when  he  was,  according  to  the 
ordinary  judgment  of  men,  under  obligation  to  assist  Achish  ;  and  it  was  especially 
inconvenient  to  Saul  that  thi's  trouble  of  war  should  occur  when,  by  reason  of  Samuel's 
long  discountenance  of  his  reign,  the  gradual  alienation  of  able  men,  the  loss  to  the 
kingdom  of  David's  prowess,  and  his  own  private  sorrows,  it  was  not  possible  to 
gather  adequate  forces  and  act  with  wonted  energy.  Providence  has  a  manifest 
tendency  to  allow  troubles  to  cross  the  path  of  the  wrong-doer  just  when,  for  his  own 
purposes,  it  is  desirable  to  have  it  quite  clear.  "  Behold,  I  will  hedge  up  thy  way 
with  thorns,"  is  a  prediction  likely  to  be  fulfilled  in  the  lives  of  rulers  and  nations 
bent  on  a  crooked  course  of  conduct ;  nor  can  individuals  escape  the  law  of  provi- 
dential vexation  when  they  practise  deceit  or,  like  Saul,  cherish  an  impenitent  spirit. 
It  is  thus  that  the  delusiveness  of  sin  appears  ;  for  the  ease  and  pleasure  anticipated 
in  doing  one's  sinful  will  vanish  before  events,  which,  like  mists  around  a  mountain, 
seem  to  come  from  we  know  not  where.  A  man's  sin  will  be  sure  to  find  rebuke  in 
forms  he  could  not  foresee.  It  is  very  inconvenient  to  be  on  the  wrong  side  in  the 
moral  conflicts  of  life.  Good  men  can  bear  trouble  in  patience,  knowing  that  it  is  as 
truly  helpful  to  their  highest  interests  as  is  joy ;  wicked  men  not  only  lose  the  sup- 
port of  a  clear  conscience,  but  have  to  learn  that  the  end  for  which  they  have  striven 
will  be  frustrated  (cf .  Ps.  vii.  9 ;  xxxvii.  38 ;  cxii.  10). 

III.  The  opebation  of  mobal  causes.  "The  troubles  which  thus  came  on  David 
and  Saul,  producing  in  the  one  a  questionable  ambiguity  of  conduct,  and  in  the  other  a 
sense  of  helplessness,  were  connected  with  a  set  of  moral  causes  that  had  been  in  steady 
operation  for  a  considerable  period,  and  had  interacted  with  the  physical  in  producing 
the  crisis.  Taking  the  case  of  Saul,  we  see  how  his  sin  in  the  early  part  of  his  reign 
being  anrepented,  induced  the  line  of  conduct  which  drove  David  from  the  land, 
alienated  the  spiritual  power  and  many  of  the  ablest  men,  gradually  drew  around 
himself  evil  men,  and  created  uneasiness  and  distrust  in  the  nation.  Whatever 
reluctance  on  the  part  of  the  people  to  assemble  in  full  force,  and  whatever  want  of 
nerve  on  the  part  of  Saul  to  lead  them  on,  might  have  been  the  immediate  cause  of 
his  fear — these  were  the  result  of  the  moral  defection  which  had  slowly  worked  on 
all  departments  of  life.  Besides  this,  the  sin  of  Saul  had  had  the  efEect  of  so  with- 
drawing the  Divine  favour  that  Providence,  by  not  restraining  their  will,  permitted 
the  attack  of  the  Philistines.  For  moral  reasons  Saul's  predicted  doom  was  preparing, 
in  spite  of  all  his  efforts  to  avoid  it.  It  is  one  of  the  most  striking  characteristics 
of  the  Bible,  as  compared  with  other  books,  that  it  brings  into  prominence  the  moral 
causes  that  affect  we  present  and  future  position  of  men.  Assuming  the  orderly 
action  of  physical  laws,  it  impresses  us  with  the  truth  that  the  mental  and  moral  are 
above  the  physical,  and  that  man  by  his  conduct  sets  in  motion  moral  forces  which, 
by  a  subtle  interaction,  ultimately  govern  the  bearing  of  the  physical  upon  his  con- 
dition. Moral  causes  are  »rMreary.  In  so  far  as  we  may  imagine  the  Divine  action  in 
creation  having  a  beginning,  the  moral  cause  of  action  was  antecedent.  The  reason 
of  the  exercise  of  power  was  moral.  In  our  world's  sad  history  moral  causes  have 
been  primary.  The  same  is  true  of  our  personal  life.  They  lie  at  the  spring  of  our 
joy  or  woe.  They  are  also  silent  and  slaw.  Saul's  sin  and  impenitence  were  not 
uttered,  and  they  worked  on  in  silent,  slow  course  all  through  his  life.  It  seems  to 
require  time  for  the  higher  moral  laws  to  work  out  their  legitimate  consequences  in 
the  sphere  of  the  physical.  There  are  many  illustrations  of  this  in  the  lives  of  evil 
men,  as  also  of  good.  They  are  also  invineible.  No  energy  or  cunning  on  the  part  of 
Saul  could  obviate  the  political  and  military  weakness  of  his  kingdom.  No  power  can 
check  the  tendency  to  physical  and  political  decay  consequent  on  the  sins  of  statesmen 
and  peoples.  The  whole  universe  submits  to  the  action  of  the  moral  forces  that  ara 
tendmg  to  bring  men  into  judgment.    The  sea  even  will  obey  and  give  up  its  dead. 

General  lessons: — 1.  In  embarrassments  brought  on  by  oir  sins  it  is  honouring 
tB  Gkid  to  speak  the  plain  tnith  and  trast  to  his  care.    2.  The  affairs  of  life  will  be 


SM  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [cm.  xztdi.  l—U. 

eagilj  conducted  in  proportion  as  men  are  honest  and  simple  in  word  and  deed.  8. 
Those  only  who  learn  the  lessons  of  trouble  in  their  early  stage  will  escape  later  evils, 
4.  We  should  be  thankful  to  Glod  for  hedging  our  erring  steps  with  difficulties.  6.  It 
is  a  comfort  to  the  holy  that  the  principles  ruling  in  their  souls  are  destined  to  finally 
subdue  all  things  to  their  truest  welfare. 

Vers.  6 — 14. — Maris  appeal  from  God  to  man.  The  facts  are — 1.  Saul  in  his 
trouble  seeks  in  vain  guidance  n-om  God.  2.  In  despair  he  has  recourse  to  the  witch 
of  Endor,  promising  her  that  no  harm  should  come  to  her  for  assisting  him  with  her 
incantations.  3.  Saul  desires  of  her  to  bring  up  Samuel.  4.  On  Samuel  coming  forth 
the  woman  is  in  terror,  and  also  discovers  Saul's  identity.  6.  By  the  aid  of  the  woman 
Saul  recognises  Samuel,  and  bows  himself  to  the  earth.  The  strange  events  here 
narrated  awaken  feelings  of  wonder,  and,  in  minds  not  acquiescent  in  God's  methods 
of  developing  his  purpose  in  connection  with  the  Hebrew  race,  some  degree  of  in- 
credulity ;  but  the  important  spiritual  teaching  is  obvious,  and  the  difficulties  of  the 
subject,  also,  are  not  without  their  practical  value.     We  have  here  an  instance  of — 

L  A  MAN  MQHTBOUSLT  LEITT  OF  GoD  IN  TIME  OF  DISTRESS.  The  triple  reference 
to  dreams,  prophets,  and  Urim  indicates  the  intense  desire  of  Saul  to  obtain  some 
intimation  of  the  Divine  will ;  and  this  renders  the  futility  of  his  endeavour  the 
more  impressive.  Outwardly  he  conformed  to  the  usages  of  a  ruler  in  Israel,  and, 
were  he  judged  by  men  who  have  regard  only  or  chiefly  to  the  zeal  which  meets  the 
eye,  he  would  be  regarded  as,  so  far,  a  religious  man,  and  within  the  range  of  blessing. 
To  those  who  are  unfamiliar  with  Scripture  it  may  seem  painfully  strange  that  a 
man  presumably  in  earnest  should  be  so  utterly  left  of  God ;  but,  as  in  other  instances, 
a  little  more  knowledge  will  afford  a  solution  of  the  fact  and  justify  the  ways  of  God. 
1.  It  is  a  fact  that  mem,  are  left  to  themselves.  Divine  guidance  had  been  withheld 
from  Saul  from  the  day  of  his  rebellion  (ch.  xv.  20 — 23)  up  to  the  date  of  this  event. 
The  antediluvians  and,  at  one  stage  of  history,  Israel  were  abandoned  to  their 
devices  (Gen.  vi.  1 — 3 ;.  Isa.  i.  16).  Pharisees  were  left  to  the  blindness  of  their 
hearts  notwithstanding  their  many  prayers.  When  men  deliberately  darken  the  light 
that  is  in  them  God  does  not  enable  them  to  see  the  "  Light  of  the  world,"  2.  There 
are  moral  reasons  for  such  ahandonmerU.  In  Saul's  case  there  was  an  absence  of 
that  state  of  mind  which  alone  would  render  attention  to  his  cry  for  help  honourable 
to  God  and  blessed  to  mankind.  There  was  no  penitential  recognition  of  his  former 
sin,  nor  of  the  years  of  persistent  impenitence,  nor  of  his  cruelty  to  David  ;  his  desire 
for  God's  guidance  and  help  sprang  entirely  from  fear  of  military  disaster,  of  loss 
of  influence,  and  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  prediction  outstanding  against  him  (ch.  xv. 
28,  29).  The  response  of  God  to  man's  cry  is  based  on  law  as  beautiful  in  its 
orderliness  as  anything  in  the  physical  world.  The  notion  that  God  m.vM  help  every 
one  in  trouble  is  based  on  sheer  ignorance,  and  is  profoundly  unscientific.  Even  in 
home  and  society  we  recognise  the  necessity  of  moral  conditions  of  receiving  atten- 
tion and  favour.  Divine  mercy  is  free,  but  is  righteous  in  its  flow.  It  never  sets  a 
premium  on  selfishness  and  impenitence ;  it  is  never  exercised  in  such  a  way  as  to  do 
violence  to  our  radical  sense  of  right  and  moral  propiiety.  This  will  account  for  the 
deaf  ear  which  God  is  represented  as  turning  to  bad  men  when,  in  desperation,  they 
cry  to  him  in  adversity,  and  when,  at  the  end  of  life,  they  seek  him  in  vain  ;  for  they 
do  not  cire  for  God,  for  holiness,  for  anything  but  selfish  deliverance  from  uncom- 
fortable circumstances  and  great  danger.  Hence — 3.  TJie  abandonment  is  in  har- 
mony  with  the  current  of  God's  promises.  Again  and  again  we  are  encouraged  to  seek 
the  Lord.  Nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  God  delights  to  answer  our  cry  for  help. 
The  appeal  of  David  later  on  in  life,  and  the  dumb  pleading  of  the  Magdalene,  were 
freely  answered  ;  but  the  fifty-first  Psalm  reveals  the  contrast  of  David's  spirit  with 
that  of  Saul,  and  the  tears  of  the  unholy  woman  told  of  a  heart  altogether  turned 
toward  God. 

II,  The  eOTBEHUMAN  CHARACTER  OF  God's  WATS.  There  is  in  some  minds  a  feeling 
of  surprise  that  such  a  narrative  as  this  should  find  a  place  in  a  book  supposed  to  be 
written  or  compiled  under  Divine  inspiration  for  the  instruction  of  the  world  in 
spiritual  truth ;  and,  assuming  that  its  fitness  in  such  a  book  can  be  made  out,  it  ie 
dewned  incredible  tbat  God  should  allow  his  servant  to  come  from  the  invisible  world 


OL  Txvni.  1—25.]        THB  FIBST  BOOK  OF  BAMUEL.  Ill 

at  the  request  of  such  a  man  as  Saul,  and  through  an  agency  condemned  in  the  Bible. 
Now  on  this  di£Scu1t  subject  it  may  suffice  for  our  purpose  to  observe — 1.  A  revdor 
Hon  of  Godls  purpose  .towards  mankind  in  connection  with  and  by  means  of  the 
history  of  a  race  is  natural  otdy  in  so  far  as  it  embraces  what  the  chief  figures  of  the 
histxyry  actually  did,  and  especially  in  their  relation  to  him,  be  it  good  or  bad.  That 
Saul  actually  did  as  here  recorded  is  evident  on  the  face  of  the  whole  narrative,  f oi 
never  was  there  a  more  perfect  air  of  truthfulness  on  a  record.  The  very  unreasoji- 
ablenesB  of  his  conduct  in  applying  to  a  witch  for  such  a  purpose,  and  after  executing 
the  law  against  witchcraft,  is  quite  reasonable  when  we  reflect  on  the  otter  mental  and 
moral  confusion  involved  in  his  despair.  Compare  his  unreasonable  act  of  seeking 
a  blessing  through  a  sinful  act  (ch.  xiii.  8 — 14 ;  xv.  21 — 23).  The  record,  therefore, 
of  such  a  transaction  is  reasonable  in  an  inspired  book.  2.  There  are  cases  in  which 
God  allows  had  men  to  have  their  desire  without  the  advantage  they  expect  from  its 
being  granted.  Quails  were  given  to  men  to  their  grief.  A  king  was  desired  con- 
trary to  God's  will,  and  one  was  given,  much  to  the  afBiction  of  the  nation.  There 
is  so  far  a  similarity  in  this  instance,  that  the  granting  of  the  desire  to  see  Samuel 
was  only  to  seal  Saul's  doom,  not  to  give  the  guidance  anticipated,  and  which  had 
been  hitherto  refused  (ver.  6).  3.  There  was  a  manifest  fitness  in  Samuel  being 
permitted  to  declare  the  fixity  of  SauVs  fate  and  its  equity.  He  had  instructed  and 
warned  Saul  at  first  in  private  (ch.  ix.  25,  26),  and  subsequently  (ch.  xv.  26 — 31). 
All  through  he  had  looked  with  sorrowful  pity  on  this  poor  wayward,  sinning  man. 
With  Saul's  belief  in  the  existence  of  the  spirits  of  good  men  after  death,  it  was  the 
most  natural  thing  to  wish,  if  possible,  to  see  this  wise,  kind,  and  faithful  friend, 
and  in  his  utter  despair  appeal  to  his  pity ;  and  considering  that  there  evidently  still 
lurked  in  his  mind  a  last  hope  that  the  old,  long-deferred  prediction  of  downfall  might 
yet  be  averted,  with  a  feeling  that  it  was  very  hard,  and  perhaps  unjust,  for  him  to  be 
thus  left  in  misery,  there  seems  to  be  a  blending  of  Divine  tenderness  and  judgment  in 
this  kind  and  faithful  friend  being  permitted  once  more  to  be  seen  and  heard,  and  at 
the  same  time  to  vindicate  the  justice  of  God  in  the  doom  about  to  be  accomplished. 
The  Divine  tenderness  and  judgment  which  had  borne  with  and  chastised  Saul  all 
through  his  perverse  life  were  now  conspicuous  in  the  irrevocable  sealing  of  his  doom. 
He  would  rather  hear  his  sentence  from  Samuel  than  any  other  being,  if  it  is  to  be  pro 
nounced.  4.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  woman  had  anything  to  do  viith  the  appear- 
ance of  Samuel.  He  came  forth  before  she  called,  and  hence  her  wild  shriek.  That 
she  subsequently  played  her  part  as  a  witch  was  consistent  with  the  character  of  such 
persons.  That  Saul  should  suppose  her  to  be  the  cause  of  the  appearance  does  not 
touch  the  question.  He  was  not  in  a  mental  condition  to  discriminate.  That  God 
should  allow  an  invisible  being  to  become  visible  under  such  conditions  is  to  be  settled 
by  history,  for — 5.  There  is  no  moral  principle  violated  in  God  allowing  a  being  from 
the  invisible  world  to  become  visible.  There  is  here  no  sanction  of  witchcraft,  no  ad- 
mission of  its  powers.  Kindness  and  judgment  only  are  displayed  in  relation  to  Saul 
The  whole  difficulty,  therefore,  resolves  itself  in  a  visible  appearance  of  a  dead  man. 
Will  any  one  say  that  God  cannot  cause  a  Samuel  to  appear  as  truly  as  a  Moses  and 
Elijah  ?  Does  the  incredulity  lie  in  the  fact  that  we  never  see  the  departed,  or  that 
God  does  not  cause  them  to  appear  to  others  ?  By  what  law  is  God  bound  to  make 
a  specific  exercise  of  his  power  common  ?  Will  the  case  be  improved  by  saying  it 
is  such  an  exercise  of  power  as  we  should  not  deem  wise  and  useful  ?  What  is  that 
but  Baying  we  make  our  method  of  government  a  standard  by  which  God's  reported 
acts  shall  be  judged  ?  Is  it  not  wiser  to  submit  to  the  force  of  historical  testimony, 
and  admit  that  his  ways  are  not  our  ways  ?  God  does  strange  things  in  the  earth,  at 
which  meii  marvel,  but  never  unholy  things.  There  is  nothing  incredible  in  the 
existence  of  departed  spirits,  nor  in  their  employment  when  God  has  a  fit  purpose 
to  accomplish  through  them.  ,      ,        ,  ,        , 

III.  The  pebmanenck  of  beliqious  sentiment3.  It  is  noteworthy  that  although 
Saul  had  lived  so  long  in  impenitence,  and  had  become  even  hardened  in  his  sinful 
course  he  still  retained  an  awe  and  reverence  for  the  supernatural  and  invisible.  His 
very  folly  and  sin  in  having  recourse  to  a  witch  revealed  the  strength  of  the  feeling 
which  could  not  rest  without  some  help  from  the  unseen  world.  If  God  cannot  be 
found  men  will  seek  out  a  substitute.    Idolatry  and  all  Sonns  of  religious  super- 


«SS  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxvin.  1— 2ft. 

Atition  are  evidence  of  the  power  of  the  leligions  aentiment  in  man.  Thousands  of 
men  have  done  much  to  crush  it  out,  but  it  has  reasserted  itself  in  seasons  of  distress. 
Because  man  is  formed  for  religion,  and  carries  within  him  feelings  wliich  crave  for 
the  unseen  and  eternal,  therefore  he  often  becomes  the  slave  of  false  systems  of 
belief  and  worship.  The  permanence  of  this  sentiment  gives  hope  to  the  missionary, 
and  adds  to  the  remorse  of  the  finally  impenitent. 

IV.  Thb  power  op  beligious  influence.  The  influence  of  Samuel  over  Saul 
appears  in  this  bitter  cry  for  his  presence  in  the  hour  of  misery.  The  foundation  of 
this  influence  was  laid  in  Samuel's  character,  and  in  the  kind  and  wise  interest  he 
took  in  Saul  when  entering  on  his  public  duties  as  king.  Holy  example,  faithful 
warning,  wise  instruction,  tender  forbearance,  and  pitiful  concern  had  not  been  alto- 
gether lost  on  this  erring,  self-willed  man,  although  in  the  perversity  of  hi's  heart  he 
had  for  years  gone  counter  to  Samuel's  guidance.  In  the  dark  and  painful  hour  of 
despair  the  thought  of  the  wise  counsellor  and  sincere  friend  came  over  the  soul 
with  memories  rich  in  homage  to  him.  How  often  does  the  poor  prodigal,  when 
sinking  in  misery,  feel  the  spell  of  a  mother's  piety  1  How  many  a  man  after  years 
of  neglected  instruction  thinks  of  the  faithful  pastor,  and  perchance  takes  to  heart 
the  lessons  of  his  words  and  life  t 

General  lessons : — 1.  The  climax  of  trouble  is  reached  when  God  refuses  to  hear 
our  prayer,  for  "  What  can  I  do  ?  "  then  admits  of  no  satisfactory  answer.  2.  We 
ought  to  search  our  hearts,  to  see  whether  we  so  "  regard  iniquity  "  therein  as  to  be  in 
an  unfit  moral  condition  to  receive  a  blessing  from  God  (Ps.  Ixvi.  18).  3.  God  has 
methods  by  which  he  can  vindicate  the  justice  of  his  judgments,  even  when  we  are 
craving  for  relief  from  them.  4.  It  is  important  to  exercise  religious  influence  over 
others  as  early  and  constantly  as  possible,  since  we  know  that  it  will  be  a  power  even 
when  we  are  gone. 

Vera.  16 — 25. — The  last  fmitlets  ^ort.  The  facts  of  this  section  are — 1.  Saul,  in 
reply  to  Samuel's  question,  declares,  as  the  reason  of  seeking  him,  his  deep  distress 
and  desire  to  know  what  to  do.  2.  Samuel  intimates  that  the  inquiry  is  vain,  as  he 
cannot  go  against  God ;  that  the  event  causing  so  much  distress  was  simply  the  per- 
fecting of  what  had  long  before  been  declared ;  that  David  was  the  coming  king, 
and  that  all  this  was  the  consequence  of  deliberate  disobedience.  3.  He  also  declares 
that  the  morrow  should  witness  the  overthrow  of  Saul's  power  and  the  death  of  him- 
self and  sons.  4.  The  effect  of  the  message  on  Saul  is  to  prostrate  him  in  terror  on 
the  ground.  5.  Out  of  compassion  the  woman  seeks  in  vain  to  rouse  Saul  from  his 
helpless  despair,  but  by  the  aid  of  his  attendants  he  is  at  last  constrained  to  rise  and 
partake  of  the  meal  she  had  prepared.  Among  the  many  truths  suggested  by  this 
impressive  scene  we  may  notice  a  few. 

I.  The  daeinq  op  despeeation.  Ordinarily  men  shrink  in  dread  from  all  thought 
of  contact  with  visitants  from  the  unseen  world,  and  bad  men  especially  tremble  at 
the  possible  presence,  seen  or  unseen,  of  the  ghosts  .of  the  departed.  The  experience 
of  all  ages  testifies  to  this.  And  yet  here  we  have  an  instance  of  a  man,  not  usually 
distinguished  by  calm  self-possession,  deliberately  seeking,  and  actually  holding, 
converse  with  one  from  the  dead.  The  solution  of  this  reversal  of  the  course  of 
human  feeling  and  conduct  lies  in  the  desperation  of  despair,  which  so  overpowers  all 
thought  and  feeling  as  to  dare  to  do  what  at  other  times  would  be  impossible.  Such 
the  urgency  of  conscience,  the  pressure  of  misery,  the  violent  struggle  of  a  will 
caught  in  the  coils  of  its  own  perversity.  The  same  occurs  in  other  circumstances, 
as  when,  to  extricate  themselves  from  self-brought  miseries,  men  dare  to  perpetrate 
deeds  of  honour  or  shame,  or  even  commit  suicide.  Is  there  not  a  similar  feeling 
implied  in  the  cry  to  the  rocks, "  Fall  on  us  and  hide  us  from  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  "  ? 

II.  An  dnanswekable  question.  One  question  had  agitated  Saul  for  some  days. 
He  appealed  to  God,  and  no  answer  came ;  and  now  Samuel  is  told  that  the  object  for 
which  he  was  summoned  into  the  visible  sphere  was  to  reply  to  this  one  question, 
"  What  shall  I  do  ?  "  The  silence  of  God  and  the  words  of  Samuel  show  that  prac- 
tically this  was  a  question  for  which  no  answer  was  possible.  The  day  for  doing 
was  in  the  past,  when  Samuel  delivered  instructions  in  the  name  of  God.  Years  of 
persistent  impenitence  for  disobedience  and  of  self-willed  warring  against  the  pur- 


OB.  uviiL  1—21.]         THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  M9 

poses  of  Ood  had  broaght  the  nnhappy  man  to  a  time  and  position  in  which  no  aotion- 
on  his  part  could  reverse  the  judgment  impending.  Too  late  I  So.  is  it  in  human 
life  still.  Men  may  persist  in  evil  ways  at  home  or  in  business  till  ruin  of  domestic 
peace  and  of  prospects  is  inevitable,  and  no  course  is  open  for  retrieval.  The  ques- 
tion of  the  jailor, "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  was  opportune,  and  then,  ns  gener- 
ally, it  admitted  of  a  blessed  answer ;  but  it  is  possible  for  men  to  scorn  and  despise 
Christ  so  long  that  the  other  question  may  arise, "  How  shall  we  escape  if  we  neglect 
BO  great  salvation  ?  "  (cl  Heb.  ii.  3 ;  vi.  3—7 ;  x.  26—31). 

III.  The  unalterable  law  of  life.  The  whole  of  Saul's  conduct  during  these 
closing  days  of  his  life  was  based  on  the  ignorant  supposition  that  by  some  device 
he  could  be  sustained  in  the  kingdom  notwithstanding  his  former  disobedience  and 
continued  impenitence.  Conformity  in  act  and  spirit  to  the  mind  of  God  la  the  law 
of  true  prosperity  in  life.  Israel's  king  rises  or  falls  according  to  this  law.  As  a 
servant  called  to  perform  an  important  part  in  unfolding  Messianic  purposes,  Saul's 
hold  on  the  kingdom  was  made  to  depend  on  character.  No  plea,  no  consideration  of 
personal  misery,  no  device  suggested  by  the  living  or  the  dead,  could  avail  to  give  to 
a  self-willed,  impenitent  man  what  is  due  to  the  obedient  and  holy.  In  all  hia 
misr^ry  and  desire  for  guidance  there  was  not  a  trace  of  the  broken  or  contrite  heart 
which  Ood  accepts ;  mere  was  only  and  always  a  blind  effort  to  avert  the  passing 
away  of  the  power  which  sin  had  forfeited.  This  law  of  life  is  never  changed. 
Men  struggle  against  it,  seek  to  evade  its  action,  crave  for  some  relaxation  of  its 
pressure,  but  it  is  unbending,  unrelenting.  Character  determines  destiny.  The  lines 
of  experience  in  the  future  are  the  outcome  of  the  present,  and  not  disconnected.  As 
we  sow  we  reap. 

IV.  The  moral  interpretation  of  Events.  No  doubt  there  were  hours  when  the 
revival  of  conscience  would  enable  Saul  to  read  the  meaning  of  the  troubles  that  had 
long  befallen  him ;  but  generally,  and  especially  at  this  juncture,  he  appears  to  have 
wondered  at  the  miseries  of  his  position.  Men  do  bring  on  themselves  manifold 
troubles,  and  then,  forgetful  of  the  conduct  which  gave  rise  to  them,  or  not  tracing 
them  carefully  back  to  their  own  former  moral  condition,  they  marvel  at,  and  perhaps 
complain  of,  the  sufferings  endured.  The  visitant  from  the  unseen  world  threw 
light  on  Saul's  position  by  reference  to  conduct  and  character.  Here  was  an  inter- 
pretation, from  a  moral  point  of  view,  of  a  long  succession  of  events  in  the  political, 
physical,  and  mental  spheres.  We  never  estimate  events  in  our  life  aright  if  we 
leave  out  the  moral  element.  A  vast  accumulation  of  disasters  in  the  history  of 
nations  and  individuals,  Churches  and  homes,  is  understandable  in  the  light  of  what 
men  have  been  and  have  done.  Hence  the  value  of  the  Bible,  which  comes  as  a 
visitant  from  the  spiritual  sphere,  casting  light  on  the  matters  that  worry  and  distress 
the  heart  of  man.  Sinful  men  need  a  voice  to  tell  them  how  to  estimate  the  experi- 
ences of  their  life. 

V.  The  vindication  or  God's  sv\  ewn.  It  seemed  hard  to  Saul  to  be  thus  left 
of  God,  the  mere  wreck  of  his  fonr.er  self,  and  now  exposed  to  a  g'reat  disaster  as 
commander  of  an  army.  Had  casual  observers,  unacquainted  with  antecedent  moral 
facts,  looked  on  his  miseries,  they  might  pronounce  the  treatment  severe.  There  is, 
however,  in  the  conscience  of  even  the  most  self-willed  sinner  that  which  recognises 
the  majesty  of  right  and  echoes  the  voice  of  judgment.  It  was  only  for  Samuel  to 
refer  to  the  deliberate  disobedience  6f  former  days,  and  Saul  saw  at  once  the  con- 
nection of  all  his  woes  with  the  depraved  moral  condition  then  manifested  and  sub- 
sequently cherished.  Divine  patience  had  borne  with  him  during  years  of  rebellion, 
content  to  let  the  natural  outgrowth  of  his  own  acts  bring  on  the  judgment  predicted, 
and,  now  that  it  was  falling  on  him  with  crushing  force,  this  reminder  of  g^eat  and 
continuous  sin  was  even  to  the  suffering  king  a  full  vindication  of  the  course  o£ 
Providence.  Here  is  warning  and  instruction  for  us.  Let  us  never  suppose  that  wo 
or  others  bear  more  than  we  deserve.  We  should  avoid  the  bare  thought  that  God 
deals  harshly  with  any  of  his  creatures.  The  bitterest  element  in  the  cup  of  suffer- 
ing is  that  we  put  into  it  by  our  transgressions ;  for  facts  prove  that  overwhelm- 
ing material  diBasters.with  a  good  conscience,  are  not  the  worst  of  evils,  and  become 
not  only  endurable,  but  means  of  spiritual  good.  The  hour  may  come  to  each  when, 
by  a  voice  full  of  truth,  we  shall  be  made  to  see  how  just  are  God's  judgments  oa 

iBAM.  V  >< 


690  THK  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.         [oh.  xxvra.  1—25. 

ounelyes.  Th«  escape  from  80  awfal  a  position  is  by  fleeing  now  for  refuge  to  Christ 
onr  BighteousnesB.  The  dumb  consent  of  Sanl  to  the  truth  of  Samuel's  words  is  in 
keeping  with  the  acquiescent  silence  wherewith,  in  the  future  life,  the  wicked  are 
represented  as  bowing  to  the  sentence  of  the  Judge  (cf.  Matt  vii.  21 — 23 ;  zzr,  11, 
12,  31—46 ;  Luke  xvi.  23—25 ;  xix.  22—26). 

VI.  Thb  gbeat  disappointment  of  life.  Saul  certainly  cherished  hope  to  the 
last  that  by  some  contrivance,  some  casual  aid,  he  should  avert  the  evil  due  to  his  sins. 
With  all  the  unreasoning  energy  of  desperation  he  sought  Samuel  as  a  final  resource ; 
but  instead  of  the  hoped-for  guidance  of  what  he  shall  do,  he  meets  with  a  declara- 
tion of  his  doom.  Sentence  of  death  is  passed  by  the  very  friend  whose  counsel  is 
sought.  This  doubtless  was  the  most  grievous  disappointment  of  his  earthly  life, 
and  might  well  lay  him  low  in  the  dust.  Not  instruction,  but  judicial  utterance. 
Not  deliverance,  but  destruction.  There  are  bitter  disappointments  during  the  life 
of  most  men,  and  the  heart  sinks  in  pain  and  dismay,  but  the  great  disappointment  of 
some  is  at  the  end  of  their  earthly  course.  Christ  represents  some  as  expecting  to 
be  received  into  heaven,  and  all  the  hopes  of  years  are  blasted  by  the  awful  words, 
"  Depart  from  me,  ye  that  work  Iniquity."  The  parable  of  the  Pharisee  and  publican 
points  to  the  same  fearful  issue.  Would  that  men  did  but "  ponder  the  path  of  their 
feet,  and  by  timely  penitence  and  renewal  of  soul  obviate  that  most  calamitous  of  all 
disappointments  I 

VII.  Sympathy  with  fallen  gekatnbss.  There  is  an  awful  and  instructive  con- 
trast in  this  closing  scene  of  Saul's  career — between  the  calm,  measured,  though 
evidently  tender  words  of  Samuel,  followed  by  his  return  to  the  invisible  world, 
leaving  the  wretched  king  prostrate  and  helpless  on  the  ground,  and  the  active  com- 
passion of  this  evil  woman  for  the  distinguished  sufferer  at  her  feet.  Samuel  was 
still  the  |;me,  loving  man  as  of  old ;  but  in  the  invisible  sphere  he  saw  things  in  a 
clear  moral  light,  and  was  restrained  by  his  judicial  commission  from  manifesting  in 
action  sympathy  for  the  fallen  king.  It  is  a  question  how  far  a  perfect  perception 
of  the  enormity  of  sin,  such  as  must  be  attained  by  the  "  spirits  of  the  just  made 
perfect,"  diminishes  what  we  ordinarily  understand  as  sympathy  for  those  who 
receive  "  according  to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body."  Be  that  as  it  may,  we  cannot 
but  note  how  even  tliose  addicted  to  a  life  of  sin,  as  was  this  woman,  are  touched 
by  the  presence  of  a  great  sorrow.  There  is  something  exquisitely  beautiful  in  her 
conduct.  For  a  time  the  old  cunning  and  moral  insensibility  and  cynicism  are  set 
aside,  and  the  humane  feelings  of  her  soul  find  free  exercise,  as  perhaps  in  the  days 
of  her  youth — suggestive  to  us  of  the  germ  of  true  humanity  that  underlies  the  accre- 
tions of  a  guilty  iSe,  and  of  the  power  that  may  be  exercised  over  even  the  worst, 
if  only  we  knew  the  art  of  touching  the  hidden  spring.  Every  reader  of  the  narra- 
tive must  enter  into  her  gentle  and  respectful  feelings  towards  the  fallen  monarch  ; 
and  we  feel  that  had  we  been  there  we  also  should  have  sought  to  raise  him  from 
the  earth,  and  provide  generous  nourishment  for  his  exhausted  frame.  For  sym- 
pathy with  the  righteous  judgments  of  God  does  not  extinguish  pity  for  those  who 
fall  under  them.  In  fallen  greatness  we  see  the  majesty  and  the  dishonour,  the 
possibilities  and  the  actualities,  of  our  common  humanity.  It  is  as  though  a  large 
part  of  ourselves  had  come  to  grief ;  and  though  we  cannot  but  deplore  the  sin,  we 
feel  disposed  to  weep  over  the  lost  one,  and  to  render  the  last  ofiSces  of  kindness 
with  a  tender  hand.  So  did  our  blessed  Lord,  the  perfect  Man,  weep  over  the  lost 
city  when  proclaiming  with  full  acquiescence  its  righteous  doom  (Matt,  xxiii.  37, 
38 ;  Luke  xix.  41—44). 

General  lessons: — 1.  The  only  safe  course  when  sin  has  been  committed  ia  at 
once,  after  the  example  of  David  and  Peter,  to  return  to  the  Lord  and  cast  ourselves 
entirely  on  his  mercy.  Saul's  neglect  of  this  was  the  secret  of  his  subsequent 
miseries.  2.  There  is  great  probability  of  cherished  sin  issuing  in  a  state  of  mind 
such  that  men  shall  imagine  they  are  seeking  good  of  God  when  in  reality  they  are 
seeking  only  the  evasion  of  his  righteous  judgments.  3.  It  cannot  be  too  earnestly 
and  frequently  impressed  on  young  and  old  that  moral  character  is  the  governing 
element  in  the  determination  of  their  present  and  f  utiire  condition.  4.  The  occa- 
sional justification  of  God's  apparently  severe  judgments  recorded  in  Scripture  may 
be  regarded  as  foreshadowing  the  future  moral  solution  of  the  dark  and  painful 


OH.  xxna.  1— 2£.]         THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  SSI 

events  connected  with  the  history  of  the  intelligent  nniyerae.  6.  If  we  would  be 
prepared  to  end  life  with  a  realisation  of  our  hopes  we  most  give  heed  to  the  reality 
of  our  onenesa  with  the  mind  of  God, 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vew.  1 — 6.  (GiLBOA.) — Darkening  shadows  of  retribution.  "  And  when  Sanl 
saw  the  host  of  the  Philistines,  he  was  afraid,  and  his  heart  greatly  trembled  " 
(ver.  6).  1.  The  end  of  Said  was  now  approaching.  How  long  he  reigned  isi  not 
stated  ("  forty  years,"  Acts  xiii.  21 ;  perhaps  a  round  number,  including  the  judge- 
ship of  Samuel).  But  his  course  from  his  first  wrong  step  (ch.  xiii.  8 — 16)  had 
been  a  downward  one,  bfoken  only  by  brief  seasons  of  amendment.  His  mental 
malady  may  account  in  part  for  some  of  his  actions  in  his  later  years.  During  his 
persecution  of  David  the  enemies  of  Israel  became  more  powerful  and  aggressive, 
and,  in  retribution  for  imfaithfulness  to  Jehovah,  he  was  about  to  be  delivered  with 
the  host  of  Israel  "into  the  hand  of  the  Philistines,"  from  whom  ho  had  been  chosen 
to  effect  deliverance  (ch.  ix.  16).  2.  The  Philistine  invasion  was  on  a  larger  scale 
than  any  that  had  recently  occurred  (ch.  xiii.  5  ;  xvii.  1),  and  in  a  difEerent  part  of 
the  country.  It  was  evidently  planned  with  a  view  to  inflict  a  fatal  blow  on  Israel. 
The  enemy  marched  northward,  entered  the  plain  of  Esdraelon  (Jezreel),  the  battle- 
field of  Palestine  (stretching  out  eastward  in  three  branches,  like  fingers  from  the 
hand),  and  encamped  at  Sbunem  (at  the  base  of  Little  Hermon,  north  of  the  central 
and  principal  branch).  "And  the  Israelites  pitched  by  the  fountain  which  is  in 
Jezreel "  (ch.  xxix.  1),  on  a  spur  of  Mount  Gilboa  (south  of  the  central  branch),  from 
which  they  could  see  the  Philistines,  three  miles  distant  across  the  plain,  where  on  the 
morrow  the  conflict  must  be  waged.  3.  What  the  issite  of  the  conflict  was  likely  to 
be  Saul's  heart  told  him  only  too  plainly.  He  felt  that  what  he  had  so  long  dreaded 
was  about  to  come  upon  him ;  that  the  sentence  of  rejection  formerly  uttered  by 
Samuel  (ch.  xvi  14 — 16),  now  gone  to  his  rest  (ver.  3),  was  to  be  fully  executed,  and 
that  he  would  be  deprived  of  his  crown,  and  probably  of  his  life.  David,  who  had 
once  saved  Israel  in  similar  peril,  had  gone  over  to  the  Philistines  (ch.  xxvii.  4),  was 
now  (as  he  thought)  among  them,  and  would  "  surely  be  king  "  (ch.  xxiv.  20).  The 
night  of  retribution  ia  setting  in.  The  ministers  of  vengeance  ate  gathering,  like 
v^tures  to  the  prey, 

"  From  the  invisible  ether ; 
nnt  a  speck,  and  then  a  vultnie. 
Till  the  air  is  dark  with  pinions. 

The  experience  of  Saul  is  shared  by  many  a  persistent  transgressor  in  the  presence 
of  imminent  danger  and  approaching  death,  when  "  the  terrors  of  God  do  set  them- 
selves in  array  against "  him  (Job  vi.  4 ;  xxiv.  17).     He  is — 

I.  Beset  bt  ibbesistiblb  feab.  The  sight  of  superior  hostile  forces  is  calculated 
to  produce  auch  fear,  but  its  power  to  do  so  depends  chiefly  upon  the  inward  state  of 
a  man  himself,  more  or  less  conscious  of  his  condition ;  1.  The  rememhrance  of 
past  transgressions,  and  of  the  punishment  threatened  against  them,  and  already  in 
some  measure  experienced.  Circumstances  often  quicken  the  memory  and  open  its 
secret  records,  so  that  former  actions  and  events  reappear,  are  seen  in  their  true 
character,  and  fill  the  soul  with  consternation.  "  I  will  reprove  thee,  and  set  them 
in  order  before  thine  eyes  "  (Ps.  1.  21).  2.  The  consciousness  of  Divine  displeasure 
in  consequence  of  disobedience,  and  the  heart  not  being  right  vdth  God.  Although 
conscience  may  slumber  long,  the  hour  of  awakening  comes,  and  when  it  asserts  its 
power  "  its  frown  is  more  to  be  dreaded  than  the  frowns  of  kings  or  the  approacn  of 
armies.  It  ia  a  fire  in  the  bones,  burning  when  no  man  sospecta"  (South).  "A 
wounded  spirit  who  can  bear  ?  "  (Frov.  xviii.  14). 

"  0  conscience,  conscience,  man's  most  faithful  firlend, 
How  canst  thou  comfort,  ease,  relieve,  defend  I 
But  if  he  will  thy  friendly  checks  forego, 
Thou  art,  oh,  woe  for  me  I  his  deadliest  foe  "  (Crabbed 

MK  fl 


5,12  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xxviil  1—25. 

3.  The  foreboding  of  approaching  doom.  Conacience  "  exerts  itself  magisterially, 
and  approves  or  condemns,  .  . .  and  if  not  forcibly  stopped,  naturally  and  always,  of 
course,  goes  on  to  anticipate  a  higher  and  more  effectual  sentence,  which  shall  here- 
after second  and  affirm  its  own  "  (Butler). 

II.  Impelled  to  seek  Divine  counsel.  "  And  Saul  inquired  of  Jehovah "  (ver. 
6).  It  is  not  recorded  that  he  had  ever  done  so  since  he  "  asked  counsel  of  God  " 
and  "  he  answered  him  not "  (ch.  xiv.  37).  His  communication  with  Heaven  had 
evidently  been  long  interrupted.  But  under  the  influence  of  fear  he  felt  the  urgent 
need  of  it,  as  other  men  who  have  neglected  to  seek  God  often  do  in  times  of 
danger,  and  he  expected  that  it  would  come  at  his  bidding,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
when  he  made  use  of  the  recognised  means  of  obtaining  it,  apart  from  a  proper  state 
of  heart,  therein  exhibiting  the  same  blindness  as  of  old  (eh.  xiii.  9).  Cherishing  a 
spirit  of  envy  and  hatred,  how  could  it  be  expected  that  he  should  be  visited  by  the 
Divine  Spirit  in  dreams  of  good  ?  Having  slain  the  high  priest,  and  compelled  his 
son  to  flee  to  David  ".with  the  ephod  "  and  the  Urim,  how  could  it  be  expected  that 
he  should  obtain  counsel  through  another  whom  he  had  appointed  in  his  stead,  or, 
having  alienated  the  proph^,  that  he  should  gain  it  through  them  ?  Divine  aid  is 
often  sought  through  proper  channels  in  vain  because — 1.  It  is  not  sought  at  the 
right  time, — "  When  thou  mayest  be  found  "  (Ps.  xxxii.  6).  "  Then  shall  they  call 
upon  me,  but  I  will  not  answer"  (Prov.  i.  24 — 33), — which  takes  place  not  merely  as  a 
just  punishment  for  long  neglect,  but  also  on  account  of  the  increased  hardness  of 
their  hearts  thereby  induced,  and  rendering  them  incapable  and  utterly  unworthy  of 
holding  communion  with  God.  "  If  wo  do  not  hear  God's  voice  when  it  goes  well 
with  us,  God  can  and  will  refuse  to  hear  our  voice  when  it  goes  ill  with  us  "  (Starke). 
2.  It  is  not  sought  in  a  right  spirit — with  humility,  penitence,  self-renunciation,  and 
faith.  Of  these  principles  there  is  no  trace  in  the  inquiry  of  Saul.  3.  It  is  not 
sought  with  a  right  purpose,  but  with  some  earthly  and  selfish  end  in  view,  rather 
than  the  Divine  honour.  "As  the  event  proved,  Saul  did  not  really  inquire  of  the 
Lord  in  the  sense  of  seeking  direction  from  him,  and  of  being  willing  to  be  guided 
by  it.  Bather  did  he,  if  we  may  so  express  it,  wish  to  use  the  Lord  as  the  means  by 
which  to  attain  his  object.  But  that  wae  essentially  the  heathen  view,  and  differed 
only  in  detail,  not  in  principle,  from  the  inquiry  of-  the  familiar  spirit,  to  which  he 
afterwards  resorted  "  (Edersheim).  "  Ye  ask,  and  receive  not,  because  ye  ask  amias," 
&c.  (James  iv.  3  ;  Ps.  btvi.  18  ;  Isa.  Ixvi.  4 ;  Ezek.  xiv.  -4 ;  xx.  31). 

III.  Denied  thb  desised  responsu.  '"Jehovah  answered  him  not,"  ice.  (rer.  6). 
"  I  am  sore  distressed ;  for  the  Philistines  make  war  against  me,  and  God  is  departed 
from  me,  and  answereth  me  no  more "  (ver.  16).  "  Saul  received  from  God  no 
answer  more,  except  for  judgment."  1.  What  dreadful  silence  and  loneliness  are  here 
revealed  I  "  We  read  of  the  silence  of  the  desert,  the  silence  of  midnight,  the  silence 
of  the  churchyard  and  the  grave ;  but  this  is  something  more  profound  and  appalling 
— the  silence  of  God  when  appealed  to  by  the  sinner  in  his  extremity.  It  is  not  the 
silence  of  indifference,  nor  of  inability  to  hear,  nor  of  weakness,  nor  of  perplexity  j 
but  of  refusal,  of  rejection,  of  displeasure,  of  abandonment "  (Bonar,  •  Bible 
Thoughts' ).  "  Ephraim  is  joined  to  idols :  let  him  alone "  (Hosea  iv.  17).  2. 
What  utter  helplessness  I    3.  What  intolerable  darkness  and  distress  I  (Heb.  x.  27). 

Consider — 1.  That  if  "inquiry  of  the  Lord"  be  left  unanswered,  the  reason  or  it 
is  to  be  sought  in  the  moral  condition  of  the  inquirer.  2.  That  nothing  but  the 
offering  of  the  sacrifice  of  "  a  broken  and  a  contrite  heart "  can  prevent  despair.  S. 
That  the  boundless  mercy  of  God  should  awaken  hope  even  at  "the  eleventh 
hour,"-D. 

Ven.  7—10,  (GiLBOA,  Endob).— -/JwoWinflr  to  superstitious ]araetiee$.  "Seek  me 
a  woman  that  hath  a  familiar  spirit,  that  I  may  go  to  her,  and  inquire  of  her  "  (ver. 
7).  1.  The  religion  of  Saul  (like  that  of  many  others  in  Israel)  was  largely  per- 
vaded by  superstition.  He  regarded  Jehovah  as  an  object  of  dread  rather  than  ot 
tnut  and  love,  and  observed  the  outward  forms  of  his  service  not  in  a  spirit  of  willing 
and  hearty  obedience,  but  because  he  thought  that  they  would  of  themselves  procure 
for  him  the  Divine  favear.  Hence  his  zeal  in  putting  away  "those  that  had  umiliar 
■pirito"  {Obotk=npmt»  ef  the  departed,  supposed  to  be  called  up  from  the  onaaen  wcrM 


OH.  xxvm.  1—26.]         THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  BM 

to  make  disclosures  concerning  the  future,  and  dwelling  in  them  and  speaking 
through  them  in  hollow  tones  of  voice,  Isa.  viii.  19  ;  xzix.  4 ;  ventriloquists,  LXX. ; 
necromancers)  "  and  wizards"  (sorcerers).  And  when  his  inquiry  of  the  Lord  was 
not  answered,  he  resorted  to  one  of  these,  in  the  expectation  of  being  told  what  he 
must  do  (ver.  16)  to  avert  the  wrath  which  he  feared.  In  like  manner  the  heathen 
resorted  to  their  priests  and  diviners  (ch.  vi.  2).  He  wag  an  embodiment  of  the 
heathen  mind  in  Israel.  "There  were  three  courses  open  to  him:  he  might  sit  down 
in  quiet  hopelessness,  and  let  the  evil  come ;  or  he  might  in  faith  and  penitent  sub- 
mission commit  the  whole  matter  to  God,  even  amid  the  awful  silence ;  or  he  might  be 
take  himself  to  hell  for  counsel,  since  heaven  was  deaf.  He  chooses  the  last  I  '  God  hap 
cast  me  ofi ;  I  will  betake  myself  to  Satan.  Heaven's  door  is  shut ;  I  will  see  if  hell'i 
be  open'  "  (Bonar).  He  had  about  him  servants  who  pandered  to  his  superstitious 
propensities  (ch.  xvi.  15),  and  informed  him  of  a  practitioner  of  the  heathen  art 
residing  at  Bndor,  eight  miles  distant  (north  of  Little  Hermon)  ;  and  thither  two  of 
them  conducted  him  "  by  night."  (Another  of  the  night  scenes  of  this  book — ch.  iii. 
3  ;  V.  3  ;  ix.  25  ;  xv.  11 ;  xix.  10 ;  xxv.  36  ;  xxvi.  7  ;  xxx.  17).  It  was  "  a  dreadful 
journey,  a  terrible  night ;  both  symbols  of  Saul's  condition,  lost  on  the  way  of  inner 
self -hardening  and  thorough  self-darkening"  (Erdmann),  The  readiness  with  which 
he  was  directed  to  the  sorceress  shows  the  secret  prevalence  of  superstition  in  Israel. 
3.  Ke  failed  to  obtain  the  aid  he  desired,  committed  his  crowning  act  of  apostasy, 
and  hastened  his  doom.  "  So  Saul  died  for  .  .  ,  asking  counsel  of  one  that  had  a 
familiar  spirit,  to  inquire  of  it"  (1  Chron.  x.  13).  "There  is  no  wisdom,  nor  un- 
derstanding, nor  counsel  against  the  Lord  "  (Prov.  xxi.  30).  There  may  have  been 
"  an  objective  reality,  a  dark  background  of  magical  agency "  (Delitzsch,  '  Bib. 
Psychology,'  p.  363)  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  "  the  actual  references  to  magio  in 
Scripture  do  not  involve  its  reality.  The  mischiefs  resulting  from  the  pretenium, 
under  the  theocracy,  to  an  act  which  involved  idolatry  justified  the  statute  which 
denounced  it  with  death  "  ^Kitto, '  Cyc.,'  art.  Witchcraft).  "  In  the  doctrinal  Scrip- 
tures magic  is  passed  by  with  contempt ;  in  the  historical  Scriptures  the  reasonable- 
ness of  this  contempt  is  shown.  Whenever  the  practisers  of  magic  attempt  to 
combat  the  servants  of  God  they  conspicuously  fail"  (Smith's  'Diet.,'  art.  Magic). 
Resorting  to  superstitious  practices  of  various  kinds  (the  selection  of  "lucky"  days, 
fortune-telling,  spirit-rapping,  psychography,  necromancy,  and,  in  more  direct  con- 
nection with  the  Christian  religion,  image-worship,  prayers  to  the  dead,  snperstitious 
rites  and  ceremonies  of  various  kinds)  is  not  unknown  at  the  present  day.    Notice — 

I.  Its  inducements.  Among  them  are — 1.  Unbelieving  fear.  "Superstition  is 
the  restless  efEort  of  a  guilty  but  blind  conscience  to  find  rest  and  peace  and  good  by 
unauthorised  propitiations  and  ceremonies  "  (R.  Watson).  "  The  true  cause  and  rise 
of  superstition  is  indeed  nothing  else  but  a  false  opinion  of  the  Deity,  that  renders 
him  terrible  and  dreadful,  as  being  rigorous  and  imperious ;  that  which  represents 
him  as  austere  and  apt  to  be  angry,  but  yet  impotent  and  easy  to  be  appeased  again 
by  some  flattering  devotions,  especially  if  performed  with  sanctimonious  shows  and 
a  solemn  sadness  of  mind"  (Smith,  '  Sel.  Dis.  Superstition'),  "The  human  hearl 
needs  something  to  cling  to,  something  to  which  it  may  hold  fast,  a  prop  which  its 
tendrils  may  firmly  clasp ;  therefore  when  it  leaves  him  for  whom  it  was  made,  when 
it  sinks  into  unbelief,  then  it  clings  to  superstition  and  darkness  "  (Schlier).  2 
Unhallowed  cariosity,  which  is  not  satisfied  with  what  has  been  revealed  in  the 
word  of  God,  and  wishes  to  become  acquainted  with  the  secrets  of  the  unseen  world 
and  the  future,  designedly  concealed.  Such  curiosity  "  is  a  flattering  serpent,  which 
promises  us  the  wisdom  of  God,  and  cheats  us  out  of  a  blessed  paradise  of  happier, 
childlike  waiting."  "  Let  no  man  beguile  you,"  &e.  (Col.  ii.  18),  S.  Foolish  pre- 
gumption,  which  fancies  that  it  can  attain  the  knowledge  and  help  of  the  super- 
natural by  other  ways  and  means  than  God  has  appointed.  "  He  who,  in  respect  of 
supersensual  things  and  of  the  mysterious  background  of  sensible  things,  regards  as 
true,  and  allows  impressions  to  be  made  on  himself  by  thoughts  or  occurrences 
whose  reality  has  neither  the  warranty  of  undoubtedly  credible  tradition  nor  the 
warranty  of  internal  force  of  conviction  in  their  favour,  is  rightly  called  superstitious" 
(Delitzsch). 

II.  Its  DKVion.     Th«y  usually— 1.  In/eolve  artifice,  effort,  trouble,  and  sacrifioa 


634  THE  FIBST  B00£  OF  SAMUEL.         [oh.  zxnn.  1— 8& 

(yen.  7,  8).  What  extraordinary  pains  do  men  sometimes  ondergo  in  the  practice  of 
■aperatition  I  (1  Kings  xviii  28).  2.  Affed,  darhntss  and  secrecy,  and  necessitate  the 
adoption  of  nndig^ified,  mean,  and  shameful  courses.  They  are  carried  out  under 
the  cover  of  night,  which  is  f ayourable  to  deception.  Saul  disg^nised  himself  not  to 
•scape  the  Philistines,  but  to  elude  the  observation  of  his  own  people,  and  to  impose 
npon  the  sorceress  (ver.  9).  S.  Involve  mental  hlindness  and  credulity,  so  that  those 
who  yield  to  them  become  the  ready  dupes  of  others  who  traffic  on  their  gloomy 
fears  and  illusory  hopes,  "deceiving  and  being  deceived."  "  It  was  a  shame  that 
the  king  who  had  expelled  all  sorcerers  must  himself  at  last  fall  into  the  hands  of  a 
sorceress  "  (Winer). 

III.  Its  sinfulness.  1.  It  casts  contempt  upon  the  mffidtneu  of  Divine  revelation. 
"  Wilt  thou  have  light  for  all  the  riddles  and  dark  questions  of  this  life  ?  betake  thy- 
self to  God's  word,  there  enough  is  revealed,  and  what  goes  beyond  that  comes  of 
evil.*  2.  It  chooses  evil  instead  of  good,  disregards  the  mortu  dispositions  which 
God  requires,  and  violates  the  sense  of  goodness,  righteousness,  and  truth.  Saul 
took  an  oath  "  by  the  Lord  "  to  protect  what  he  knew  was  displeubing  to  tiie  Lord, 
and  was  guilty  of  connivance  at  what  he  himself  had  condemned  as  worthy  of  death 
(ver.  10).  3.  It  does  what  the  word  of  God  prohibitt,  and  in  its  worst  forms,  caste 
off  allegiance  to  God,  and  makes  alliance  with  his  enemies  (Levil;  xix.  31 ;  xx.  6, 
27  ;  Deut.  xviii.  10 ;  2  Kings  xxiii.  24  ;  GaL  v.  20 ;  Eev.  xxii.  16).  "  Knowing  that 
the  act  of  divination  co-operates  in  no  slight  degree  with  the  errors  of  the  lives  of 
the  multitude,  so  as  to  lead  them  out  of  the  right  way,  Moses  did  not  suffer  his  dis- 
ciples to  use  any  species  of  it  whatever.  All  these  things  are  but  the  furniture  of 
impiety.  How  so  ?  Because  he  who  attends  to  them  and  who  allows  himself  to  be 
influenced  by  them  disregards  the  cause  of  all  things,  looking  upon  those  things  alone 
as  the  causes  of  all  things,  whether  good  or  evil "  (Philo,  '  On  Monarchy '). 

IV.  Its  INJUBIOU8NE8S.  1.  It  fills  the  votaries  of  superstition  with  miserable  dis- 
appointment. 2.  It  makes  them  the  victims  of  delusion,  and  further  estranges  them 
from  the  way  of  truth.  3,  It  increases  their  guilt,  hardens  their  heart,  and  quickens 
their  pace  to  final  ruin.  Saul's  night-visit  was  an  ill  preparation  for  the  coming  con- 
flict.   It  extinguished  every  ray  of  hope,  and  turned  his  fear  into  despair.-— D. 

Ver.  11.  (Bndob.) — SamueCs  counsel  vainly  desired.  "Bring  me  up  Samnel." 
The  character  of  Samuel  was  so  great,  his  life  bad  been  so  long-continned,  his  appear- 
ance so  familiar  to  all,  his  influence  so  powerful  and  extensive,  that  after  his  depart- 
ure his  form  must  have  seemed  still  to  brood  over  the  land.  What  the  thoughts  of 
Saul  were  at  his  death  we  know  not.  Perhaps  he  was  glad  of  his  removal  Although 
dwelling  near  him,  he  was  altogether  estranged  from  him,  and  entirely  neglected  to 
seek  his  counsel.  But  the  time  came — the  threatening  hosts  of  the  Philistines,  his 
overwhelming  fear,  the  silence  of  Heaven — when  he  urgently  needed  it,  and  earnestly 
but  vainly  desired  the  benefit  of  it.  Whether  he  went  to  the  sorceress  with  the 
deliberate  purpose  of  seeking  an  interview  with  his  old  and  faithful  counsellor,  or 
sought  it  under  the  impulse  of  the  moment,  is  not  stated.  The  former  is  the  more 
probable.  He  was  certainly  persuaded  of  the  power  which  she  professed  to  have 
(ver.  11)  of  raising  up  the  spirits  of  the  departed,  and  (after  her  expression  of  sur- 
prise, and  her  description  of  his  well-known  appearance)  of  the  actual  presence 
of  Samuel  in  consequence  of  his  request  ("  I  have  called  thee,"  ver.  15).  The  result 
of  the  interview,  however,  proved  that  his  hope  of  obtaining  good  from  it  was  vain. 
It  is  not  unusual  for  those  who  have  neglected  the  advice  of  a  teacher  or  friend  to 
desire,  when  he  is  gone,  that  he  might  come  back  and  again  grant  it  to  them.  In 
such  a  desire  we  see — 

I.  The  valub  op  faithful  counsel,  to  which  it  is  a  testimony.  The  reproofs 
and  warnings  which  a  faithful  counsellor  gives  are  not  always  agreeable.  They  are 
often  deemed  unnecessary,  regarded  with  contempt,  and  cause  him  to  be  accounted  an 
enemy.  But  they  are  justified  by  events ;  and  then  their  worth  is  felt,  arid  they  ara 
longed  for,  when  perchance  it  is  too  late.  The  sore  distress  which  Saul  now  suffered 
would  have  been  averted  if  he  had  listened  to  the  counsel  of  Samuel.  He  u  yout 
best  friend  who  tells  you  the  truth,  and  seeks  your  welfare  rather  than  your  favour 
GKva  heed  to  what  he  says  while  it  may  conduce  to  your  profit. 


OH.  xxviiL  1—26.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL  B3S 

II.  Tub  folly  of  faithless  neglect,  of  which  it  is  a  confession.  "  How  hav« 
I  hated  instruction,  and  my  heart  despised  reproof ;  and  have  not  obeyed  the  voice 
of  my  teachers,  nor  inclined  mine  ear  to  them  that  instructed  me  I "  (Pro v.  v.  12, 13). 
"  How  many  who  have  despised  the  advice  of  a  father  or  a  mother,  and  giieved  theii 

Earents  by  opposition  and  disobedience,  long  bitterly  to  bring  them  back  when  they 
ave  gone  down  to  the  grave,  that  they  may  have  the  benefit  of  the  counsel  which 
they  once  slighted  and  scorned  I  If  they  could  go  to  the  necromancer  in  the  hour 
of  their  distress,  it  would  not  be, '  Bring  me  up  the  companion  who  cheered  me  in  my 
gaieties,  who  was  with  me  at  the  revel  and  the  dance  and  the  public  show ; '  but, 
'  Bring  me  up  the  father  with  his  gray  hairs,  who  solemnly  told  me  that  the  way  of 
transgressors  was  hard ;  or  the  mother  who  with  weeping  eyes  and  broken  voice 
admonished  me  against  sinful  indulgences.'  .  .  .  And  yet,  if  you  neglect  the  Lord 
and  continue  to  resist  the  strivings  of  his  Spirit,  so  that  at  length  he  departs  from 
you  as  he  departed  from  Saul,  what  would  it  avail  that  the  grave  could  give  up  it» 
inhabitant — if  the  parent,  the  friend,  or  the  minister  should'  return  at  your  bidding  ?  " 
(H.  MelviU). 

III.  The  wobthlessnebs  of  pious  wishks  in  those  who  persist  in  transgression. 
Saul  was  deeply  humbled.  His  self-will  and  pride  were  broken  down  into  pitiable 
abasement,  and  he  seemed  willing  to  receive  and  obey  the  counsel  which  he  had 
previously  alighted.  Yet  his  motive  was  doubtless  the  same  as  in  inquiring  of  the 
Lord  (vers.  1 — 6) ;  he  looked  upon  Samuel  as  more  merciful  than  the  Lord,  relied 
upon  him  to  effect  a  change  in  the  Divine  purpose  (ch.  zv.  29),  and  expected  his  aid 
at  the  very  moment  he  was  committing  a  capital  ofEence.  He  was  more  blinded  and 
self-deceived  than  ever.  Men  often  abase  themselves  deeply  in  affliction  while  thej- 
remain  wholly  destitute  of  the  spirit  of  obedience.  "Let  no  man  deceive  himself." 
What  value  can  there  be  in  a  religious  desire  which  is  combined  with  the  violatior 
of  the  plainest  religious  duty  ? 

IV.  The  CSELESSNE8S  of  bxtsaobdinart  couinTNlOATiONS,  such  as  have  been  some-, 
times  desired  from  the  dead.  Saul  had  what  to  him  was  the  fulfilment  of  his  desire  ; 
but  he  was  told  only  what  he  already  knew  or  feared,  he  was  not  led  to  repentance 
and  faith,  and  sank  into  despair.  Is  it  supposed  that  benefit  would  be  derived  from 
the  reappearance  and  counsel  of  the  departed  ?  Consider  that — 1.  The  light  which 
might  be  brought  would  only  be  a  confirmation  of  the  truth  which  has  been  already 

'  revealed.  If  even  future  events,  as,  e.  g.,  the  time  of  death,  should  be  declared,  the 
knowledge  thereof  would  probably  be  useless  and  injurious.  Should  death  be  dis- 
tant, it  would  be  a  strong  temptation  to  sloth  and  continued  sin ;  should  it  be  very 
near,  whilst  it  might  arouse  some  to  make  preparation  for  it  simply  from  a  selfish 
dread  of  threatening  evil,  it  would  lead  others  to  feel  that  it  was  too  late  to  avert  the 
danger,  and  resign  themselves  to  reckless  indulgence  or  blank  despair  (see  ch;  xz. 
3).  2.  Those  who  are  not  improved  by  existing  inducements  to  faith  and  obedience 
would  be  proof  against  such  as  might  be  thereby  presented,  and  would  in  most  cases 
be  hardened  in  sin  (John  ziL  10).  "  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither 
will  they  be  persuaded,  though  one  rose  from  the  dead  "  (Luke  zvi.  31).  8.  God 
has  given  to  men  the  knowledge  and  inducements  which  are  best  adapted  to  their 
probationary  condition  and  sufficient  for  every  practical  purpose,  and  has  wisely 
determined  that  no  more  shall  be  afforded,  "  He  that  is  unjust,"  &c.  (Bev.  zziL  11). 
"  As  no  additional  dissuasions  from  sin  and  inducements  to  holiness  would  be  pre- 
sented, they  who,  notwithstanding  these  disclosures,  remained  impenitent  and  tmbe- 
lieving  must  continue  in  irreclaimable  wickedness."  "  Say  not  in  thine  heart,"  &o. 
(Bom.  X.  6—11).  Crave  not  for  "secret  things" — the  mysterious,  the  supernatural, 
the  miraculous,  the  speculative,  the  impossible.  "If  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy 
mouth  the  Iiord  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  in  thine  heart  that  God  hath  raised  him  from 
tiM  dead,  diou  shalt  be  saved." — D. 

Ven.  12 — 20.  (Bndoe.)  —  The  sentence  o^  r^ection  eonflrmed.     "And  JehovrH 
hath  done  for  himself,  as  he  spake  by  me"  (ver.  17).    1.  The  ^mrative  of  Saul'i 
interview  with  the  sorceress  is  graphic,  but  brief,  incomplete,  and  in  many  respects. 
M  might  be  expected,  indefinite.    Whether  on  bis  request,  "  Bring  me  up  Samuel, 
■be  aniployed  her  illicit  art  ia  not  expressly  stated,  nor  whether  any  supematural 


SM  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.        [oh.  xrnn.  1—25. 

agency  was  concerned  in  what  took  place.  "The  woman  saw  Samnel,"  and  ihe 
mone  (ver.  14),  "  and  she  cried  out"  (in  real  or  feigned  surprise  and  fear),  *'Why 
hast  thou  deceived  me  ?  for  thou  art  Saul."  There  is  no  intimation  that  the  name 
of  Samnel  or  the  distinguished  stature  of  her  visitor  had  previously  suggested  who 
he  was ;  nor  of  any  "  gestiu-es  of  fearful  menace  such  as  he  could  only  show  towards 
a  deadly  enemy,  t. «.  towards  Saul "  (Ewald,  Stanley).  It  was  from  her  descrip- 
tion of  "  gods  ascending  out  of  the  earth,"  and  of  the  well-known  appearance  of  the 
venerable  judge  and  prophet,  that  "  he  perceived  that  it  was  Samuel,  and  prostrated 
himself  in  abject  homage  before  him  whom  he  had  formerly  moved  by  his  impor- 
tunity to  comply  with  his  request  (ch.  xv.  30) ;  and  while  "  stooping  with  his  face 
to  the  ground"  he  heard  a  voice  which  he  was  persuaded  was  the  voice  of  Samuel. 
The  evidence  of  an  apparition  or  vision  (for  there  can  be  no  question  concerning 
anything  else)  depended  solely  on  the  testimony  of  the  woman  ;  of  the  hearing  of  an 
unearthly  voice  on  that  of  Saul,  from  whom  also  (unless  his  two  servants  were  pre- 
sent at  the  time,  which  is'  not  likely)  the  whole  account  must  have  been  primarily 
derived.  2.  It  has  been  esxplained  in  various  ways,  e.  g-,  that  there  was — (1)  A  real 
apparition  of  the  prophet  (Bcclus.  xlvi.  20),  either  evoked  by  the  conjurations  of 
the  woman  (LXX.,  Josephus,  Talmud),  or  effected  by  Divine  power  without  her  aid, 
and  contrary  to  her  expectation  (see,  for  authorities  and  arguments,  Wordsworth, 
'Com.;'  Waterland,  Delany,  Sir  W.  Scott,  '  Demonology ; '  Kitto,  'D.  B.  lUus.  ; 
Lindsay,  Hengstenberg,  Keil).  (2)  An  illusory  appearance  produced  by  demoniacal 
(or  angelic)  agency,  and,  according  to  some,  employed  as  a  medium  of  Divine  revela- 
tion f  Luther,  Calvin,  Grotius,  Gilpin, '  Dasmonologia  Sacra ; '  Hall,  Patrick,  M.  Henry). 
(3^  A  mental  impression  or  representation  produced  by  Divine  influence.  (4)  A  super- 
itttious  self-deception  on  the  part  of  the  woman,  combined  with  a  psychological 
identifying  of  herself  with  the  deceased  prophet  (Erdmann).  (5)  A  conscious  decep- 
tion practised  by  her  (perhaps  not  entirely  without  illusion)  on  the  fearful  and  super- 
stitious mind  of  the  king,  fasting,  wearied,  terrified,  and  in  the  dark  (Chandler, 
W.  Scott,  '  Existence  of  Evil  Spirits ; '  Thenius)  ;  little  other  than  a  dream,  though 
terribly  real  to  him.  The  circumstances  of  the  case  were  such  that  the  almost 
dramatic  language  of  the  historian  may  be  fairly  understood  as  descriptive  of  what 
seemed  to  Saul,  and  was  afterwards  popularly  believed,  rather  than  of  the  actual 
reality.  All  that  occurred  may  be  accounted  for  more  satisfactorily  on  this  hypo- 
thesis than  any  other.  Almost  every  other  involves  assumptions  concerning  the 
power  of  necromancy,  the  reappearance  of  the  dead,  evil  spirits,  &c.,  which  are  un- 
supported by  Scripture  and  exceedingly  improbable.  A  Divine  interposition  would 
have  been  unmistakably  indicated  in  the  narrative  (which  is  not  the  case,  ver.  21), 
inconsistent  with  the  Divine  refusal  to  answer  Saul's  inquiry,  unnecessary  in  order  to 
reprove  him  further  for  the  past  (for  there  is  no  expressed  reproof  of  his  present 
crime),  without  adequate  theocratic  purpose,  contrary  to  the  holiness  of  God,  and  a 
confirmation  (not  a  punishment)  of  "the  anti-godly  attempt  of  the  sorceress."  3. 
Its  ddef  significance  (however  it  may  be  explained)  lies  in  the  revelation  which  it 
makes  of  the  depth  of  degradation  to  which  Saul  had  sunk  and  the  effect  of  his 
apostasy.  His  "sin  of  divination"  (ch.  xv.  23)  led  to  despair,  and  was  speedily 
followed  by  the  full  execution  of  the  sentence  of  his  rejection.  The  silence  of  God 
was  the  silence  that  precedes  the  thunderstorm  and  the  earthquake.  Observe  that — 
I.  There  ib  no  appeal  fbom  the  Divine  judgment  to  any  other  fvers.  16,  17). 
Saul  appears  to  have  clung  to  the  delusion  that  the  sentence  of  Divine  judgment 
uttered  against  him  might  be  effectually  resisted  and  entirely  revoked ;  refused  to 
acknowledge  and  submit  to  it,  and  hoped  to  succeed  in  his  conflict  with  it  when  suc- 
tess  was  plainly  perceived  by  others  to  be  impossible.  Hence  (and  not  merely  to 
gratify  his  curiosity  concerning  his  fate)  he  sought  the  counsel  of  Samuel.  In  answer 
to  the  voice  (asking  reproachfully  the  reason  why  he  had  "  disquieted  "  the  dead, 
and  drawing  forth  the  expression  of  his  feelings  and  wishes),  he  pathetically  de- 
scribed his  distress  in  consequence  of  the  attack  of  the  Philistines  and  his  abandon- 
ment by  God,  and  appealed  for  aid  in  his  perplexity.  Without  supposing  a  desire  of 
revenge  on  the  part  of  the  sorceress,  hardly  any  other  reply  could  be  more  accordant 
with  his  state  of  mind  and  deepest  convictions  than  that  which  came  to  him.  Since 
(by  his  own  confession)  he  was  abandoned  by  the  Lord,  it  was  useless  to  expect  effectual 


OB.  xivm.  1—26.]         THE  PIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  M7 

help  from  the  prophet  of  the  Lord,  who  was  the  exponent  and  executor  of  hia  will. 
No  direction  was  given  "  what  he  must  do,"  and  no  ground  of  hope  afforded  that  he 
might  find  mercy  with  the  Lord  himself  if  he  sought  it  in  a  right  spirit.  "  The  belief 
that  Samuel  had  come  to  revisit  him  from  the  dead  so  worked  upon  Saul's  mind  ae 
to  suggest  to  his  conscience  what  seemed  to  be  spoken  in  his  ear "  (Smith's  '  Old 
Testament  History'). 

II.  The  Divine  judgment  is  bometimbs  pelt  to  be  iebevocablb.  Of  this  he  had 
occasionally  caught  a  glimpse,  but  it  was  now  brought  home  to  him  with  over- 
whelming force  in  connection  with — 1.  The  consciousness  of  his  present  condition, 
as  an  object  of  Divine  displeasure,  and  destined  to  be  replaced  in  the  kingdom  by 
David,  to  whom  he  had  long  ago  applied  the  words  of  the  prophet  (ch.  xiii.  14  ;  xv. 
28):  "The  Lord  hath  rent,"  &c.  (ver.  17).  "The  perfects  express  the  purpose  of 
God  which  had  already  been  formed,  and  was  now  about  to  be  fulfilled  "  (Keil).  2. 
The  remembrance  of  his  past  transgression.  "  Because,"  &c.  (ver.  18).  The 
sparing  of  Amalek  was  the  well-known  cause  of  his  estrangement  from  Samuel  and 
his  rejection ;  and  how  vividly  does  some  former  act  of  disobedience  sometimes  rise 
before  the  mind  of  the  sinner,  increasing  his  burden  of  guilt  and  justifying  his  con- 
demnation I  3.  The  fear  of  his  future  fate,  now  foreseen  to  be  approaching  (ver. 
19).  Israel  would  share  his  defeat,  he  and  his  sons  would  be  on  the  morrow  num- 
bered with  the  dead,  and  the  camp  spoiled  by  the  enemy.  It  was  a  terrible  message, 
an  inward  realisation  and  confirmation  of  the  Divine  sentence.  How  little  had  he 
profited  by  resorting  to  divination  I  "  The  Strength  of  Israel  will  not  lie  nor 
repent." 

III.  The  conviction  that  the  Divine  judgment  cannot  be  altebed  pboduces 
DESPAIE.  "  And  Saul  fell  straightway  all  along  on  the  earth,"  &o.  (ver.  20).  Up  to 
this  moment  some  hope  lingered  in  his  breast. 

"  The  wretch  condemned  with  life  to  part, 
Still,  stUl  on  hope  relies ; 
And  every  pang  that  renda  the  heart 
Bids  expectation  rise. 

"  Pope,  like  the  glimmering  taper's  light, 
Adorns  and  cheers  the  way ; 
And  stm,  as  darker  grows  the  night, 
Emits  a  brighter  ray  "  (Goldsmith). 

But  now  it  was  quite  extinguished.  "  Whilst  evil  is  expected  we  fear,  but  when  It 
is  certain  we  despair."  "  Saul  was  too  hardened  in  his  sin  to  express  any  grief  or 
pain,  either  on  his  own  account,  or  because  of  the  fate  of  his  sons  and  his  people. 
In  stolid  desperation  he  went  to  meet  his  fate.  This  was  the  terrible  end  of  a  man 
whom  the  spirit  of  God  had  once  taken  possession  of  and  turned  into  another  man, 
and  whom  he  had  endowed  with  gifts  to  be  leader  of  the  people  of  God  "  (0.  von 
Gerlach).  "  All  human  history  has  failed  to  record  a  despair  deeper  or  more  tragic 
than  his.  Over  the  close  of  this  life  broods  a  thick  and  comfortless  darkness,  even 
the  darkness  of  a  night  without  a  star"  (Trench,  •  Shipwrecks '). 

Bemark  that — 1.  If  men  are  forsaken  by  God,  it  is  only  because  he  has  been 
forsaken  by  them.  2.  Their  only  effectual  resource  in  distress  is  the  mercy  of  God, 
against  whom  they  have  sinned.  3.  Persistent  transgression  infallibly  ends  in 
misery  and  despair. — D. 

Vers.  20—25.  (Endor.)— ^Ae  witch  of  Endor.  According  to  Jewish  tradition 
she  was  the  mother  of  Abner,  on  which  account  perhaps  she  escaped  when  others 
were  "  put  away  ;  "  and  the  two  attendants  of  Saul,  in  his  visit  to  her,  were  Abner 
and  Amasa.  She  dwelt  at  Endor  (the  fountain  of  habitation),  a  village  four  miles 
south  of  Mount  Tabor  (Josh.  xvii.  11 ;  Ps.  Ixxxiii.  10).  "  The  cilcareous  cliffs 
around  are  filled  with  wide  caverns,  and  some  of  the  modem  habitations  are  formed 
of  front  walls  shutting  in  these  caves,"  in  one  of  which  she  may  have  dwelt  and 
practised  her  forbidden  art.  This  possessor  or  mistress  of  Ob  (see  vers.  7 — 10), 
although  differing  much  from  those  who  were  accounted  "  witches,"  greatly  abhorred 
and  seve'-ely  punished  in  more  recent  times,  was  a  representative  of  many  of  them 


6S8  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMlTEL.  [oh.  ixviii.  1— 28^ 

in — 1.  Perverted  religiouinett.  Her  history  might  liava  Biiown  that  she  possessed 
a  more  than  ordinary  measure  of  the  religious  sentiment  prevalent  in  women,  and 
that  it  had  been  (as  it  uften  is)  misdirected  by  the  influences  under  which  she  fell. 
She  was  at  first  a  victim  of  superstition,  and  afterwards,  finding  herself  perhaps 
endowed  with  peculiar  and  mysterioni  lusceptibilities,  and  looked  up  to  by  others  on 
account  of  her  superior  "  wisdom,"  practised  on  their  superstitious  fears,  in  part 
deceived  and  in  part  deceiving.  The  mischief  of  the  perversion  of  the  religious 
sentiment  (in  deception,  bigotry,  cruelty,  &o.)  is  incalculable.  2.  Secret  criminal- 
ity. If  she  had  lived  among  the  heathen  from  whom  her  art  was  derived,  she  might 
have  been  held  in  general  repute,  like  the  oracles  of  Greece.  But  in  Israel  necro- 
mancy was  condemned  as  treason  against  the  Divine  King,  an  abomination  associated 
with  and  promotive  of  the  worship  of  idols,  and  she  displayed  a  daring  impiety  in 
practising  it  even  in  secret.  "  The  Hebrew  witch,  or  she  who  communicated  or 
attempted  to  communicate  with  an  evil  spirit,  was  justly  punished  with  death,  though 
her  communication  with  the  spiritual  world  might  either  not  exist  at  all,  or  be  of  a 
nature  much  less  intimate  than  has  been  ascribed  to  thewitches  of  later  days ;  nor 
does  the  existence  of  the  law  against  the  witches  of  the  Old  Testament  sanction  in 
any  respect  the  severity  of  similar  enactments,  subsequent  to  the  Christian  revelation, 
against  a  difEerent  class  of  persons  accused  of  a. very  different  species  of  crime  "  (Sir 
W.  Scott).  3.  Unholy  cupidity.  The  desire  of  gain,  to  which  she  may  have  been 
urged  by  necessitous  circumstances,  was  probably  her  principal  motive  in  practising 
her  art  at  the  risk  of  life.  The  same  desire  leads  to  the  basest  actions,  and  even 
turns  godliness  into  ungodliness.  It  is  "  a  root  of  all  evil."  4.  Perpetual  fear  of 
discovery  and  suspicion  of  deception  on  the  part  of  those  to  whose  wishes  she 
ministered,  and  of  whose  weaknesses  she  made  trafSc  (ver.  9),  The  sword  of  justice 
hangs  over  the  head  of  secret  transgressors,  and  suffers  them  not  to  enjoy  a  moment's 

Eeace.  6.  Skilfid  dec^tion.  Saul  thought  to  deceive  her,  but  was  himself  deceived 
y  her,  and  fatally  deluded.  Whatever  may  have  been  her  power  in  magic,  clair- 
voyance (Keil),  and  ventriloquism  (Isa.  xxix.  4),  she  certainly  professed  what  she 
did  not  possess  (ver.  11)  ;  employed  it  in  "cunning craftiness,"  and  became  (whether 
designedly  or  undesignedly)  accessory  to  his  ruin  (1  Chron.  x.  14).  How  much  of 
the  power  which  is  now  abused  and  made  a  curse  might  if  properly  used  become  a 
blessing  I  6.  Kindly  sympathy  and  ministration.  On  observing  his  heavy  fall  (for 
she  was  apparently  in  the  same  room)  she  came  to  his  side,  and  seeing  that  he  was 
"sore  troubled,"  felt  a  woman's  pity,  spoke  to  him  in  soothing  tones  as  to  a  wilful 
child,  requested  him  to  gratify  her  wishes  in  eating  "  a  morsel  of  bread  "  to  strengthen 
him,  in  return  for  her  obeying  his  voice  (with  "  a  talkativeness  characteristic  of  this 
class  of  women,  and  a  certain  humour  "),  perhaps  called  his  servants,  and  with  them 
cosstruned  him.  TS.ii  heart  was  not  dead.  "She  had  one  calf  that  she  was  very 
fond  of,  and  one  that  she  took  a  great  deal  of  care  of,  and  fed  it  herself ;  for  she  was 
a  woman  that  got  her  living  by  the  labour  of  her  own  hands,  and  had  no  other  pos- 
session but  that  one  caU ;  this  she  killed,  and  made  ready  its  flesh,  and  set  it  before 
his  servants  and  himself.  .  Now  it  is  but  just  to  recommend  the  generosity  of  this 
woman  "  (Josephus).  7.  Pitiable  desolation.  Saul  is  gone  forth  into  the  night  to 
meet  his  fate.'  Left  to  herself,  distrusted  and  distrustful,  feared  and  fearful,  without 
the  consolations  of  religion,  she  is  as  much  an  object  of  pity  as  of  blame,  "  We  take 
leave  of  her,  as  she  took  leave  of  the  ruined  king,  with  a  pitying  heart,"— D. 

Vers.  11 — 16. — A  God-forsaken  man.  I.  Foreboding  before  the  battlx.  Ab 
the  clouds  gather  blackness  before  a  storm,  so  the  mind  of  King  Saul  became  more 
than  ever  dejected  and  gloomy  before  his  defeat  and  death  on  Mount  Gilboa.  Ho 
who  in  the  beginning  of  his  reign  struck  so  boldly  at  the  Philistines,  and  ttrew 
off  their  yoke  from  the  neck  of  Israel,  was  now  afraid  at  the  approach  of  their  t.ost, 
and  "his  heart  greatly  trembled."  Not  that  his  natural  courage  had  deserted  him, 
but,  amidst  all  the  disorder  of  his  brain,  this  one  thing  he  knew,  that  it  was  the 
God  of  Israel  who  had  given  him  success  against  the  Philistines,  and  now  he  found 
himself  without  God.  There  was  no  priest  with  the  army  to  obtain  Divine  direction 
by_  the  Urim  and  Thummim.  Saul  had  slain  the  priests.  "There  was  no  prophet  to 
bring  messages  from  God.     By  his  breach  with  Samuel  Saul  had  alienated  from  hia 


OH.  Mviu.  1—26.]        THE  PIBST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  U» 

cause  all  those  who  had  any  measnre  of  prophetic  gift.  We  hear  the  wafl  of  a  per 
turbed  spirit — "  f  am  sore  distressed ,"  but  no  confession  of  sin,  no  accent  of  npent- 
ance.  This  is  an  ominous  cbaructeristic  of  Saul,  that  he  never  fairly  faces  the  ques- 
tion of  his  own  misconduct,  always,  palliates  his  sin,  always  evades  self -judgment  and 
self-reproach.  What  breaks  from  liim  in  his  extremity  is  only  the  cry  of  hurt  pride. 
the  bitter  vexation  of  a  man  wLo  saw  that  his  career  was  a  failure,  and  that  he  had 
brought  himself  'm  djsappointmont  and  defeat  His  foreboding  before  the  battle 
was  only  too  well  ffioundeii.  So  Shakespeare  describes  Bichara  IIL  gloomy  and 
desperate  before  the  battle  of  fiosworth  Field: — 

"  I  have  not  that  alacrity  of  spirit 
Nor  cheer  of  mind  that  I  was  wont  to  hafab" 

And  shadows  in  the  night  struck  yet  deeper  terror  into  the  soul  of  Bichard.  In  like 
manner  Macbeth  at  Dunsinane,  expecting  the  attack,  has  dark  foreboding  : — 

"  There  is  no  flying  hence,  nor  tarrying  hei«. 
I  'gin  to  be  aweary  of  the  sui." 

n.  Bbcoubsb  to  forbidden  arts.  The  troubled  thoughts  of  the  king  went  after 
that  great  prophet  who  had  anointed  him  to  be  king,  and  had  been  to  him  as  the 
voice  of  Ood.  All  his  mishaps  had  come  from  inattention  to  Samuel's  instructions  and 
warnings.  And  it  seemed  to  him  that  his  fortune  might  still  be  retrieved  if  only  he 
could  have  once  more  the  advice  of  Samuel.  The  prophet  was  dead  and  buried,  and 
there  was  no  way  to  communicate  with  him  except  through  the  forbidden  art  of  necro- 
mancy. Saul  had  in  his  zeal  against  heathen  practices  expelled  from  his  dominions 
those  who  plied  this  art  for  gain ;  but  now  he  fell  in  this,  as  in  so  many  other  respects, 
below  his  own  former  level,  and  repaired  to  a  female  necromancer  at  Endor.  As  to 
what  occurred  at  Endor  it  is  not  necessary  or  perhaps  possible  to  pronounce  a  very 
decided  opinion.  It  was  no  mere  piece  of  jugglery.  To  the  perception  of  the  woman 
there  really  was  an  apparition  ;  but  there  is  room  for  much  question  whether  this  was 
the  actual  appearance  of  a  departed  spirit,  or  a  sort  of  waking  vision  dependent  on 
the  ecstatic  and  clairvoyant  state  of  the  necromancer.  If  there  was  a  real  presence, 
it  was  that  of  Samuel,  or  possibly  that  of  an  evil  spirit  personating  Samuel.  Neither 
of  these  suppositions  commends  itself  to  our  judgment.  No  doubt  the  historian 
says,  "Samuel  said  to  Saul."  But  he  describes  the  scene  merely  according  to  ap- 
pearance, and  so  as  to  account  for  the  effect  produced  on  the  mind  of  the  king.  He 
does  not  analyse  appearances  at  all,  or  look  under  them  for  possible  elements  of 
illusion  or  delusion.  But  if  it  be  possible  to  account  for  the  apparition  any  otherwise, 
We  shrink  from  the  belief  that  Samuel  was  actually  brought  into  this  scene  of  gloom 
and  wickedness,  and,  coming  into  it,  spoke  to  poor  distracted  Saul  without  any  tone 
of  pity  or  exhortation  to  repentance,  grimly  telling  him  that  to-morrow  he  wonld  be 
defeated,  and  he  and  his  sons  would  join  the  ghosts  in  Sheol.  The  moral  improba- 
bility of  this  is  very  great.  As  to  an  evil  spirit  personating  Samuel  in  order  to  drive 
the  king  to  despair,  there  is  no  moral  unlikelihood  in  the  conjecture,  and  it  has  been 
the  opinion  of  Tertullian,  of  Luther,  of  Grotius,  and  many  more ;  but  it  supposes  a 
greater  marvel  than  the  phenomena  require  to  account  for  them,  and  therefore  we 
reject  it.  Our  view  is  that  the  apparition  was  real,  but  was  no  more  than  an  appa- 
rition. The  old  man  in  the  mantle  had  no  existence  whatever  but  to  the  morbid  mmd 
of  the  woman,  who  had  fallen  into  a  clairvoyantic  trance.  It  is  perfectly  well  known 
that  women  of  a  certain  constitution  have  extraordinary  aptitude  for  such  trances 
and  visions,  and  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  female  necromancers  and 
sorcerers  of  antiquity  were  persons  of  the  same  class  with  the  nervous,  crazy  crea- 
tures who  are  now-a-days  spoken  of  as  "powerful  mediums."  Such  persons  in  our 
own  time  see  apparitions  of  the  dead,  and  if  they  add  some  elements  of  trick  and 
imposture  the  better  to  establish  their  reputation,  it  is  only  what  such  unhappy  beings 
have  done  in  the  past,  and  what  the  woman  at  Endor  very  likely  did  also.  The  voice 
that  Saul  heard  may  easily  have  proceeded  from  her  as  a  practised  ventrilociuist 
(see  Isa.  xxix.  4).  Saul  had  fallen  with  his  face  to  the  ground  before  the  apparition, 
which  was  invisible  to  him.  So  the  ventriloquism  was  easy  enough,  and  there  was 
nothing  in  the  words  ascribed  to  Samuel  which  it  was  beyond  the  power  of  the 


640 


THB  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  zxix.  1 — 11. 


necromancer  to  say,  well  aware  as  she  must  have  been  of  the  king's  unfitness  to 
encounter  the  great  Philistine  army,  and  the  strong  probability  that  the  battle  on  the 
morrow  would  go  against  him.  The  wretched  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter  wa* 
that  Saul  was  bereft  of  all  hope,  and  "  was  sore  afraid." 

III.  CoMMCTKiON  WITH  THB  DEAD.  Necromanoy,  unfortunately,  is  not  a  lost  art 
among  ourselves.  Men  and  women  of  education  are  not  ashamed  or  afraid  to  prac- 
tise arts  and  consult  "  mediums  "  that  are  referred  to  in  the  Old  Testament  as 
abhorrent  to  Ood  and  utterly  forbidden  to  his  people.  In  the  communication  with 
the  dead  which  is  said  to  be  established  there  may  be  an  element  of  trickery,  there 
maybe  an  element  of  power  of  some  evil  sort  that  no  one  can  define;  but  the  process 
all  in  all  is  one  of  base  delusion,  its  whole  tendency  is  crazy,  and  its  issues  are  in 
gloom  and  madness.  Above  all,  it  tends  to  draw  men  away  from  God,  or  it  is  an 
attempt  to  obtain  preternatural  direction  for  souls  that  have  fallen  out  of  communion 
with  him,  like  the  soul  of  Saul,  and  it  cannot  come  to  good.  But  we  do  not  say  to 
the  children  of  God,  "Have  nothing  to  do  with  the  dead."  In  the  communion  of 
saints  we  are  bound  to  those  who  have  departed,  as  much  as  to  those  who  are  in  the 
body.  How  they  may  help  us  even  now  is  one  of  the  things  of  which  we  have  no 
certain  knowledge.  But  we  pay  them  most  honour  when  we  refrain  from  any 
attempt  to  disturb  their  sacred  repose,  and  endeavour  to  remember  their  counsels,  to 
walk  liD  their  steps,  to  live  as  they  would  wish  us  to  live  before  God  and  maiii 

"How  pui«  in  heart  and  sound  in  head, 
With  what  Divine  affection  bold, 
Should  be  the  man  whose  thought  would  hold 
An  hour's  communion  with  the  dead. 

"  In  vain  shalt  thou  or  any  call 

The  spirits  from  their  golden  day, 
Except,  like  them,  thon  too  canst  aay, 
M  y  spirit  is  at  peace  with  all. 

"  They  haunt  the  silence  of  the  breast, 
Imaginations  calm  and  fair, 
The  memory  like  a  cloudless  air, 
The  conscience  >a  a  wa  at  rest "  (TennyionV  8> 


EXPOSITION. 
Datid'b  Dismissai.  ibom  the  Phuibtinb  Outr  (oh.  xxii.). 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Hakoh  or  THE  Philistine  akmt  (vers.  1 
— 5).  Ver.  1. — The  Philistines  gathered,  &o. 
The  narrative,  broken  ofif  for  the  description 
of  Saul's  abasement,  is  again  resumed  from 
ch.  xxviii.  1.  Aphek.  As  we  saw  on  ch.  iv. 
1,  this  word,  signifpng  a  fortress,  is  a  very 
common  name  for  places.  If  it  was  the  Aphek 
in  Judah  there  mentioned,  David's  dismissal 
would  have  taken  place  near  Gath,  and  so 
soon  after  Achish  joined  the  Philistine  army. 
Mr.  Conder  thinks  it  was  the  place  repre- 
sented by  the  modem  village  Fuku'a,  near 
Mount  Gilboa,  in  the  tribe  of  Issachar  ;  hut 
as  this  was  distant  from  Ziklag  eighty  or 
ninety  miles,  it  would  not  have  been  possible 
for  David  to  have  readied  home  thence  on 
the  third  day  (ch.  xxx.  ] ),  nor  was  it  pro- 
bable that  his  presence  with  his  little  army 
would  remain  long  unnoticed.  A  fountain 
which  is  in  Jezreel.  Hebrew, "  the  fountain." 
Conder  says,  "Crossing  the  valley  we  see 


before  us  the  site  of  Jezreel,  on  •  Imoll  SOO 
feet  high.  The  position  is  very  peculiar,  for 
whilst  on  the  north  and  north-east  the 
slopes  are  steep  and  rugged,  on  the  south 
the  ascent  is  very  gradual,  and  the  traveller 
coming  northward  is  astonished  to  look  down 
suddenly  on  the  valley  with  its  two  springs : 
one,  'Ain  JS,lud,  welling  out  from  a  con- 
glomerate cliff,  and  forming  a  pool  100  yards 
long  with  muddy  borders  j  the  other,  the 
Crusaders'  fountain  of  Tubania"  ('Tent- 
Work,'  i.  124).  The  former  is  the  fountain 
inentioned  here  ;  and  it  is  evident  that  even 
now  Saul  had  chosen  a  strong  position  for 
his  army.  The  reading  of  the  Septuagint, 
En-dor  instead  of  "  the  fountain  "  (Hebrew, 
'En,  or  'Ain),  is  indefensible,  as  the  Israel- 
ites were  many  miles  to  the  southward. 

Vers.  2,  3.— The  lords  of  the  Philistines 
passed  on.  Evidently  they  were  on  their 
march  northward,  with  their  troops  arranged 
in  divisions,  when  David's  presence  in  tha 
rearward  with  the  contingent  of  Achiah  wat 


OK.  xax.  I— II.] 


THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


Ml 


noticed.  The  princes — not  the  strict  word 
for  the  Philistine  lords  (see  on  ch.  v.  8),  but 
a  loose,  general  term  used  again  in  yer.  4 — 
on  having  it  reported  to  them  in  the  course 
of  a  day  or  two  that  there  was  a  bodv  of 
strange  troops  in  the  army  of  Oath,  asked, 
What  do  these  Hebrews  here?  Hebrew, 
"  What  these  Hebrews  ?  "  i.  e.  What  mean 
these  Hebrews  ?  using  of  them  the  ordinary 
Philistine  term  of  contempt.  Achish  answers 
that  these  men  were  the  followers  of  David, 
who,  having  deserted  from  Saul,  had  been 
with  him  these  days  or  these  years,  i.  e.  an 
indefinitely  long  time,  during  which  he  had 
conducted  himself  with  the  utmost  fidelity 
to  his  new  master. 

Vers.  4 — 6. — Angrily  rejecting  the  testi- 
mony of  Achish  in  David's  favour,  they  say, 
Make  this  fellow  (Hebrew,  "the  man") re- 
turn, that  he  may  go  again  to  his  place,  i.  e. 
to  Ziklag.  He  shall  not  go  down  with  us  to 
battle.  Though  the  Fhilistines.marched  up 
into  the  Israelite  territory,  yet  they  speak 
naturally  of  goirig  down  into  battle,  because 
while  armies  usually  encamped  on  opposite 
ranges  of  hills,  they  descended  into  the  plain 
between  for  the  encounter.  An  adversary. 
Hebrew,  "  a  satan,"  without  the  article,  and 
so  in  1  Chron.  xxi.  1.  As  a  proper  name  it  has 
the  article,  as  in  the  books  of  Job  and  Zech- 
ariah.  Should  he  reconcile  himself  The 
verb  means,  "  to  make  himself  pleasing," 
"  to  commend  himself"  The  heads  of  these 
men,  pointing  to  the  Philistine  ranks.  David 
of  whom  they  sang,  &c.  The  song  of  the 
Jewish  maidens  seems  to  have  been  as  well 
known  in  Philistia  as  in  the  land  of  IsraeL 
On  the  former  occasion  it  had  made  the  Philis- 
tines drive  him  away  from  the  court  of  Achish 
(ch.  zxi  11 — 15) ;  here,  too,  it  made  them 
drive  him  from  their  army,  but  he  was 
thereby  saved  &om  the  painful  necessity  of 
making  war  on  his  own  country,  and  returned 
just  in  time  to  rescue  his  wives  and  property. 

AOHISH  SENDS  David  AWAY  (vers.  6 — 11). 
Vers.  6,  7. — As  Jehovah  liveth.  These 
words  are  strange  in  the  mouth  of  a  Philis- 
tine, nor  can  we  suppose  that  oat  of  respect 


to  David  he  would  thus  swear  by  David'i 
God.  Probably  they  are  the  eqmvalent  ol 
the  oath  which  Achish  really  used.  He  sends, 
however,  David  away  with  the  utmost  court- 
esy, assuring  him  that  his  own  wish  had 
been  that  he  should  remain  with  him,  because 
all  his  conduct  had  been  upright  since  he  had 
come  to  him  at  Gath. 

Ver.  8. — David's  answer  is  subtle  and  pre- 
varicating ;  he  pretends  that  his  honour  naa 
been  attacked,  when  really  he  had  tricked 
the  unsuspecting  Achish.  But  truth  is  a 
modem  virtue,  and  though  David  extols  it 
in  the  Psalms  (Ps.  xv.  2  ;  li.  6),  we  too  often 
find  him  practising  falsehood. 

Ver.  9.— I  know  that,  &c.  Rather,  "I 
know  it,  for.  thou  art  good  in  my  sight,"  i.  e. 
I  know  all  that  thou  wouldst  say  as  to  thy 
trustworthiness,  and  assent  to  it.  As  Wl 
angel  of  God.  J.  e.  as  a  messenger  of  God,  ai 
one  set  to  me  by  God. 

Vers.  10, 11. — With  thy  master's  servants. 
It  has  been  well  remarked  that  while  this 
would  be  a  strange  description  of  David's 
own  men,  it  would  exactly  describe  that  band 
of  deserters  belonging  to  the  tribe  of  Ma- 
nasseh  who,  instead  of  obeying  Saul's  simi- 
mons  to  the  war  with  the  Philistines,  joined 
David  about  this  time  (see  1  Chron.  xii.  19 
— 21).  As  soon  as  ye  be  np  early  in  the 
morning,  &c.  If  it  was  on  the  second  day's 
march  that  the  Philistine  lords  objected  to 
David's  continuance  with  them,  he  would  be 
back  at  Gath  in  two  days,  and  on  the  third 
day  reach  Ziklag,  as  is  said  in  oh.  xxx.  1. 
However  difficult  David's  position  may  have 
been,  still  every  one  must  condemn  his 
conduct  towards  Achish  as  dishonourable ; 
but  God,  who  often  deals  with  men  more 
mercifully  than  they  deserve,  nevertheless 
rescued  him  from  his  state  of  perplexity,  and 
saved  him  from  the  necessity  of  either  fight- 
ing against  his  own  countiymen  or  of  still 
more  dishonourably  breaking  his  word  to 
Achish  by  deserting  in  the  battle.  He  also 
sent  him  home  just  in  time  to  rescue  from 
a  miserable  fate  those  whom  he  loved. 


HOMILETICia 

Vers.  1-  -5. — The  amnteraetions  of  Providetice.  The  facts  are — 1.  The  Philistines 
make  preparations  for  battle,  and  David  and  his  men  form  the  rear.  2.  On  the 
princes  complaining  of  the  presence  of  the  Hebrews,  Achish  pleads  the  faithfulness 
of  David.  3.  The  princes  insist  on  the  dismissal  of  David  and  his  men  to  a  safe 
quarter,  being  suspicious  that  he  might  in  battle  turn  against  them.  The  conduct  of 
David,  as  recorded  in  chapter  xxvii.,  now  began  to  be  embarrassing  both  to  himself 
and  his  Philistine  protectors ;  and  had  events  gone  on  as  once  appeared  probable, 
David  would  have  been  put  in  inextricable  difficulties.  It  was  only  the  quarrel 
between  Achish  and  the  leaders  of  his  forces  that  solved  the  ambiguity  of  his 
position. 

I.  The  codbsb  or  human  bvbmts,  regarded  in  isolated  sections,  often  seeks  to 


S42  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMDBL.  [oh.  xxa.  1—11; 

BSHDEB  THI  BBALIBATIOR  OF  God'S  PUBFOflK  TmCEBTAnrj  IF  HOT  IMFOSSIBLB.      The  pi^ 

pbet  Samuel  had  declared  it  to  be  God's  parpoae  to  bring  David  to  the  throne,  m  • 
man  worthy  of  the  confidence  of  the  nation.  The  arrangement  that  bad  been  mad« 
on  the  accession  of  Saul  to  power  had  been  modified  in  harmony  with  this  fact. 
Yet  in  the  ambiguous  position  in  which  David  was  now  placed  by  hia  own  erring 
conduct  it  seemed  as  though  events  were  tending  in  a  different  direction.  The 
very  man  on  whom  the  hope  of  the  pious  was  set  wag  now  allied  with  Israel's  foe, 
and  on  the  way  to  fight  against  his  own  people.  Already  dissimulation  had  injured 
his  reputation,  and  should  he  now  engage  against  his  own  countrymen,  how  could  he 
ever  be  worthy  of  confidence  as  a  loyal  Hebrew  ?  This  is  not  an  isolated  instance. 
The  readiness  with  which  the  descendants  of  Jacob  seemed  to  settle  in  Egypt  after 
his  death  gave  no  promise  of  the  fulfilment  of  God's  purpose  concerning  them.  The 
scattering  of  the  disciples  by  the  first  persecution  appeared  to  run  counter  to  Church 
consolidation,  and  therefore  to  power  of  Christian  effort.  There  are  ebbs  in  the 
individual  Christian  life  which  while  in  progress  suggest  the  uncertainty  of  final 
salvation.  Even  the  long  course  of  evils  subsequent  to  the  creation  of  man,  con- 
sidered in  their  earthly  development,  may  give  rise  to  the  doubt  whether  the  benevo- 
lent purpose  of  a  good  Creator  can  ever  be  attained.  It  should  not  be  forgotten, 
however,  that  we  see  only  sections  of  life's  course,  and  we  must  not  draw  a  con- 
clusion from  partial  knowledge.  God  allows  freedom  of  action,  and  trains  his 
creatures  by  t^e  dearly-purchased  lessons  of  a  painful  experience,  and,  moreover, 
calmly  awaits  the  issue  of  the  whole. 

II.  The  errobs  of  hen  of  sincere  fiett  abb  vebt  tersbblt  tbbated  bt  God. 
We  cannot  but  be  struck  with  the  great  difference  between  the  conduct  for  which 
Saul  was  so  heavily  punished  and  that  of  David  which  did  not  issue  in  his  rejection. 
Saul's  sin  was  radical — it  was  "  rebellion  "  (ch.  xv.  23).  It  indicated  that  self-will 
ruled  his  conduct.  David's  sin  in  dissembling  and  in  settling  without  Divine 
direction  as  an  ally  of  Achish  was  the  sin  of  backsliding  and  neglect.  He  was 
radically  sincere  in  his  piety,  but  in  an  hour  of  weakness  lost  his  full  faith  in  God, 
and  so  yielded  to  the  infiuence  of  fear.  Hence  he  was  chastised  by  sorrow,  by 
increasing  fears,  by  self-humiliation,  loss  of  reputation,  and  that  secret  sense  of 
Divine  displeasure  which  the  erring  soul  of  the  devout  knows  too  well.  Though  the 
sincere  servant  of  God  falls,  he  shall  not  be  utterly  cast  down.  God  remembers  that 
he  is  dust.  In  David's  case  the  troubles  created  by  his  actions  produce  regret  that 
he  ever  put  himseU  in  such  a  false  position,  and  quicken  the  spirit  of  true  repent- 
ance. Our  Saviour's  treatment  of  hardened,  self-willed  men  and  those  whose  spirits 
were  struggling  to  do  right  and  to  be  right  was  very  different.  It  is  a  consolation  to 
us  all  to  know  that  he  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  and  does  not  cast 
off  those  who,  not  being  able  to  "watch  one  hour,"  fall  into  temptation. 

III.  God  never  fails  to  exercise  contbol  over  the  set  of  events  which  seem 
TO  BUN  countbr  TO'  HIS  PURi'osES,  and  when  the  fit  time  arrives  hb  brings  new 
elements  into  operation.  David  erred  and  sinned  ;  but  David  was  restrained  and 
inwardly  humbled.  This  dangerous  alliance,  though  bringing  him  to  the  verge  of  a 
precipice,  was  limited,  in  the  pressure  of  its  obligationsj'by  a 'new  set  of  influences 
being  brought  into  operation.  So  far  as  the  bond  between  David  and  Achish  was 
working,  David's  hand  must  soon  be  raised  in  battle  against  Israel ;  but  the  in- 
scrutable Providence  which  ordained  him  to  be  future  king,  and  allowed  him,  for 
hidden  reasons,  to  come  into  perilous  and  damaging  relationships,  also  held  sway 
over  the  spirits  of  Philistine  princes,  and  just  when  the  sin  of  the  man  of  God 
was  about  to  bear  its  cruellest  fruit,  moved  them  to  protest  against  his  entering  into 
the  conflict.  Thus  tenderly  does  God  deal  with  his  erring  servant,  and,  in  a  manner 
unknown  and  unexpected,  counteract  the  course  of  events  which  recently  had  tended 
to  the  frustration  of  his  own  purposes.  How  often  would  God's  servants  ruin  their 
own  reputation  and  the  very  cause  dear  to  their  hearts  did  he  not  raise  up  means  o£ 
checking  the  tendency  of  their  conduct.  It  is  of  the  Lord's  mercies  that  we  are  not 
consumed. 

IV.  In  thus  COUNTERACTINa  THE  EFFECTS  OF  OUR  MI8CONDUC3T  GOD  CAUSES  OHASTISS- 

MENT  to  COMB  ON  THE  ERRING.     David  was  mercifully  saved  from  the  peril  of  smiting 
hia  own  people,  and  the  pressure  of  any  obligation  which  bnman  mendships  anq 


OL  zxix.  1— IL]  THB  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  Ml 

onstoms  miHr  have  laid  npon  him  was  removed,  and  the  prospects  of  hia  being  welcomed 
M  king  in  Israel  were  brightened ;  yet  in  his  own  heart  he  was  made  to  feel  all  the 

Eain  and  ehame  of  being  regarded  as  a  man  of  treacherous  character.  He  could  not 
ut  smart  under  the  contempt  of  heathen  princes  if,  as  is  likely,  he  knew  of  theii 
language  concerning  himself.  "  Make  this  fellow  return,"  and  for  the  reason  "  lest  in 
the  battle  he  be  an  adversary  to  us."  To  profess  to  be  true  and  faithful,  and  yet  to 
be  scorned  and  treated  as  one  whose  word  and  profession  are  worthless,  this  was  one 
means  by  which  Providence  caused  the  erring  one  to  suffer  from  the  fruit  of  his  own 
deeds. 

General  lessons: — 1.  Let  us  not  be  allured  into  questionable  courses  by  a  prospect 
of  present  ease,  seeing  that  a  perilous  crisis  may  arise  out  of  the  very  means  we  take 
for  securing  ease.  2.  Whatever  troubles  beset  the  Church  by  reason  of  the  imper- 
fect conduct  of  God's  servants,  let  us  still  cherish  faith  in  his  wisdom  and  power  to 
counteract  the  natural  effects  of  their  conduct.  3.  It  is  of  great  importance  so  to  act 
as  never  to  merit  the  scorn  and  distrust  of  irreligious  men,  for  we  thereby  dishonour 
the  name  of  God  and  destroy  our  proper  influence  in  the  world. 

Vers,  i— 11.— Escape  from  danger.  The  facts  are — 1.  Achish  informs  David  of 
the  remonstrance  of  the  princes,  and  at  the  same  time  expresses  confidence  in  his 
integrity.  2.  On  Achish  urging  liis  return  from  the  scene  of  conflict,  David  professes 
to  be  surprised  that  he  should  be  distrusted,  and  appeals  to  his  past  fidelity.  3.  Being 
reassured  of  the  confidence  of  Achish,  and  of  the  determination  of  the  princes,  David 
returns  with  his  men.  The  relations  of  Achish  and  David  appear  to  have  been  most 
honourable  to  both,  and  there  is  something  beautiful  in  the  respect  and  consideration 
with  which  this  heathen  ruler  treats  the  refugee.  He  does  his  best  to  lessen  the  pain 
which  he  presumes  the  communication  of  the  resolve  of  the  princes  will  cause  him, 
and  sends  him  away  with  the  strongest  assurances  of  interest  and  confidence.  On 
the  other  hand,  while  keenly  feeling  the  implication  of  the  princes,  David  displays  in 
his  self-vindication  the  art  of  a  skilled  diplomatist.  He  does  not  say  that  he  wishes 
to  go  against  Israel,  or  that  he  regrets  not  being  permitted  to  go,  but  shrewdly  asks 
whether,  so  far  as  concerns  his  past  conduct  while  with  Achish,  he  might  not  be 
trusted  in  conflict  with  a  foe.  There  are  several  topics  suggested  by  this  discussion 
between  the  heathen  king  and  the  Hebrew  refugee. 

L  The  STING  OP  SUSPICION.  David  was  hurt  by  the  imputation  of  possible  trea- 
chery. His  sojourn  among  the  Philistines  had  been  marked  by  carefulness  not  to 
abuse  their  hospitality,  and  to  fulfil  the  obligations  incident  to  his  position  as  a 
protected  refugee.  Also,  as  a  pious  Hebrew,  he  claimed  to  be  far  above  the  uncir- 
cumcised  in  all  that  makes  character  noble  and  trustworthy.  Moreover,  the  proba- 
bility is  he  did  not  entertain  thoughts  of  treachery,  but  rather  in  his  conscious  embar- 
rassment was  secretly  praying  to  God  for  some  escape  from  the  dilemma  of  his 
position.  Although,  as  a  man  of  the  world,  he  must  have  seen  the  legitimacy  of 
their  conclusion  from  their  premises,  yet  this  did  not  remove  or  lessen  the  sting  of  the 
suspicion  of  the  princes.  He  was  reaping  the  bitter  fruit  of  his  former  act ;  and  we 
have  noticed  under  vers.  1 — 6  the  element  of  chastisement  in  this  pain.  To  every 
•  upright  mind  it  is  most  distressing  to  be  an  object  of  suspicion,  and  especially  among 
persons  with  whom  friendship  has  been  maintained.  It  eats  away  the  joy  and 
strength  of  the  heart,  and  destroys  much  of  our  power  with  men.  -Happy  is  it  for  us 
if  a  good  conscience  is  a  private  solace ;  but  we  should  see  to  it  that  the  suspicion 
is  not  warranted  by  any  puzzling  ambiguities  in  our  words  or  deeds. 

II.  Fidelity  in  engagements.  Achish,  in  strong  language,  testifies  to  the  fidelity 
with  which  David  had  kept  every  engagement  involved  in  his  positron  in  the  country, 
and  David  himself  appears  to  have  been  honestly  conscious  that  in  this  matter  he 
was  upright.  He  had  done  his  duty,  and  that  is  much  to  say  in  a  world  where  so 
many  temptations  arise  to  induce  selfish  action,  regardless  of  relative  claims.  It  is 
of  great  importance  in  the  social  order  that  men  understand  their  position  to  rulers, 
to  neighbours,  and  to  home,  and  with  careful  exactitude  discharge  the  varied  obliga- 
tions resting  on  them  with  religious  scrupulosity.  It  is  hard  tn  say  what  material 
loss,  moral  injury,  and  social  and  commercial  disorganisation  arise  from  laxity  in 
l^eeping  engagements.     The  ease  with  which  some,  even  prot'essing  Christians,  can 


S44  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUITL.  [ch.  zxk.  1—11 

disregard  the  obligations  of  their  position  in  society  and  the  Church,  and  also  fafl  to 
meet  undertakings  deliberately  made,  is  very  painful  to  contemplate.  We  honooi 
God  when  we  "fcilfil  all  righteousness."  Our  supposed  fidelity  in  great  things  i« 
deprived  of  much  of  its  honour  and  glory  by  neglect  of  what  are  deemed  the  "  minor 
moralities."  Oar  Lord  has  taught  us  the  connection  between  the  two.  "  He  that  is 
faithful  in  the  least  is  faithful  also  in  much." 

III.  The  influence  of  bupebiob  character.  There  is  evident  sincerity  in  the 
words  of  Achish  when  he  says  of  David,  "  Thou  hast  been  upright.  .  .  I  know  that 
thou  art  good  in  my  sight  as  an  angel  of  God."  The  fact  is,  the  force  of  David's 
superior  character  as  an  enlighteiied  Hebrew  and  a  God-fearing  man  was  duly  recog- 
nised by  this  heathen  king.  The  disparity  between  the  two  men  in  point  of  spiritual 
enlightenment  and  holy  aspiration  was  enormous.  The  peaceful,  kindly  disposition 
of  Achish  enabled  him  to  live  on  such  terms  of  intimacy  with  David  as  to  feel  the  full 
force  of  his  superiority.  The  highest  form  of  character  on  earth  is  realised  when  great 
natural  powers  are  fully  permeated  with  the  light  and  love  of  the  Christian  spirit ;  and 
in  any  case  of  moderate  powers,  elevation  is  attained  in  so  far  as  the  pure,  loving  mind 
of  Christ  rules  the  life.  Such  character  is  a  silent  formative  power  in  society.  Men 
who  speak  not  of  it  consciously  recognise  its  beauty  and  force.  They  feel  its  charm, 
its  restraining  power,  its  elevating  tendency,  its  quickening  and  soothing  effects. 
How  blessed  the  influence  of  a  missionary  among  degraded  heathen  1  What  power 
for  good  is  exercised  by  many  a  devout  pastor  in  village  and  city  I  Who  can  esti- 
mate the  value  of  holy  character  in  the  master  of  workmen,  the  teacher  of  the 
young,  the  mother  of  a  family,  the  statesman  at  the  head  of  affairs  ? 

IV.  Concealment  of  thought.  David  complained  to  Achish  of  the  suspicions  of 
his  lords,  and  was  prepared  to  prove  that  nothing  in  his  conduct  since  he  had  been 
amongst  them  gave  the  slightest  ground  for  their  imputation ;  but  his  defence  was 
so  carefully  worded  as  to  conceal  from  Achish  the  real  thought  of  his  heart.  He 
simply  reasoned  from  his  known  conduct  to  a  general  conclusion  of  fidelity  to  his 
protector ;  he  said  nothing  of  the  private  wish  that  he  may  not  have  to  fight  Israel, 
or  of  any  hope  that  he  shall  escape  the  test  of  fidelity,  or  of  his  secret  pleasure  that 
a  door  of  escape  was  opening.  The  form  of  the  language,  to  one  not  keen  in  detect- 
ing shades  of  thought  under  general  terms,  might  lead  to  the  belief  that  he  was 
referring  to  the  impending  battle,  and  so  far  perhaps  David's  words  may  be  chal- 
lenged. Yet  he  only  said  what  was  generally  true.  He  concealed  the  sentiments 
pertinent  to  the  coming  contest.  This  practice  of  concealing  thought  requires  much 
watchfulness.  We  are  not  bound  to  let  out  all  we  think,  nor  are  we  to  give  faculties 
to  men  to  understand  what  others  would  see  at  once,  but  we  are  bound  not  to  design 
to  give  a  torong  impression.    Truthfulness  lies  in  intent  as  also  does  falsehood. 

V.  DooBS  OF  ESCAPE.  After  the  fearful  strain  that  must  have  been  put  on  David's 
feelings  by  the  ambiguous  position  in  which  he  had  placed  himself,  it  must  have 
been  an  immense  relief  to  see  the  door  open  for  an  honourable  retreat.  The  Bible 
does  not  tell  us  all  that  God's  servants  thought  and  felt  and  did ;  but  judging  from 
David's  usual  conduct  when  in  great  straits,  and  from  the  references  in  the  Psalms 
to  times  of  trial,  we  may  infer  that  during  this  painful  and  self-caused  season  of 
peril  he  cried  from  the  depths  of  his  heart  for  deliverance.  It  came,  and  the  "  salva- 
tion" was  of  the  Lord.  How  this  suggests  to  us  the  many  escapes  which  God 
secures  for  us  during  our  earthly  course  I  What  instances  there  are  of  the  same 
Providence  in  the  records  of  the  Bible  and  the  history  of  the  Christian  Church  I 
And  above  all,  there  is  now  "  an  open  door  "  set  before  us  by  which,  if  we  will,  we 
may  escape  from  the  degradation  and  woe  of  sin,  and  walk  in  the  liberty  of  the 
children  of  God.  "  Escape  for  thy  life,"  was  once  said  to  Lot.  He  gave  heed,  and 
was  saved.  He  that  hath  an  ear  to  hear,  let  him  now  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to 
the  Churches. 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 11.  (On  THE  MABCH  TO  APHBK.) — A  good  man  in  had  company.  "  What 
do  these  Hebrews  here  ?  "  (ver.  3).  The  results  of  the  wrong  step  which  David  had 
taken  in  going  into  the  country  of  the  Philistines  now  became  manifest.     In  the  wai 


OH.  XXIX.  1—11  ]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  Stt 

against  Israel  Achish  naturally  looked  to  hitn  and  his  men  to  go  out  with  him  to 
battle.  What  was  he  to  do  ?  He  might  refuse  to  go.  This  would  have  been  hit 
Btraightforward  course.  But  he  would  thereby  forfeit  the  friendship  of  Achish,  and 
expose  himself  to  imminent  danger.  He  might  go  and  fight  against  Israel.  This 
would  be  to  incur  the  greatest  guilt,  and  imperil  his  accession  to  the  throne.  He 
might  go  and  turn  traitor  on  the  battle-field.  This  was  what  the  Philistines  expected 
(ver.  4),  but  it  would  have  covered  his  name  with  infamy.  He  determined  for  the 
present  to  continue  his  prevarication  with  Achish,  who  said  he  should  be  captain  of 
his  body-guard  for  the  future  (ch.  xxviii.  1,  2),  and  went,  probably  with  a  troubled 
conscience,  and  hoping  that  he  might  in  some  way  be  relieved  from  his  inconsistent 
and  perplexing  position.  He  was  clearly  out  of  his  proper  place  in  the  Philistine 
army.     His  condition  represents  that  of  a  good  man — 

I.  Improperly  associated  with  the  dngodlt.  It  is  by  no  means  uncommon  for 
a  good  man  to  yield  to  the  temptation  to  join  the  wicked  in  their  pursuits,  unneces- 
sarily, and  from  an  unjustifiable  motive ;  such  as  the  desire  of  personal  safety,  con- 
venience, information,  pleasure,  or  profit — like  Lot  in  Sodom,  Jonah  going  to  Tarshish, 
Peter  in  the  palace  of  the  high  priest  (see  ch.  xv.  6).  The  relation  into  which  he 
thus  enters  is  inconsistent  with: — 1.  Truth;  inasmuch  as  it  usually  requires  him  to 
deceive  others  concerning  his  real  character  and  purposes,  by  pretending  to  be  what 
he  is  not,  and  concealing  what  he  is.  2.  Piety  ;  inasmuch  as  he  is  thereby  hindered 
in  his  devotions  (ch.  xxvi.  19),  exposes  himself  to  fresh  temptations,  sanctions  sinful 
or  doubtful  conduct,  strengthens  the  ranks  of  the  enemy,  violates  his  duty  to  God 
and  "  his  own  company  "  and  people.  "  Those  that  would  be  kept  from  sin  must 
not  go  on  the  devil's  ground"  (M.  Henry).  "What  doest  thou  here,  Elijah?" 
David — Hebrew — Christian  ?  3.  His  own,  real  welfare ;  inasmuch  as  he  involves 
himself  in  unforeseen  but  certain  trouble,  places  himself  beyond  the  promised  pro- 
tection of  God,  and  exposes  himself  to  the  threatened  fate  of  his  enemies. 

II.  Shrewdly  suspected  by  his  associates.  He  may  endeavour  to  escape  their 
suspicion,  and  for  a  time  succeed,  but  it  is  sooner  or  later  excited  by — 1.  Something 
in  himself — his  name,_  appearance,  relation  to  past  events  ("  Is  not  this  David  ?  ' 
Ac,  vers.  3,  5),  peculiar  behaviour,  faltering  and  ambiguous  explanations.  "Thy 
speech  bewrayeth  thee."  "  Did  I  not  see  thee  in  the  garden  with  him  ?  "  2.  The 
occurrence  of  new  circumstances,  which  quicken  perception,  call  for  decision,  test  and 
manifest  the  character,  and  its  congruity  or  otherwise  with  present  associations.  3. 
The  general  instinct  of  the  ungodly.  Altlioughsoraeof  their  number  may  be  deceived, 
and  exhibit  unbounded  confidence  in  him  (ver.  3),  let  no  one  think  to  escape. 
"  There  is  nothing  hidden  that  shall  not  be  revealed.' 

III.  Deeply  humiliated  by  his  treatment.  1.  Outwardly.  In  the  eyes  of 
others.  "  Make  this  fellow  return,"  &c.  (ver.  4).  He  is  compelled  to  leave  the 
aociety  which  he  has  chosen ;  expelled  from  it  publicly  and  ignominiously,  as  one 
unworthy  to  be  trusted.  2.  Inwardly.  In  his  own  eyes.  The  heathen  king  of 
Gath  appears  to  have  been  a  faithful  and  honourable  man ;  and  his  expression  of 
confidence  in  David  (vers.  3,  6),  in  contrast  to  the  dishonourable  prevarication 
of  the  latter  (ver.  8),  must  have  put  him  to  shame.  "The  flattering  com- 
mendations of  worldly  people  are  almost  always  purchased  by  improper  compliances, 
or  some  measure  of  deception,  and  commonly  may  cover  us  with  confusion" 
(Scott). 

IV.  Providentially  extricated  from  his  embarrassment.  He  may  not  be  able 
to  extricate  himself  from  the  net  in  which  he  has  become  entangled.  But  God  does 
not  readily  abandon  him  to  all  the  natural  consequences  of  his  conduct.  He  has 
many  ways  of  working  out  his  deliverance,  and  efEeets  it — 1.  From  regard  to  the 
good  that  is  in  him,  and  in  pity  toward  him  in  his  perplexity  and  distress.  2.  For 
the  honour  of  his  name,  that  his  merciful  care  over  his  servants  may  be  seen,  and  his 
glory  promoted  by  them.  3.  Not  without  testifying  his  disapproval  of  his  sin. 
"  David  returned  the  next  morning  to  Ziklag  no  doubt  very  light  of  heart,  and 
praising  God  for  having  so  graciously  rescued  him  out  of  the  disastrous  situation 
into  wTiich  he  had  been  brought!'  (Keil).  "The  snare  is  broken,  and  we  are 
escaped  "  (Ps.  cxxiv.  7).  But  on  the  third  day  he  found  Ziklag  in  ashes,  was  over- 
whelmed with  grief,  and  more  deeply  humbled  than  ever  before.    Tl:e  folly  and 

IBAK.  ■> 


646  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xxn.  1—11 

^ — ^ —  II 

guilt  of  the  course  which  he  had  pursued  were  at  length  brought  home  to  him  vrith 
irresistible  force. 

Remarks : — 1.  Thiere  are  associations  with  the  ungodly  which  are  not  sinful,  but 
right  and  beneficial  to  a  good  man  himself,  as  well  as  to  them.  2.  No  one  should 
place  himself  in  the  way  of  temptation,  and  then  expect  that  God  will  preserve  hira 
from  falling  or  extricate  him  from  the  consequences  of  his  presumption.  3.  If  any  one 
finds  that  he  has  improperly  associated  himself  with  the  wicked,  he  ought  to  adopt 
all  proper  methods  to  efEect  his  speedy  separation  from  them.  4.  When  he  has 
found  deliverance  from  his  perplexity  and  peril  he  should  give  the  glory  of  it  to 
God  alone. — D. 

Vers.  1 — 11. — Achish.  David  had,  in  the  course  of  his  life,  friendly  relations  with 
several  heathen  princes.  One  of  tliese  was  Achish  (elsewhere  called  Abimelech, 
Ps.  xxxiv.,  inscription),  son  of  Maoch,  and  king  of  Gath,  one  of  the  five  royal  cities, 
the  seats  of  the  princes  of  the  Philistine  confederacy.  What  is  recorded  of  him 
shows  that  he  was  a  remarkable  man.  Whilst  Saul  persecuted  David,  Achish  pro- 
tected him ;  and  whilst  the  former,  in  the  midst  of  Israel,  "  with  the  law  "  of  Moses, 
committed  atrocious  crime,  and  sank  into  heathen  superstition,  the  latter,  in  the  midst 
of  heathenism,  "  without  the  law  "  (Bom.  ii.  11 — 16),  exhibited  much  moral  excellence, 
and  approached  the  faith  of  Israel  (ver.  6).  pe  may  have  profited  in  religious 
knowledge  by  his  intercourse  with  David  ;  on  the  other  hand,  his  example  was  in 
some  respects  worthy  of  imitation  by  him.  We  must  not  attribute  to  him  virtues 
which  he  did  not  possess ;  but  we  see  in  him  a  man  much  better  than  we  might 
have  expected  to  find  from  the  disadvantages  under,  which  he  lived.  He  was  dis- 
tinguished by — 1.  Self-interested  policy.  Although  he  may  have  felt  some  sympathy 
with'David  in  his  persecution  by  Saul,  yet  he  appears  to  have  received  him  under  his 
protection  chiefly  because  of  the  aid  he  hoped  to  obtain  from  him  for  himself  and  his 
people  (ch.  xxvii.  12).  2.  Unsuspecting  confidence.  He  had  much  reason  to  be 
suspicious  of  David  from  his  knowledge  of  his  victory  over  the  champion  of  Oath, 
and  his  recollection  of  his  former  visit ;  but  he  put  an  unreserved  trust  in  his  repre- 
sentations (ch.  ixviii.  2),  and  even  when  others  suspected  him  did  not  withdraw  it. 
A  trustful  disposition  is  liable  to  be  imposed  upon,  but  it  is  always  worthy  of  admira- 
tion. 3.  Royal  generosity,  in  permitting  David  to  dwell  in  Gath,  making  him  s  pre- 
sent of  Ziklag,  and  appointing  him  to  an  honourable  post  in  his  army.  He  was 
without  envy  or  jealousy,  and  acted  toward  him  in  a  manner  worthy  of  a  king.  4. 
Discriminating  appreciation;  admiring  the  military  bravery  of  David  and  the 
still  higher  qualities  which  he  possessed.  "  I  have  found  no  fault  in  him,"  &c.  (vers. 
3,  6,  9).  There  must  have  been  much  in  common  between  these  two  men  to  have 
enabled  them  to  live  on  such  friendly  terms  with  each  other  for  so  long  a  period. 
Excellence  perceives  and  appreciates  excellence.  5.  Honourable  fdelity,  both  in 
testifying  to  the  worth  of  David  and  in  submitting  to  "the  lords  of  the  Philistines," 
with  whom  he  was  associated  (ver.  7).  6.  Courteous  consideration.  "And  now 
return,  and  go  in  peace,"  &c.  (ver.  7).  "  Rise  up  early  in  the  morning  with  thy  master's 
servants,"  &o.  (ver.  10 ;  1  Qiron.  xii.  19 — 22).  He  was  frank  and  commendatory 
even  to  flattery,  and  desirous  not  to  hurt  his  feelings  by  the  manner  of  his  dismissal. 
7.  Devout  sentiment.  "As  Jehovah  liveth,"  &o.  (ver.  6).  How  much  he  meant  by 
this  expression  we  know  not.  But  we  may  believe  that,  notwithstanding  he  was 
united  with  others  in  conflict  with  Israel,  there  was  in  him  (as  the  efEect  of  that 
Divine  mercy  and  gp-ace  which  wrought  in  all  nations)  "  some  good  thing  toward  the 
Lord  God  of  Israel."  And  "  in  every  nation  he  that  feareth  God,  and  worketh  right- 
•ouaness,  is  accepted  with  him  "  (Acts  x.  35). — D. 

Ver.  S. — A  false  position.  What  a  dilemma  for  David  I  He  conld  not  refuse  the 
confidence  he  had  sought  from  Achish.  He  conld  not  renounce  the  allegiance  he  had 
■0  recently  pledged.  If  he  should  disobey  the  king  of  Gath,  he  could  look  for 
nothing  bnt  indignant  reproach  and  a  traitoi's  doom.  If  he  should  obey  him,  he 
would,  in  course  of  a  few  days,  be  fighting  against  his  own  nation,  and  bringing  them 
again  under  the  yoke  of  the  Pliilistmes ;  and  this  would  be  worse  than  death.  Per- 
plexed and  reluctant,  he  marched  in  the  rear  of  the  invading  army,  lufiering  inwardly 


«.  zziz.  1— IL]  THK  riBST  BOOK  OF  BAMUEIi.  147 

kll  the  more  that  he  wm  obliged  to  hide  his  unwillingness,  and  to  affect  a  seal  against 
Israel  which  his  heart  disowned.    See  in  this  story — 

I.  TBI  IU.UST&1TI0N  or  DiTiHB  PBOViDBHOB.  While  David  wrought  himself  into 
a  most  critical  position,  end  an  apparently  fatal  embroilment  with  the  Philistines, 
the  Lord  wrought  wonderfully  through  the  very  errors  of  his  servant,  so  as  to  pre- 
serve him  in  safety,  and  open  his  way  to  a  higher  destiny.  It  was  well  appointed 
that  he  should  be  out  of  the  land  of  Israel  at  this  time,  so  that  he  should  neither 
hasten  nor  hinder  the  discomfiture  of  Saul,  and  that  the  Philistines  should  give  him 
shelter,  and  yet  not  involve  him  in  the  crime  of  desolating  and  enslaving  his  native 
land.  How  to  escape  from  the  dilemma  in  which  he  was  caught  bafSed  even  David's 
ready  mind ;  but  the  Lord  always  knows  how  to  deliver.  He  does  so  through  means 
and  agencies  that  are  natural ;  in  this  case  through  the  very  natural  jealousy  of  the 
Philistine  lords,  and  their  proper  military  prudence,  objecting  to  have  the  person  of 
the  king  intrusted  to  the  keeping  of  a  band  of  Israelites,  and  that  hand  commanded 
by  a  skilful  and  daring  captain  in  the  rear  of  their  army,  where  their  defection  would  be 
most  dangerous.  "  The  lords  favour  thee  not,"  said  Achish.  And,  like  our  kings  ir. 
old  times,  who  durst  not  disregard  the  voice  Of  the  barons,  Achish  intimated  to  David 
.that  it  was  best  for  him  to  retire  from  the  army.  David  was  quite  acute  enough  to 
see  the  advantage  which  the  Philistine  chiefs  were  unwittingly  conferring  upon  him. 
They,  as  his  enemies,  helped  him  out  of  the  dilemma  in  which  he  had  been  placed  by 
Achish,  his  friend.  Such  things  are  not  infrequent  in  the  providence  of  God.  Often 
a  man's  enemies  open  to  him  the  way  out  of  great  dif&culty.  Disfavour  is  shown,  or 
a  sharp  word  spoken,  and  it  turns  out  a  great  advantage.  The  wrath  of  opponents 
or  rivals  may  act  as  so  much  dynamite  to  explode  a  rock  of  obstruction  which  friendly 
hands  cannot  remove,  and  so  to  clear  the  path  of  deliverance. 

II.  Thb  illustbation  of  human  life.  See  how  a  man  may  fall  through  want  of 
moral  firmness  into  a  false  position  utterly  unworthy  of  his  character.  It  was,  as 
respects  David's  integrity,  unfortunate  that  he  found  such  favour  with  the  Philistine 
king.  It  is  always  a  misfortune  to  be  successful  in  the  beginning  of  wrong-doing, 
for'it  soothes  the  conscience  and  leads  one  on  to  compromise  himself  more  deeply. 
And  one  false  step  leads  to  another.  David's  unbelief  led  him  into  a  course  of 
deceit  and  dissimulation  from  which  he  saw  no  way  of  escape,  and  every  day  drew 
him  further  into  a  position  which  was  false  and  unworthy.  It  is  a  story  full  of  ad- 
monition and  warning.  One  may  easily  let  himself  into  a  trap  from  which  he  cannot 
let  himself  out.  One  may  take  a  false  step,  which  involves  another  and  another,  till 
there  is  a  course  of  deflection.  An  object  is  gained,  but  in  the  success  the  conscience 
is  soiled  ;  and  then  the  penalty  is  that  one  is  compelled  to  act  out  the  part  he  has 
assumed,  to  go  on  in  the  way  on  which  he  only  meant  to  venture  for  a  time  and  for 
a  purpose.  He  thought  to  do  a  questionable  thing  and  then  return  to  his  integrity ; 
but  lo  I  he  is  in  a  maze,  and  cannot  find  the  way  out.  The  gain  which  he  sought 
turns  out  to  be  a  loss ;  the  favour  which  he  craftily  won  proves  to  be  a  burden 
and  a  danger ;  and  there  is  no  remedy.  It  is  very  unsafe  to  possess  great  powers 
of  deception.  David  had  them,  and  they  nearly  ruined  him.  But  the  experience 
through  which  he  passed  taught  him  to  abhor  deceit,  and  to  desire,  what  God 
desires,  truth  in  the  inward  parts.  For  proof  of  this  see  Ps.  xv.  1,  2 ;  xsxiv.  12, 
13 ;  li.  6.  Mark,  too,  how  he  appeals  to  the  God  of  truth,  and,  ashamed  of  his 
own  unveracity  in  certain  passages  of  his  early  life,  puts  all  his  dependence  in  his 
later  years  on  the  veracity  and  faithfulness  of  God,  who  has  made  with  him  an 
"  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure  "  (see  2  Sam.  xziii.  6 ;  Ps.  xsv. 
10 ;  xxxi.  5).  The  security  of  our  salvation  rests  not  on  our  tenacity  of  faith,  but 
on  the  truth  of  God  bur  Saviour.  He  cannot  lie.  The  Son  of  David,  our  Prince 
of  life,  is  faithful  and  true;  and  he  who  is  our  God  in  Christ  Jesus  will  never 
fail  those  who  rely  on  his  word.  "Yet  b«  abideth  faithful;  he  cannot  denjr 
himself."— F. 


■  ■fl 


•48 


THE  PIBST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


[oh,  XXX.  1 — 31 


EXPOSITION. 
David  SEsmrxs  his  Wives  fkom  the  Amalehites  (ch.  xzx.). 


CHAPTER  XXX. 
David  upon  his  return  finds  Ziklao 

BURNT    BY    THE   AmALBKITES    (verS.    1 — 6). 

Ver.  1. — On  the  third  day.  David  evidently 
could  not  have  gone  with  the  Philistines  as 
far  as  to  Shunem  ;  for,  as  noticed  in  the  pre- 
vious chapter,  it  would  have  heen  impossible 
to  march  back  to  Ziklag  in  so  short  a  time. 
But  as  he  had  gone  first  to  Gath,  where  no 
doubt  Achish  collected  his  vassals,  and  then 
marched  northwards  with  the  army  for  two 
days,  he  must  altogether  have  heen  absent 
from  Ziklag  for  some  little  time.  The  Ama- . 
lekitea.  Doubtless  they  were  glad  to  retali- 
ate upon  David  for  his  cruel  treatment  of 
them  ;  but,  besides,  they  lived  by  rapine,  and 
when  the  fighting  men  of  Philistia  and  of 
Judsea  were  marching  away  to  war,  it  was  just 
the  opportunity  which  they  wished  of  spoiling 
the  defenceless  country.  The  south.  /.  e.  the 
Negeb,  for  which  see  ch.  xxvii  10.  It  was 
the  name  especially  given  to  the  southern 
district  of  Judah,  whence  these  freebooters 
turned  westward  towards  Ziklag.  They  would 
probably  not  dare  to  penetrate  far  into  either 
territory.  The  word  for  invaded  is  the  same 
as  in  ch.  xxviL  8,  and  implies  that  they 
spread  themselves  over  the  country  to  drive 
off  cattle  and  booty,  but  with  no  intention 
of  fighting  battles. 

Vers.  i—5. — They  slew  not  any.  No 
resistance  was  made,  as  the  men  of  war  were 
all  away.  It  was  probably  for  thus  leaving 
their  wives  and  families  absolutely  defence- 
less that  David's  people  were  so  angry  with 
him.  As  we  are  told  in  ch.  xxvii.  3  that 
the  refugees  with  David  had  brought  each  his 
household  with  him  into  the  Philistine  terri- 
tory, the  number  o  women  must  have  been 
large.  The  Amalekites  spared  their  lives, 
not  because  they  were  more  merciful  than 
David,  but  because  women  and  children  were 
valuable  as  slavea  All  the  best  would  be 
picked  out,  and  sent  probably  to  Egypt  for 
sale. 

Ver.  6. — Th«  Mnl  tf  all  the  people  wai 
grieved.  Hebrew,  "was  bitter."  Their 
great  sorrow  is  pathetically  described  in  ver. 
4.  But,  as  is  often  the  case  with  those  in 
distress,  from  grief  they  turned  to  anger,  and 
sought  relief  for  their  feelings  by  venting  their 
rage  upon  the  innocent  Possibly  David  had 
not  taken  precautions  against  a  danger  which 
he  had  not  apprehended ;  but,  left  almost 
friendless  in  the  angry  crowd  who  were  calling 
ont  to  stone  him,  he  enconraged  himself  in 
Jehovah  his  Ood.  Literally, "'  strengthened 
himaalf'   in  Jehovab,  tna  numnoned  the 


priest  to  ask  counsel  and  guidance  of  God  by 

the  ephod. 

David's  pursuit  ot  the  Amalekites 
(vers.  7 — 16).  Vers.  7,  8. — Looking  only  to 
Jehovah  for  aid,  David  sends  for  Abiathar, 
who  seems  to  have  remained  constantly  with 
him,  and  bids  him  consult  Jehovah  by  the 
Urim.  In  strong  contrast  to  the  silence 
which  surrounds  Saul  (ch.  xxviiL  6),  the 
answer  is  most  encouraging.  Literally  it  is, 
"Pursue;  for  overtaking  thou  shalt  over- 
take, and  delivering  thou  shalt  deliver." 

Vers.  9, 10. — Having  obtained  this  favour- 
able answer,  David  starts  in  pursuit  with  his 
old  band  of  600  men.  So  rapid  was  his  march 
that  one  third  of  these  dropped  out  of  the 
ranks,  so  that  the  new-comers  from  Manasseh 
would  have  been  useless,  nor  had  they  lost 
wives  or  children.  The  brook  (or  rather 
"ton-ent")  Besor  practically  remains  im- 
identified,  as  the  site  of  Ziklag  is  unknown  ; 
but  possibly  it  is  the  Wady-es-Sheriah,  which 
runs  into  the  sea  a  little  to  the  south  ol 
Gaza.  As  there  was  water  here,  those  that 
were  left  behind  stayed.  Hebrew,  "the 
stragglers  stayed."  It  seems  also  to  have 
been  wide  enough  to  cause  some  difficulty 
in  crossing,  as  it  is  said  that  these  200  were 
too  faint,  or  tired,  to  go  over  the  torrent 
Besor.  From  ver.  24  we  find  that  David 
also  left  with  them  as  much  as  possible  of 
his  baggage.  Stragglers  had  no  doubt  been 
falling  out  for  some  time,  but  would  here  be 
rallied,  and  obtain  rest  and  refreshment. 

Vers.  11,  12. — An  Egyptian,  the  slave,  as 
we  read  in  ver.  13,  of  some  Amalekite,  left 
in  the  field,  in  the  open  common,  to  perish. 
He  had  become  faint  and  could  not  travel  as 
fast  as  they  did,  and  so  was  left  behind  with  no 
supplies  of  food,  for  he  had  eaten  nothing  for 
three  days  and  three  nights.  The  Amalekites 
had  thus  a  start  of  at  least  this  time,  or  even 
more,  as  this  slave  would  probably  have 
carried  some  food  away  with  him  from  Ziklag. 

Ver.  13. — To  whom  belongest  thoul  As 
he  was  probably  unarmed,  and  his  garb  that 
of  a  slave,  David  asks  who  is  his  owner  and 
what  his  couutiy.  He  learns  from  him  besides 
that  he  was  left  behind  three  days  ago  because 
he  fell  sick.  The  word,  does  not  imply  more 
than  temporary  faintness,  and  is  that  trans- 
lated awry  in  ch.  xxii.  8.  But  his  life  was 
of  too  little  value  for  them  to  mount  him  on 
a  camel,  or  even  to  leave  with  him  anppUei 
of  food,  and  so  their  inhumanity  led  to  their 
destruction. 

Ver.  14.— The  Cherethites.  The  intereet 
in  this  people  arises  from  David's  body-guard 
having  been  composed  of  foreignen  Wring 


01.  zxx.  1— SI.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


S4fl 


the  name  of  Cherethim  and  Pelethim.  We 
here  find  fhe  Cherethim  inhabiting  the 
lonthsm  portion  of  the  land  of  the  Philis- 
tines, and  such  was  stUl  the  case  in  the  days 
of  Zephaniah  (Zeph.  ii.  5,  and  compare  Ezek. 
XXV.  16).  As  David  retained  Ziklag  (ch, 
xxvii.  6),  he  appears  to  have  chosen  the  men 
who  were  to  guard  his  person  from  this 
neighbourhood,  having  probably  been  struck 
by  their  stature  and  martial  bearing  when 
dwelling  among  them.  Hence  it  is  probable 
that  the  Pelethim  were  also  a  Philistine  race. 
Whether  lie  Cherethim  and  the  Philistines 
generallj  oame  from  Crete  to  Palestine  is  a 
very  disputed  question,  but  they  were  cer- 
tainly not  indigenous,  but  immigrants  into 
Canaan.  Caleb.  Upon  the  settlement  of  the 
Israelites  in  Canaan,  Hebron  with  a  large 
district  in  the  south  of  Judah  was  assigned 
to  Caleb  the  Kenezite,  who  with  his  clan  had 
been  incorporated  into  the  tribe  of  Judah. 
Though  the  town  was  afterwards  assigned  to 
the  priests,  the  whole  country  round  remained 
subject  to  Caleb  (Josh.  xxL  11,  12),  and  con- 
tinued to  bear  his  name.  Evidently  the 
Amalekites,  beginning  on  the  east,  had  swept 
the  whole  southern  district  of  Judah  before 
entering  the  country  of  the  Philistines,  where 
they  no  doubt  burnt  Ziklag  in  revenge  for 
David's  cruel  treatment  of  them. 

Ver.  15.  —  To  this  company.  Better, 
"troop."  The  word  signifies  a  band  of  sol- 
diers, robbers,  or  the  like.  Required  by 
David  to  act  as  his  guide,  the  Egyptian  con- 
sents upon  condition  that  David  bind  him- 
self neither  to  kill  him,  it  being  one  of  the 
unscrupulous  customs  of  ancient  warfare  to 
put  deserters,  persons  forced  to  act  as  guides, 
and  even  noncombatants,  to  death  to  save 
trouble  ;  nor  give  him  up  to  his  master, 
who  would  treat  him  in  the  same  way. 

Ver.  16. — When  he  had  brought  them 
down.  Though  left  behind,  the  Egyptian  knew 
the  course  which  the  Amalelcites  intended 
to  take,  and  was  thus  able  to  bring  David 
quickly  up  to  them,  as  they  would  move 
slowly  because  of  their  large  booty  of  cattle. 
On  overtaking  them  David  found  them  dis- 
persed in  scattered  groups  abroad  upon  all 
the  earth  (literally,  "  over  the  face  of  all  the 
land  "),  eating  and  drinking,  and  dancing. 
More  probably,  "feasting."  The  word  liter- 
ally means  keeping  festival;  but  though 
they  had  solemn  dances  at  festivals,  yet,  as 
is  the  case  with  our  word  feasting,  good 
'  eating  was  probably  the  uppermost  idea ;  stiU 
the  word  may  have  only  the  general  sense 
of  "  enjoying  themselves  as  on  a  festival." 

Defeat  of  the  Amalekites  and  ee- 

OOVEKY  OF  THE  WOMEN  AND  SPOIL  (verS.  17 

— 20).  Ver.  17. — ^From  the  twilight.  It  has 
been  debated  whether  this  means  the  even- 
ing or  the  morning  twilight ;  but  the  words 
which  follow,  "  unto  the  evening  of  the  next 


day,"  literally,  "of  {or  for)  their  morrow," 
seem  to  prove  that  it  was  in  the  evening 
that  David  arrived.  Moreover,  in  the  morn- 
ing they  would  not  have  been  feasting,  bat 
sleeping.  David  probably  attacked  them  at 
once,  and  slew  all  within  reach  until  night- 
fall. The  next  morning  the  battle  was  re- 
newed ;  but  as  David  had  but  400  men,  and 
the  Amalekites  covered  >  large  extent  of 
country,  and  probably  tried  to  defend  them- 
selves and  their  booty,  it  was  not  till  towards 
the  next  evening  that  the  combat  and  the  pur- 
suit were  over.  As  they  would  need  pasture 
and  water  for  their  cattle,  they  had  evidently 
broken  up  into  detachments,  which  had  gone 
each  into  a  different  place  with  their  herds. 
The  pursuit  must  have  been  prolonged  to  a 
considerable  distance,  as  no  more  than  400 
young  men  escaped,  and  even  they  only  by 
the  aid  of  their  camels. 

Vers.  18,  19.  —  Becovered.  Hebrew, 
"rescued,"  or  "delivered."  The  word  oc- 
curs again  in  the  second  clause  of  the  verse, 
and  is  there  translated  "rescued."  Had 
carried  away.  Hebrew,  "  had  taken."  In 
ver.  19  recovered  is  literally  "caused  to 
return,"  i.  e.  restored. 

Ver.  20. — This  verse,  which  is  made  unin- 
telligible in  the  A.  V.  by  the  insertion  of  the 
unauthorised  word  whAch,  is  really  free  from 
difficulty.  After  David,  as  related  in  vers. 
18,  19,  had  recovered  the  cattle  carried  oft 
by  the  Amalekites,  he  also  took  all  the  flocks 
and  herds  belonging  to  them  ;  and  his  own 
men  "made  these  go  in  front  of  that  body 
of  cattle,  and  said,  This  is  David's  spoil," 
i.  e.  they  presented  it  to  him  by  acclamation. 
It  was  this  large  booty  which  he  distributed 
among  his  friends  (vers.  26—31). 

David  enacts  a  law  for  the  division 
OF  THE  spoil  (vers.  21—25).  Vers.  21,  22. 
^On  returning  David  finds  the  200  strag- 
glers, whom  they  had  made  to  abide  at  the 
brook  Besor.  Rather,  "whom  he  had  made 
to  abide,"  as  it  was  David's  office  to  give  such 
a  command.  The  singular  is  supported  by 
all  the  versions  except  the  Chaldee,  and  by 
some  MSS.  David  had  made  such  men  as  were 
growing  weary  halt  at  the  torrent,  because  it 
was  a  fit  place  where  to  collect  the  stragglers, 
and  also,  perhaps,  because  it  would  have  re- 
quired time  and  labour  to  get  the  baggage 
across.  All  the  more  wicked  and  worthless 
(see  on  ch.  i.  16)  members  of  the  force  now 
propose  to  give  the  200  ."-.ly  their  wives  and 
children,  and  send  them  ,  .ny  with  no  share 
of  the  spoil.  Besides  the  sheep  ard  oxen 
given  to  David,  there  would  be  cainjls  and 
other  animals,  arms,  gold  and  silver,  cloth- 
ing, and  other  personal  property. 

Ver.  23,  24.— Ye  shall  not  do  so,  my 
brethren.  David  rejects  their  unjust  pr(V 
posal  kindly,  but  firmly.  With  that  which. 
/.  e.  in  respect  of  that  which,  ka.    WlM  will 


550 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[cH.  xx\,  I — 31 


hearken  unto  you  in  this  matter  1  Literally, 
"  this  word,"  this  proposal  of  yours.  David 
then  enacts  that  those  left  to  guard  the  hag- 
gage  are  to  share  in  the  booty  equally  with 
the  combatants.  Patrick  in  his  commentary 
quotes  a  similar  rule  enacted  by  Publius 
Scipio  after  the  capture  »f  New  Carthage 
(Polybius,  X.,  xv.  6). 

Ver.  25.— That  lie  made  it  /.  e.  David. 
Having  been  thus  enacted  by  him  and 
practised  during  his  life,  no  Mug  hencefor- 
ward would  venture  to  change  it.  In  the 
war  with  the  Midianites  Moses  had  ordered 
that  half  the  spoil  should  belong  to  the 
combatants  and  half  to  the  congregation  who 
remained  in  the  camp  (Kumb.  xxxi.  27). 
This  enactment  of  David  was  in  the  same 
spirit. 

David    propitiates    his    friends    bt 

SHAEINO  WITH  THBM    HIS   BOOTY    (verS.    26 

—31).  Ver.  26.— The  elders  of  Jndah.  The 
spoil  taken  from  the  Amalekites  and  assigned 
to  David  must  have  been  very  large,  as  it 
was  worth  distributing  so  widely.  He  did 
not,  however,  send  to  all  the  elders  of  Judah, 
but  to  such  only  as  were  his  friends.  A 
present.  Hebrew,  "  a  blessing  "  (see  on  ch. 
XIV.  27). 

Yer.  27. — Bethel  cannot  be  the  famous 
city  of  that  name,  but  is  probably  the  Bethiil 
of  Josh,  xii  4,  where  it  is  mentioned  as 
lying  near  Hormah  and  Ziklag.  South  Ba- 
moth.  Hebrew,  "  Eamoth-Negeb,"  called 
Eamath-Negeb  in  Josh.  xix.  8.  Like  Bethul, 
it  was  a  Simeonite  village.  Jattir  belonged 
to  Judah  (Josh.  zv.  48),  and  was  one  of  the 
dtiu  usigned  to  the  priests  {ibid,  xxi  14). 


Ver.  28. — Aroer,  a  different  place  fron 
that  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  Jordan,  men- 
tioned in  Josh.  xii.  2,  is  probably  the  ruin 
'Ar'arah,  twelve  miles  east  of  Beer-sheba. 
Siphmoth.  Some  village  in  the  Negeb,  but 
unknown.  Eshtemoa  (Josh.  xv.  50),  the 
present  village  Semu'ah,  south  of  Hebron. 

Ver.  29.  — Bach^.  Rather  Kacal,  unknown. 
The  supposition  that  it  may  be  Carmel  u 
untenable.  The  Jerahmeelites ;  see  on  eh. 
xxvii.  10,  as  also  for  the  Kenites. 

Ver.  30.  —  Hormah.  Anciently  called 
Zephath.  For  the  reason  of  the  change  oi 
name  see  Judges  i.  17.  Chor-ashan.  More^ 
con'ectly  Cor-ashan,  the  same  place  as  Ashan' 
(Josh.  XV.  42),  a  Simeonite  town  (1  Chron. 
iv.  32)  assigned  to  the  priests  (ibid,  vi.  59). 
Athach,  never  mentioned  elsewhere,  may  be 
a  false  reading  for  Ether  (Josh.  xix.  7). 

Ver.  31. — Hebron,  destined  soon  to  be- 
come David's  capital  (2  Sam.  ii.  1),  lay 
about  fourteen  miles  south  of  Jerusalem. 
For  an  account  of  it  see  Conder, '  Tent  Work,' 
a.  79,  sgg.  In  comparing  the  list  of  David's 
heroes  (1  Chron.  xi.  26 — 47)  with  this  cata- 
logue of  friendly  towns,  it  wiU  be  found  that 
several  of  them  came  from  them,  and  had 
probably  shared  his  exile  at  Ziklag.  Such 
were  Ira  and  Gareb,  Ithrites  from  Jattir, 
Shama  and  Jehiel  from  Aroer  ;  perhaps  also 
Zabdi  the  Shiphmite  (1  Chron.  xxvii  27) 
came  from  Siphmoth.  We  find  David  in  this 
narrative  acting  justly  as  a  soldier,  generously 
to  those  who  had  been  kind  to  him  in  his 
wanderings,  and  forming  friendships  which  he 
retained  and  cherished  long  afterwards,  when 
from  being  a  fugitive  he  had  become  a  king. 


HOMILETICa 

Vwrt.  1 — 10. — The  spiritual  uses  of  calamity.  The  facts  are — 1.  David,  on  re- 
tnrning  to  Ziklag  with  his  men,  discovers  that  the  Amalekites  had  smitten  it  and 
carried  off  the  families  as  captives.  2.  In  their  deep  distress  David  and  his  men 
weep  bitterly.  3.  On  a  mutiny  arising  among  his  men,  threatening  his  life,  David 
betakes  himself  to  God  for  comfort  and  guidance.  4.  Inquiring  of  God  through 
the  high  priest,  he  receives  assurance  of  success  in  pursuing  the  Amalekites,  and 
therefore,  leaving  the  faint  at  Besor,  he  presses  on  with  the  rest  of  his  force.  The 
sojourn  of  David  in  the  country  of  the  Philistines  had  thus  far  been  conducive  to 
his  safety,  and  events  had  seemed  to  justify  the  step  taken  when,  from  fear  of  being 
slain  by  Saul,  he  without  positive  Divine  direction  left  his  native  land.  It  is  true 
the  ambiguous  position  into  which  he  had  brought  himself  exposed  him  for  a  while 
to  a  danger  of  being  treacherous  to  his  protector  or  hostile  to  his  countrymen,  but 
this  peril  had  at  last  been  providentially  obviated  by  the  opening  of  a  door  of  escape. 
It  must,  therefore,  have  been  intensely  mortifying,  and,  as  the  event  proved,  impress- 
ively instructive,  to  learn,  just  when  the  joy  of  escape  was  at  its  height,  that  hia 
self-chosen  course  had  issued  in  a  terrible  disaster.  A  great  calamity  had  come,  but 
religiously  it  proved  a  blessing,  which  fact  may  be  generalised  hj  saying  that  calami- 
ties brought  on  by  the  mistakes  of  good  men  have  important  religious  uses. 

L  Thb  avoidanok  of  on«  calamity  by  the  adoption  of  our  own  policy  of  distrust 
of  Ood's  care  n  no  guabantkb  vob  fbbkdom  fboh  ahothxx.  David,  without  good 
iMMn  diatruting  the  oare  of  God,  thought  he  ehoald  OM  inj  peiith  by  the  hand  of 
|3*«1  (ch.  xxvii  1),  and  therefore,  taking  hia  own  oooim,  Moght  ufety  under  *hf 


XXI.  I— 31  ]  THE  FIB8T  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  £61 


protection  of  Achish.  We  know  how  groundless  was  his  fear ;  but,  apart  from  that, 
events  proved  that  though  the  dreaded  evil  was  escaped,  anotiier  most  terrible  ona 
came.  Nor  is  there  much  defence  for  the  self-chosen  poUoy  in  saying  that  his  own 
life  VMU  secure,  for  escape  from  Saul  gave  no  immunity  from  death  by  the  hands  of 
other  men,  and  there  are  calamities  even  worse  than  death.  We  are  too  often  in 
fluenced  by  present  dangers,  forgetful  that  though  we  avoid  them  we  have  no  secur- 
ity in  that  avoidance  from  others  equally  fearful.  The  Israelites  feared  the  giants 
reported  to  occupy  the  promised  land,  and  escaped  being,  as  they  groundlessly 
thought,  slain  by  them  ;  but  they  saw  not  the  physical  miseries  and  the  exclusion 
from  the  promised  land  consequent  on  choosing  thus  to  escape.  David  ought  to 
have  profited  by  their  example,  as  also  should  we  &om  his.  The  application  of  this 
to  common  life  is  obvious. 

II.  OUB  BELF-CHOSBN  POLICY  MAT  BE  LONG  BEFORB  IT  BBVSALS  ITS  CHABACTEB  IN  ANY 

POSiTivB  DISASTER.  The  ambiguous  position  of  David  rendered  the  months  during 
which  he  was  with  Achish  a  season  for  verifying  the  wisdom  of  his  policy.  Although 
slight  inconveniences  arose  which  necessitated  minor  expedients,  as  when  he  sought 
a  separate  city  and  made  raids  apparently  on  the  south  of  Judah  (oh.  xxvii.  6,  10), 
yet  no  event  transpired  to  awaken  manifest  regret  for  the  course  pursued.  It  was 
only  toward  the  end  of  the  sojourn  in  the  land  of  the  Philistines  that  his  policy  bore 
the  bitter  fruit  referred  to  in  this  section.  Trouble  came  at  last  in  addition  to  the 
mental  embarrassments  which  had  been  a  secret  in  his  own  breast.  So  long  as  moral 
laws  have  force  will  every  false  policy  tend  to  disaster,  the  form  and  degree  of  it 
being  determined  by  the  nature  of  the  case.  Men  may  go  on  hoping  for  exemption 
from  trouble,  concealing  the  occasional  fears  and  embarrassments  of  their  own  heart, 
successful  escape  may  be  well  nigh  assured,  there  may  be  even  joy  at  the  thought  of 
providential  deliverance  from  impending  perils ;  but  just  then,  from  unexpected 
quarters,  a  blow  may  fall  which  confirms  the  truth  that  it  is  better  to  trust  in  the 
Lord  than  to  listen  to  the  fears  of  a  wayward  heart.  Lot's  ungenerous  policy  toward 
Abraham,  successful  at  first,  issued  in  loss  of  all  in  Sodom.  Jonah's  timid  policy 
avoided  the  scorn  and  stones  of  the  Ninevites,  and  bid  fair  to  secure  life  and  peace  ; 
but  the  storm  arose,  and  a  trouble  quite  unforeseen  sprang  forth.  In  commerce,  in 
Church  action,  and  domestic  arrangements,  distrust  of  Grod  and  self-seeking  cannot 
but  issue  in  evil,  though  the  evil  seem  to  tarry  and  be  beyond  calculation, 

III.  The  foem  of  calamity  may  pkove  to  be  a  nbab  appeoach  to  that  which 
BELF-CHOSErf  POLICY  WAS  DESIQNJCD  TO  AVOID.  Uavid  lost  his  family  and  his  property, 
the  next  best  things  to  his  own  life,  and  also  was  put  in  as  much  danger  of 
being,  slain  by  his  own  men  as  ever  he  had  been  by  Saul.  He  virtually  found  him- 
self as  he  was  when  the  distrust  of  God's  care  suggested  a  flight  from  Judah.  The 
same  was  true  of  the  Israelites,  who,  avoiding  the  "  giants "  of  the  promised  land, 
encountered  the  physical  giants,  famine  and  plague,  and  at  last  left  their  carcases 
in  the  wilderness.  A  merchant,  by  irreligious  policy,  may  for  a  season  avoid  ruin, 
«nd  yet  by  the  means  devised  ultimately  bring  on  an  event  equally  disastrous. 

IV.  The  fiest  effect  on  a  good  man  of  the  pkbssurb  of  calamity  is  to  eevbal 
TO  him  the  folly  and  evil  of  his  self-chosen  POLICY.  It  often  requires  a  heavy 
blow  to  awaken  us  from  our  complacent  belief  in  our  own  wisdom.  Such  a  blow 
fell  on  David  in  the  desolation  of  his  city,  the  loss  of  his  wives,  the  injury  to  his 
adherents,  and  the  mutiny  of  his  own  friends  and  admirers.  The  well-woven  veil 
of  expediency  which  imagination  and  reason  had  fabricated  during  the  past  sixteen 
months  was  thus  rudely  rent,  and  he  saw  at  once  how  much  better  it  would  have 
been  for  him  and  his  people  to  have  continued  trusting  to  the  care  of  God  in  Judah, 
till,  at  least,  specific  directions  were  given  to  depart.  The  reference  to_  David  en- 
couraging himself  in  God  (ver.  6)  implies  the  prostration  of  his  spirit  Ln  the  new 
light  which  had  broken  in  upon  him.  He  had  not  sought  the  Lord  on  leaving  Judah, 
«nd  now  he  sees  the  mistake.  Here  notice  the  diverse  effect  of  calamity  on  men  of 
re^  piety  and  men  of  no  vital  religion.  David  is  humbled  before  God,  sees  his 
error,  is  bitterly  penitent ;  whereas  Saul  in  all  his  calamities  persists  in  his  self-will, 
«nd  hardens  his  heart  against  God.  The  truly  religious  spirit  may  err,  may  become 
wretched  in  its  wanderings  from  God,  may  for  a  long  season  cleave  to  its  self- 
produced  miseries,  but  when  brought  face  to  face  with  great  calamity  that  beapeaki 


652  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xxx.  1— SI. 

the  judgment  of  God,  at  once  bows  in  sorrow  and  shame,  recognisinff  what  an  evS 
and  bitter  thing  it  is  to  depart  from  the  living  God.  How  many  a  backslider  and 
erring  man  has  had  occasion  to  bless  the  disaster  that  rent  the  delusion  of  their  lifa 
and  revealed  their  sin  I 

V.  The  sdbsequent  effect  of  such  calamity  is  to  thbow  a  good  man  mobb 
ENTIRELY  UPON  GoD  FOB  HELP  AND  GUIDANCE.  David,  humiliated,  self-condemned, 
looking  on  to  the  future  not  knowing  what  best  to  do,  took  heart  by  casting  his 
burden  on  the  Lord,  and  seeking  through  the  appointed  channel  specific  directions  as 
to  the  future.  Affliction  worked  the  fruit  of  righteousness.  This  is  the  proper 
religious  use  of  all  calamity,  whether  in  the  nation,  the  Church,  our  business,  our 
domestic  affairs,  or  the  unrecorded  events  of  private  life.  Jacob's  trouble  consequent 
on  his  falsehood  brought  him  nearer  to  God  at  Bethel.  The  sorrows  that  came  on 
Israel  in  the  days  of  Nehemiah  developed  a  trust  in  God  and  earnest  looking  for  his 
guidance  not  known  in  former  days.  There  is  good  reason  for  all  who  are  smitten 
with  sorrow  brought  on  by  folly  and  sin  to  encourage  themselves  in  God  ;  for,  as  to 
David  80  to  all  his  children,  he  is  a  covenant-keeping  God,  having  prepared  for  us  a 
kingdom  that  cannot  be  moved.  He  it  is  who  allows  the  trial  to  fall  not  for  our 
injury,  but  for  our  profit,  that  we  maybe  partakers  of  his  holiness ;  the  abandonment 
to  ourselves  and  to  the  suffering  of  trouble  is  all  in  mercy,  and  specially  intended  to 
remind  us  of  the  security  and  rest  to  be  found  in  him  ;  and  he  is  willing  to  hear  our 
cry,  and  to  cover  all  the  sins  of  the  past,  as  well  as  to  vouchsafe  the  aid  necessary  to 
escape  from  the  present  anguish,  and  even  to  make  it  issue  in  some  permanent 
spiritual  advantage.  We  may  therefore  "  hope  in  God "  when  all  help  fails  (of. 
Ps.  xlii.  6 ;  Ivi.  13  ;  Isa.  liv.  8 ;  Jer.  iii.  12  ;  Heb.  xii.  5—12). 

Vers.  11 — 20. — The  consequences  of  hindness.  The  facts  are — 1.  Pursuing  the 
Amalekites,  David  finds  an  Egyptian  slave  in  distress,  and  administers  to  him  food 
and  drink.  2.  On  being  questioned,  the  man  states  that  his  master,  who  was  one  of 
the  force  destroying  Ziklag,  had  left  him  there  three  days  before.  3.  On  promise  of 
not  being  delivered  up  to  his  master,  he  engages  to  act  as  guide  to  the  rendezvous  of 
the  Amalekites.  4.  On  coming  upon  them  in  the  midst  of  their  revels,  David  smites 
them,  and  recovers  all  that  his  force  had  lost,  and  acquires  also  much  spoiL  6.  David 
keeps  the  captured  flocks  and  herds  as  his  portion  of  the  spoil.  The  incidents  of  this 
section  suggest — 

I.  The  unknown  ebsults  of  kindness.  Here  was  a  case  of  a  sick,  starving 
foreigner,  a  poor  waif  nigh  unto  death ;  and  the  kind  attentions  of  David  and  his 
men  not  only  were  appreciated  by  a  fellow-creature,  but  issued  in  important  results 
which,  prior  to  the  act  of  kindness,  were  not,  perhaps,  deemed  possible.  The  feeble 
man,  well  used,  led  on  to  victory.  At  the  close  of  that  eventful  day  David  must 
have  felt  how  useful  as  well  as  how  holy  a  thing  it  is  to  act  the  part  of  a  good  Samari- 
tan. Men  are  often  under  temptation  to  be  indifferent  to  the  sorrows  of  others ;  but 
good  always  comes  out  of  an  exhibition  of  the  law  of  kindness.  No  man  ever  lost 
anything  by  binding  up  the  wounds  of  another ;  and  often  the  healer  has  obtained 
an  inward  blessing  as  a  pledge  of  some  still  further  good  that  is  to  flow  from  his 
deed.  The  blessing  of  those  ready  to  perish  is  worth  more  than  the  applause  and 
favour  of  the  rich  and  strong.  By  single  acts  of  kindness  hard  hearts  have  been 
tfuched,  and  a  new  and  blessed  course  of  life  has  been  entered  on.  Many  a  waif, 
fed  and  nourished  by  Christian  benevolence,  has  become  an  honourable  and  holy 
member  of  society,  aiding  to  overthrow  an  evil  power  worse  than  that  of  the  ancient 
Amalekites.  Who  can  tell  the  vast  and  blissful  consequences  that  may  ensue  if  only 
Christians  would  care  more  constantly  and  wisely  for  the  outcast  and  degraded  ? 

II.  The  value  of  detail  in  Soriftuke  history.  The  historian  is  specific  in  the 
account  of  what  was  given  to  this  poor  slave — "  bread,"  "  water,"  "  a  piece  of  a  cake 
of  figs,"  and  "  two  clusters  of  raisins."  This  occasional  detail  indicates  the  pure 
historic  character  of  the  Biblical  narrative,  and  invests  the  Bible  with  a  human 
interest.  This  circumstantial  character  of  narrative  is  especially  seen  in  the  Gospel 
by  St.  Mark,  and  more  or  less  in  every  writer.  As  a  hook  designed  for  all  degrees  of 
culture,  and  in  all  ages  and  climes,  the  Bible  wins  its  way  to  the  heart  and  commends 
itself  to  the  common  sense  of  mankind  hj  the  &ir  of  reality  witib  which  its  great 


CB.  XXX.  1-^1.]  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMDEL.  U8 

facts  are  incorporated  with  an  incidental  setting  of  circumstances ;  and  it  is  singular 
that  its  occasional  detail  is  never  contradicted  by  well-established  fact,  but,  on  the 
other  hand,  is  being  constantly  confirmed  by  discoveries  concerning  manners,  customs, 
natural  productions,  and  international  relations. 

III.  The  barbarities  of  slavbrt  and  op  war.  This  unfortunate  man  had  a 
master,  but  longed  not  to  be  restored  to  him.  The  barbarous  manner  in  which  he  had 
been  left  to  die  justified  his  horror  of  his  former  owner.  Slavery  necessarily  hardens 
the  heart  and  debases  the  entire  nature  of  all  who  promote  it.  The  horrors  that  have 
been  perpetrated  under  its  influence  more  befit  a  hell  than  an  earth  like  this.  Christi- 
anity has  proved  its  beneficent  character  in  removing  from  many  a  fair  region  this 
accursed  evil ;  and  it  enjoins  on  masters  of  the  free  to  manifest  towards  their  servants 
a  kind,  generous  spirit,  worthy  of  the  Saviour  they  profess  to  follow.  It  is  well  when 
servants  care  to  return  to  employers,  and  there  is  something  wrong  where  there  is 
aversion  and  reproach.  The  barbarities  of  war,  which  in  this  section  and  elsewhere 
are  conspicuous,  are  among  the  foulest  blots  on  human  nature.  In  nothing  as  in 
war  do  the  vilest  passions  of  men  break  forth  in  wild  licence.  The  ease  and  com- 
placency with  which  many  so-called  Christians  speak  and  read  of  war  ia  really 
shocking  to  one  who  enters  deeply  into  the  spirit  of  Christ.  More  care  ought  to  be 
taken  in  preventing  our  children  from  imbibing  a  love  of  war  and  its  literature,  and 
in  the  Christian  state  its  manifold,  incipient,  and  actual  evils  ought  to  be  removed  or 
avoided  by  the  most  energetic  measures.  It  is  doubtful  whether  the  Church  rises  to 
a  due  sense  of  its  solemn  obligations  in  this  respect. 

IV.  The  restoration  subsequent  to  repentance  and  obediencb.  David  had 
repented  of  the  course  to  which  he  had  committed  himself,  and,  encouraging  himself 
in  God,  he  had  followed  the  direction  conveyed  through  the  high  priest.  The  result 
was  a  restoration  of  all  he  had  lost  by  his  folly  and  an  acquisition  of  much  besides. 
Of  course  this  was  a  case  of  material  loss,  through  misconduct,  attended  with  much 
anguish  of  spirit,  and  the  restoration  was  of  the  same  character ;  but  have  we  not 
here  something  analogous  with  the  result  of  our  repentance  and  renewal  of  life? 
The  loss  and  damage  occasioned  by  our  sins  are  removed  when  we  turn  to  God  and 
follow  the  guidance  of  our  High  Priest.  In  due  time  we  recover  purity,  peace  with 
God,  most  blessed  joys,  varied  spiritual  treasures,  and  even  convert  the  weapons  of 
our  great  enemy  into  means  of  moral  advancement.     Much  has  been  ruined  by  our 

'  sins,  and  the  whole  race  has  suffered  from  the  curse ;  but  the  effect  of  our  restoration 
of  soul  to  God  through  Christ  is  a  recovery  of  the  lost  position  and  blessedness,  with 
also  an  attainment  of  a  bliss  surpassing  anything  known  by  our  first  parent  in  his 
state  of  innocence.  The  promise  reads,  "  I  will  restore  to  you  the  years  that  the 
locust  hath  eaten,  the  canker-worm,  and  the  caterpillar,  and  the  palmer-worm,  my 
great  army  which  I  sent  among  you  "  (Joel  ii.  25). 

V.  Prudent  foresight  in  anticipation  of  cominq  events.  David's  considera- 
tion for  his  followers  in  allowing  them  a  large  share  in  the  spoil  was  attended  also 
with  a  wise  prevision  of  what  was  soon  to  take  place,  and  no  doubt  it  was  on  this 
aooouut  that  he  kept  for  himself  the  cattle  taken  from  the  enemy.  Having  repented 
of  his  former  self-choosing,  and  having  drawn  nearer  to  his  God  (ver.  6),  his  soul 
rose  to  the  old  confidence  in  his  call  to  the  kingdom,  and,  calm  in  the  fresh  assurance 
of  God's  care,  he  saw  from  impending  events  that  the  end  of  Saul's  reign  was  nigh 
at  hand.  Hence,  to  pave  the  way  for  an  easy  and  prosperous  return  to  Judah,  he 
■elected  what  would  prove  suitable  gifts  to  elders  and  friends  (ver.  20 ;  cf.  ver.  26). 
Thus  we  see  how  recovery  from  backsliding  tends  to  a  healthy  tone  and  balance  of 
ordinary  mental  operations,  and  how  prudent  anticipation  of  requirements  becomes 
one  called  to  high  service  in  the  kingdom  of  God.  Faith  in  God's  purposes  concern- 
ing us  should  be  accompanied  with  wise  effort  to  obviate  difficulties  in  the  realisation 
of  that  purpose.  Our  elevation  in  the  service  of  Christ's  kingdom  is  to  be  secured 
on  our  part  by  the  vigorous  use  of  our  best  powers  in  dependence  on  God. 

General  less(ym : — 1.  Amidst  the  hurry  and  excitement  of  our  life  we,  like  David, 
should  turn  aside  to  care  for  the  poor  and  destitute,  and  shall  find  in  so  doing  a 
blessing  for  ourselves.  2.  As  slavery  was  put  down  by  the  energetic  assertion  of  the 
principles  and  spirit  of  the  gospel,  so  may  not  the  Church,  if  in  earnest,  equallv 
suppress  the  war  spirit  which  too  largely  prevails  in  so-called  Ohriatian  land*  ?    i. 


iM  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxz.  1— U 

After  the  pattern  of  David  in  temporal  matters  we  ought  to  strive  with  nil  zeal  and 
constancy  to  recover  the  blessed  inheritance  of  good  lost  to  us  individually  and  as  ■ 
race  through  sin.  4.  In  so  far  as  men  are  convinced  of  the  certainty  and  gloiy  of 
Christ's  kingdom  will  they  exercise  all  their  utmost  powers  to  hasten  it  on  and  win 
men  over  to  it.    Indifferent  action  is  a  sure  sign  of  Bpirituol  decay. 

Vera.  21 — 31. — The  law  of  service.    The  facts  are — 1.  On  returning  to  the  men  who 

had  remained  at  Besor,  some  of  David's  followers  oppose  his  intention  to  give  them 
a  share  of  the  spoil,  and  are  even  desirous  of  sending  them  away.  2.  David  resists 
this  spirit  as  being  inconsistent  with  gratitude  to  God  for  his  care  and  aid,  and  with 
strict  justice  to  those  who  serve  in  humble  form  according  to  their  strength.  3. 
David's  decision  becomes  a  standing  ordinance  in  Israel's  future  national  life.  4.  He 
sends  presents  to  the  elders  of  cities  that  had  befriended  him  during  the  days  of  his 
persecution.  David's  course  all  through  was  wonderfully  chequered.  He  had 
good  reason  for  saying, "  Many  are  the  afflictions  of  the  righteous.  No  sooner  had 
he  rejoiced  in  the  triumph  of  victory,  and  was  devising  in  his  heart  kind  and  generous 
deeds,  than  he  has  to  experience  the  annoyance  and  pain  of  contending  with  a 
murmuring  and  mutinous  spirit  among  his  own  followers.  As  we  look  at  him,  the 
"  man  after  God's  own  heart,"  bent  on  a  noble  mission  for  Israel,  generous  in  spirit 
to  all  around,  rising  high  above  others  in  integrity  of  purpose  and  spiritual  aspira- 
tion, and  surrounded  by  a  motley  group  of  men,  hard  to  control,  and  often  low  in 
tendency,  we  cannot  but  think  of  One  greater,  who  later  on  stood  among  wayward, 
ignorant  men,  the  Holy  One,  intent  on  establishing  a  throne  never  to  be  shaken,  and 
wearied  and  wounded  by  the  incessant  "contradiction  of  sinners."  But  God  teaches 
mankind  through  lessons  evolved  from  the  varied  and  often  painful  experience  of 
his  servants,  and  it  is  a  consolation  to  them  that  the  fires  which  try  them  should  also 
emit  light  for  the  benefit  of  coming  generations.  There  are  three  truths  practical  in 
bearing  brought  out  by  this  part  of  David's  experience. 

I.  The  diversb  chaeacter  of  men  is  seen  in  tee  effkjt  of  btjccesb  upon  tbeib 
SPIRIT  and  conduct.  David  and  his  men  had  achieved  a  great  success,  and  were 
returning  full  of  the  joy  of  victory.  The  record  tells  us  nothing  of  the  bearing  of 
the  leader  and  of  the  men  on  the  first  flush  of  success  ;  no  doubt  the  wild  excite- 
ment over  the  spoil  of  many  of  his  followers  was  in  striking  contrast  with  the  tremul- 
ous joy  which  found  vent  in  his  private  thanksgiving  to  God.  But  on  their  return 
to  Besor,  the' depraved,  irreligious  spirit  of  those  termed  "  men  of  Belial "  appeared  in 
the  love  of  greed  and  the  cruel  indifference  to  the  wants  of  the  weary  which  drew 
forth  David's  remonstrance.  Success  revealed  the  iniquity  of  their  hearts,  while  it 
drew  forth  the  grateful;  tender  qualities  of  David's  character.  Prosperity  is  as  real  a 
test  of  what  men  are  as  is  adversity.  It  draws  forth  a  different  set  of  qualities,  but  is 
not  the  less  a  means  of  proving  and  intensifying  a  man's  character,  be  it  good  or  bad. 
When  we  say  that  sometimes  success  in  commerce,  literature,  science,  or  military 
skill  makes  a  man  vain  and  scornful  of  others,  or  humble  and  considerate,  we  really 
mean  that  it  has  developed  hidden  weakness  in  the  one  case,  and  moral  strength  in 
the  other.  When  the  character  deteriorates  or  improves  under  the  influence  of  pros- 
perity, it  depends  on  casual  circumstances  as  to  how  the  deterioration  or  improvement 
will  manifest  itself.  Here  the  presence  of  feeble  men  unable  to  engage  in  conflict 
happened  to  be  the  occasion  of  an  outburst  of  selfish  feeling.  The  same  occasion 
furnished  a  manifestation  of  kindly  consideration  and  love  of  justice.  While  few 
things  create  in  generous  hearts  more  disgust  and  sorrow  than  the  selfishness, 
luxurious  indulgence,  and  purse-proud  bearing  of  men  whose  struggles  in  life  have 
brought  material  success,  few  qualities  are  more  admired  than  those  of  large-hearted 
benevolence,  simplicity  of  habit,  compassion  for  the  destitute,  and  the  grateful,  lowly 
spirit  which  ascribes  all  good  to  God,  and  proves  the  sincerity  of  the  ascription  by 
deeds  of  self-denial  on  behalf  of  others.  He  who  can  conquer  prosperity  is  often  a 
greater  man  than  the  conqueror  of  adversity.  Only  the  spirit  of  him  who  "made 
himself  of  no  reputation,"  who  "  became  poor"  that  we  "  might  be  rich,"  will  enable 
us  to  subdue  all  things  to  his  glory  (of.  Ps.  Ixxiii  8 — 12 ;  Prov.  L  82 ;  Mark  x.  23 — 
26 ;  Phil.  iii.  7,  8). 

II.  Thx  law  of  sebviob  ih  tb»  tvxqdou  or  Goik  TIm  telfisli  epirit  of  some  of 


BH.  xxi.  1—31.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL.  6M 


David's  men  gave  occasion  for  the  exercise  of  his  authority  in  a  right  royal  manner, 
and  issued  in  the  estahlishment  of  an  ordinance  in  relation  to  service  in  his  cause 
which  became  a  law  in  Israel,  and  fitly  foreshadows  the  principle  on  which  all 
service  in  Messiah's  kingdom  is  based.  David  would  not  allow  the  men  who, 
through  exhaustion  in  the  hasty  march,  had  remained  at  Besor  to  care  for  the  bag 
gage  to  be  deprived  of  their  share  of  the  spoil  through  the  greed  of  the  actual  com- 
batants. His  principle  was  that  they  were  all  engaged  in  one  enterprise,  that  their 
position  had  been  determined  by  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  and  that  all  honour 
should-  be  done  them.  The  ruling  faculty  in  David  was  beginning  to  bear  good 
fruit  for  the  poor  and  needy— beautifully  typical  of  One  who  is  the  Refuge  and 
Defender  of  the  oppressed  1  Considering  the  passage  in  its  bearing  on  service  in 
Christ's  kingdom,  we  may  notice— 1.  That  all  his  people  are  equally  his  servants 
andhave  thdr proper  work.  The  equality  in  Christ's  kingdom  is  that  of  oneness  oi 
spirit,  aim,  and  relationship  to  him.  AH  true  Christians  are  zealous  for  his  supremacy, 
eager  to  see  him  triumph  over  powers  of  evil,  and  on  the  same  level  as  servants  of 
one  Lord  and  Leaden  _  They  are  all  workers,  warriors,  contending  in  accordance  with 
their  power  and  position  for  a  common  issue.  Every  member  of  the  body  has  its 
function  in  securing  the  purposes  of  the  head  (1  Cor.  xii.  12—14).  2.  That  diversity 
of  employment  is  necessary  to  the  execution  of  his  purposes.  The  care  of  the  "  stuff 
was  as  necessary  in  so  dangerous  a  country  as  the  pursuit  and  attack  on  the  foe.  In 
accomplishing  the  purposes  of  Christ  on  earth  there  are  diversities  of  operations. 
The  analogy  of  the  body  is  used  by  the  Apostle  Paul  to  enforce  this  truth  on  the 
Church  (1  Cor.  xii.  12 — 31).  It  is  an  instructive  study  to  notice  how  the  maniEold 
agencies  and  gifts  of  the  Church  and  of  individual  Christians  have  worked  together 
in  producing  the  complex  result  we  witness  in  the  present  advanced  position  of 
Christ's  kingdom.  .The  recognition  of  diversity  should  stimulate  and  encourage  all, 
whatever  their  powers  and  opportunities.  3.  Thai  incapacity  for  rendering  con- 
mieitous  service  is  compatible  with  quiet  yet  important  service.  Those  who  by 
Providence  are  hindered  from  fighting  in  the  high  places  of  the  field  have  good  work 
to  do  in  a  quieter  form.  Missionaries,  popular  preachers,  diligent  pastors,  and  men 
of  high  literary  culture  may  be  in  the  forefront ;  but  the  mothers  who  train  cLildren 
in  the  fear  of  God,  fathers  who  live  godly  lives  in  the  world,  quiet,  wise  men  who 
conduct  religious  movements,  widows  who  cast  in  their  mite,  and  even  sick  and 
weary  ones  who  in  the  solitude  of  their  chamber  offer  daily  prayers  for  the  hosts  of 
God — render  most  valuable  service  in  the  common  enterprise.  4.  Where  there  is 
loyalty  in  service,  whatever  its  lowly  form,  there  is  to  be  hoTwurdble  recognition. 
David  would  not  overlook  the  claims  of  the  feeble  men  in  charge  of  the  "  stuff."  In 
this  he  was  true  to  the  principles  and  precedents  of  Israel's  greatest  leaders  (Num. 
xzzL  27  ;  Josh.  xxii.  8).  In  Christ  s  kingdom  there  is  to  be,  after  his  great 
example  in  the  case  of  the  widow's  mite  and  the  hosannas  of  children,  a  recog- 
nition by  all  of  the  need  and  value  of  services  apparently  insignificant.  This  is 
further  taught  in  the  blessing  pronounced  on  the  giver  of  a  cup  of  cold  water,  the 
mention  in  the  day  of  judgment  of  the  care  bestowed  on  the  sick  and  needy,  and 
also  in  the  equal  welcome  which  the  Lord  declares  he  will  give  to  the  gainer  of  ten 
and  two  talents.  The  rewards  of  the  advancing  kingdom  are  shared  in  the  joy  and 
satisfaction  which  all  true  workers  experience,  and  in  the  material  improvement  of  the 
world  consequent  on  its  advance  ;  and  while  he  makes  all  "  kings  and  priests  "  now, 
he  will  at  last  honour  them  with  a  vision  of  the  glory  he  had  with  the  Father  before 
the  worid  was  (John  xvii.  24). 

III.    TeERB  IB  A  WISE  POLICY  IN  THE  EXPEEBSION  OF  GRATITUDE.       The   tenor   of 

David's  life  shows  that  the  sending  presents  from  the  spoil  taken  to  those  who 
had  befriended  him  in  his  time  of  need  was  the  genuine  expression  of  a  grateful 
heart  At  the  same  time  this  was  coincident  with  a  wise  policy,  and,  in  his  mind, 
distinctly  blended  with  it.  Had  the  gifts  been  the  product  of  a  mere  calculation  of 
results,  the  act  would  only  command  the  respect  due  to  expediency,  but  having  its 
root  in  feeling,  it  rises  to  a  higher  value.  The  recompense  of  kindnesses  when 
occasion  offers  is  the  suggestion  of  a  true  heart,  and  though  utilitarian  ideas 
may  not  enter  into  the  recompense,  yet  it  is  always  useful  in  view  of  future 
contingencies.    A  orudent  man  called  to  a  great  work,  is  bound  to  prepare-  th« 


K6  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [ch.  xxx.  1— 3L 

w»y  for  its  realisation  by  securing  as  far  as  possible  the  good  will  and  co-operation 
of  others. 

General  lessons: — 1.  It  behoves  us  to  be  on  our  guard  against  the  perils  of  success, 
and  to  remember  that  as  God  is  a  refuge  from  the  storm,  so  he  is  a  shade  upon  our 
right  hand  to  tone  down  the  light  of  prosperity  (Ps.  cxxi.  5,  6).  2.  A  degree  of 
suspicion  is  always  proper  concerning  ourselves,  as  there  are  latent  evils  which 
events  may  draw  forth.  3.  We  should  be' careful  not  to  disparage  the  services  of 
persons  seeking  in  a  humble  way  to  promote  the  glory  of  Christ  (Matt,  xviii.  6). 
4.  The  chief  question  for  each  is  the  existence  within  of  a  spirit  of  loyalty  to  Christ ; 
the  form  of  service  is  a  matter  of  opportunity  (John  xxi.  15 — 17).  6.  Those  who 
render  aid  to  the  people  of  God  in  their  time  of  distress  are  sure  to  be  recompenged 
on  earth  u  in  heaven  (Luke  vi.  31 — 38 ;  xiv.  13,  14). 

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS. 

Vers.  1 — 10.  (ZiKLAG.) — Confidence  in  God.  "But  David  encouraged  himself  in 
the  Lord  his  God"  (ver.  6).  Delivered  from  their  embarrassing  position  in  the 
Philistine  army,  David  and  his  men  set  out  early  in  the  morning,  and  by  forced 
marches  (evident  from  the  exhaustion  of  one  third  of  them,  ver.  10)  arrived  at 
Ziklag  on  the  third  day.  Instead  of  being  welcomed  by  their  wives  and  children, 
they  found  the  city  a  smoking  and  desolate  ruin.  "  When  we  go  abroad  we  cannot 
foresee  what  evil  tidings  may  meet  us  when  we  come  home  again.  The  going  out 
may  be  very  cheerful,  and  yet  the  coming  in  very  doleful"  (M.  Henry).  The 
Amalekites  (whom  Saul  had  failed  to  exterminate,  and  David  often  attacked)  had 
been  there,  and,  in  revenge  for  what  they  had  sufiered,  had  .carried  ofE  the  unde- 
fended people  and  property,  and  given  the  place  to  the  flames.  Deeming  their 
recovery  hopeless,  the  strong  men  wept  like  children  "  until  they  had  no  more  power 
to  weep."  Then  their  grief  turned  to  exasperation,  and  seeking  a  victim  on  which 
to  expend  their  wrath,  they  fixed  on  David,  and  "  spake  of  stoning  him  "  as  the  cause 
of  all  their  misery.  He  was  reduced  to  the  utmost  extremity,  and  could  not  fail  to 
see  in  his  trouble  a  just  chastisement  for  his  unbelief,  prevarication,  and  cruelty. 
Possibly  the  reinforcements  that  "  fell  to  him  as  he  went  to  Ziklag  "  (1  Chron.  xii. 
20)  rendered  him  valuable  service.  But  his  hope  was  not  in  man  ;  and  instead  of 
resigning  himself  to  despair  (like  Saul),  he  was  impelled  by  his  distress  and  depriva- 
tion of  human  help  to  seek  help  in  God  alone.  "  The  long  misery  of  the  first  stage 
of  his  public  career  seems  to  have  reached  its  culminating  point.  When  things  are 
at  the  worst,  as  the  common  proverb  says,  they  must  mend.  And  from  that  moment 
when  he  believingly  cast  all  his  dependence  upon  the  Lord  his  God  only,  whom  he 
had  found  faithful  in  all  his  promises,  and  whose  providence  had  never  failed  him  in 
his  deepest  dangers,  from  that  moment  he  was  safe,  from  that  moment  he  was  pros- 
perous (Kitto).  Concerning  the  confidence  in  God  which  he  exhibited  (therein 
setting  an  eminent  example  to  others),  observe  that — 

I.  It  springs  out  of  consoious  helplessness.  Few  men  have  an  adequate  con- 
viction of  their  own  helplessness ;  and  one  aim  of  the  Divine  discipline  is  to  pro- 
duce it.  "When  I  am  weak,"  said  Paul,  "then  am  I  strong" — when  I  feel  my 
utter  weakness  under  the  pressure  of  trial,  then  I  am  constrained  to  depend  on  the 
Lord,  and  become  imbued  with  his  strength  (2 Cor.  xii.  10).  In  the  exercise  of  "the 
same  spirit  of  faith  "  others  "  out  of  weakness  were  made  strong,  waxed  valiant  in 
fight,  turned  to  flight  the  armies  of  the  aliens"  (Heb.  xi.  34).  True  faith  and 
spiritual  power  have  their  foundation  amidst  the  "  dust  and  ashes  "  of  self-abase- 
ment and  self-distrust.  Confidence  in  God  began  to  revive  in  David  when  Ziklag 
was  reduced  to  ashes.  The  same  thing  is  often  occasioned  in  others  by  means  of — 
1.  Sudden  and  severe  bereavement ;  wife  and  children,  it  may  be,  taken  away  with  a 
■troke.  2.  The  failure  of  cherished  plans  and  purposes ;  the  loss  of  property  through 
robbery  by  men  or  accidents  by  fire  or  flood,  the  break-down  of  health,  the  dis- 
appointment of  long  expectation.  3.  The  falling  away  of  friends  ;  their  unreaaon- 
able  anger  and  bitter  reproaches.  It  must  have  be«n  peculiarly  painful  to  David  to- 
bear  the  mutiny  of  his  own  men,  to  witness  the  Belfishness  of  many  of  them  (ver. 


BH.  XXX.  1—81.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  561 

22),  and  to  learn  what  little  confidence  could  be  put  in  man  (Pa.  czlvi.  8).  He  wm 
left  almost  alone.  4.  The  upbraiding  of  conscience  for  past  sin.  Trouble  is  a 
powerful  means  of  bringing  sin  to  remembrance  (1  Kings  xvii.  18).  6.  The  threat- 
ening of  danger ;  the  presence  of  "  the  king  of  terrors  "  (Job  xviii.  14).  6.  The  lack 
of  wisdom  and  power  to  deliver  from  distress.  When  we  become  fully  aware  of  our 
utter  helplessness,  two  courses  lie  open  before  us — either  to  sink  into  despair  or  to 
cast  ourselves  wholly  upon  God.  That  the  latter  may  be  taken  trial  is  sent ;  it  is 
taken  by  him  whose  heart  is  in  the  main  right  with  God,  and  it  is  never  taken  in  vain. 

II.  It  lays  hold  of  all-sufficient  hblp.  "  When  David  could  not  comfort  him- 
self in  his  wives,  nor  his  children,  nor  his  goods,  nor  in  anything  under  the  sun,  he 
could  in  something  above  the  sun.  And  the  reason  is  at  hand :  God  is  the  God  of 
.ill  consolation,  the  spring  of  comfort ;  if  any  water,  it  is  in  the  sea  ;  if  any  light,  it  is 
in  the  sun ;  if  any  comfort,  it  is  in  God — there  it  rests,  there  it  is  when  nowhere  else. 
God  is  all-sufficient ;  there  the  heart  finds  every  want  supplied,  "every  good  thing 
lodged.  As  God  is  all-sufficient  to  furnish  us  with  all  necessaries,  so  infinite  in 
power,  wisdom,  goodness  to  help  us  against  all  evils  feared  or  felt "  (R.  Harris). 
Faith  strengthens  the  soul  by  uniting  it  to  God  and  making  it  partaker  of  his 
Btrength.  It  has  respect  to — 1.  His  great  name  (see  oh.  i.  3).  "  Hope  thon  in 
Ood'^^CPs.  xlii.  6;  ix.  10;  cxxiv.  8). 

"  Hope,  said  I, 
Is  of  the  joy  to  come  a  sure  expectance, 
The  effect  of  grace  Divine  and  merit  preceiling. 
This  light  from  many  a  star  visits  my  heo  rt ; 
But  floVd  to  me,  the  first,  from  him  who  sang 
The  songs  of  the  Supreme ;  himself  supreme 
Among  his  tuneful  brethren.     '  Let  all  hope 
In  thee,'  so  spake  his  anthem,  '  who  have  known 
Thy  name'  "^ (Dante,  'Par.'  xxv.). 

2.  Hi*  intimate  relationship  to  his  people.  "Jehovah  his  God."  S.  His  pott 
doings  on  their  behalf.  When  David  formerly  fell  into  despondency  (ch.  xxvii.)  lie 
seems  to  have  forgotten  all  these,  and  failed  to  receive  the  encouragement  which 
they  were  adapted  to  impart.  But  now  he  remembered  them  and  "  took  courage." 
4.  His  faithfvl  promises.  "  The  free  expressions  of  his  goodness  and  beneficence," 
the  unchangeable  assurances  of  his  almighty  help  in  time  of  need.  "  The  mistake 
we  make  is  to  look  for  a  source  of  consolation  in  ourselves;  self-contemplation 
instead  of  gazing  upon  God.  He  is  not  affected  by  our  mutability,  our  changes  do 
not  alter  him.  When  we  are  restless  he  remains  serene  and  calm ;  when  we  are  low, 
selfish,  mean,  or  dispirited  he  is  still  the  unalterable  I  AM.  What  God  is  in  himself, 
not  what  we  may  chance  to  feel  him  in  this  or  that  moment  to  be,  that  is  our  hope  " 
(Kobertson). 

III.  It  makes  use  of  appbopbiate  means  "  He  encouraged  (strengthened)  him- 
Bolf,"  &c.  by — 1.  Repressing  fear  and  unbelief.  "  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  0 
my  soul  ? "  2.  Directing  the  thoughts  toward  God,  the  ever-present,  invisible, 
eternal  Protector  of  his  servants,  and  stirring  up  the  heart  to  renewed  trust  in  him. 
"  The  Lord  is  on  my  side ;  I  will  not  fear :  what  can  man  do  unto  me  ?  "  (Ps.  cxviii. 
6  ;  cxxi.  1).  3.  Inquiring  of  the  Lord.  "  And  David  said  to  Abiathar,"  &o.  (vers. 
7,  8).  He  sought  him  as  he  had  not  done  on  the  previous  occasion ;  sought  him  in 
a  right  spirit,  and  therefore  (unlike  Saul)  received  an  answer  : — "Pursue,  for  thou 
shalt  surely  overtake  and  deliver."  He  was  thereby  further  strengthened.  His 
confidence,  moreover,  was  expressed  and  perfected  in— 4  Obeying  the  vdll  of  the 
Lord  (vers.  9,  10),  and  co-operating  toward  the  fulfilment  of  his  promise.  Despond- 
ency led  him  to  flee  from  difficulty  and  danger,  but  faith  and  hope  incited  him  to  go 
into  their  midst,  and  made  him  "  as  bold  as  a  lion."  •'  I  will  fear  no  evil,  for  thou 
art  with  me." 

IV.  It  is  cbowned  with  complete  success.  By  the  help  obtained  of  God  fear  is 
removed,  strength  renewed,  and  confidence  inspired  (ver.  9).  After  a  brief  delay  and 
some  untoward  events  by  which  faith  is  still  further  tested  (ver.  10) — 1.  The  object 
Wiiich  ia  sought  is  providentially  discovered  (ver.  11).    jt.  The  enemy  is  completely 


668  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [CB.  XXX.  1— « 

defeated  (ver.  17).  3.  That  which  has  been  lost  is  recovered  (ver.  19).  4.  Mach 
more  than  has  been  expected  is  gained  (ver,  20).  "  A  few  days  after  David's  own 
people  were  about  to  stone  him  on  the  rains  of  Ziklag  the  royal  crown  was  laid  at 

his  feet." 

Observationt: — 1.  When  good  men  transgress  they  must  expect  to  be  "  chastened 
of  the  Lord,"  and  wicked  men  are  sometimes  used  as  a  rod  for  the  purpose,  2. 
The  wickedness  of  the  wicked  is  mercifully  restrained  (ver.  2),  often  turns  to  the 
benefit  of  those  whom  they  seek  to  injure,  and  returns  upon  their  own  heads.  3, 
The  chief  purpose  of  chastisement  is  to  bring  men  to  God  in  humility,  penitence, 
submission,  and  trust,  and  prepare  them  for  future  service  and  exaltation.  4.  The 
difference  in  the  effects  of  calamity  upon  men  (as  upon  Saul  and  David)  manifests 
the  difference  of  their  character.  6.  The  more  heavily  trouble  presses  upon  men,  the 
more  closely  should  they  cling  to  God,  that  it  may  be  rightly  borne  and  accomplish 
(ts  intended  moral  end.  6.  God  never  disappoints  the  confidence  of  his  children, 
but  fulfils  his  promises  to  them  more  richly  than  they  dare  to  hope. — D, 

Vers.  11 — 20.  (South  of  the  bbook  Besob.) — An  Egyptian  slave.  "I  was  re- 
minded of  the  poor  Egyptian  whom  David  found  half  dead,  and  brought  to  life 
again  by  giving  him  '  a  piece  of  cake  of  figs  and  two  clusters  of  raisins '  to  eat,  and 
water  to  drink,  by  an  incident  which  occurred  to  me  when  crossing  the  plain  of 
Askelon.  Far  from  any  village,  a  sick  Egyptian  was  lying  by  the  road-side  in  the 
burning  sun,  and  apparently  almost  dead  with  a  terrible  fever.  He  wanted  nothing 
but  '  water  1  water  I '  which  we  were  fortunately  able  to  give  him  from  our  travel- 
ling-bottle ;  but  we  were  obliged  to  pass  on  and  leave  him  to  hie  fate,  whatever  that 
might  be  "  (Thomson,  '  The  Land  and  the  Book ').  How  the  "  young  man  of  Egypt " 
became  "  slave  to  an  Amalekite  "  is  not  stated,  but  it  is  probable  that  he  fell  into  his 
hands  in  some  marauding  expedition,  like  the  Hebrew  women  and  children  in  the  raid 
on  Ziklag.     His  condition  was  an  involimtary,  hard,  and  degrading  one.     He  was — 

I.  Abandoned  by  his  master  with — 1.  Indifference,  and  contempt.  His  worth  as 
a  man  created  in  the  image  of  God  was  disregarded  (as  is  generally  the  case  in  the 
odious  institution  of  slavery).  He  was  treated  as  the  absolute  property  of  his  master, 
"  an  animated  tool "  (Aristotle),  and  when  deemed  no  longer  useful,  thrown  away. 
2.  Injustice.  Every  claim  in  return  for  his  services  was  ignored.  He  was  entirely 
at  the  mercy  of  his  master,  and  unprotected  by  any  law  (such  as  existed  among  the 
Hebrews).  3.  Inhumanity.  "  My  master  left  me  three  days  agone  because  I  fell 
sick"  (ver.  13).  He  might  have  been  easily  carried  forward  on  one  of  the  camels 
(ver.  17),  but  the  Amalekites  were  hard  and  cruel,  and  he  was  left  to  perish  with 
hunger  or.  to  be  devoured  by  wild  beasts.  "  He  that  is  higher  than  the  highest 
regardeth  "  (Eccles.  v.  8),  and  the  meanest  slave  cannot  be  despised  and  neglected 
with  impunity. 

IL  Befriended  by  strangbes  (vers.  11,  12).  1.  Out  of  compassion  and  desire  to 
•ave  his  life  by  every  means  in  their  power.  2.  In  fuljUmeiU  of  the  law  of  God, 
which  required  that  kindness  should  be  shown  to  the  poor,  the  stranger,  and  the 
slave.  "  Love  ye  therefore  the  stranger,  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt" 
(Deut.  X.  19 ;  xxiii.  7,  15,  16).  3.  With  appreciation  of  the  service  he  might  render 
(ver.  15).  The  more  helpless  any  one  is,  the  more  urgent  his  claim  to  assistance ;  yet 
no  one  is  so  helpless  hut  that  he  may  be  capable  of  requiting  the  kindness  shown 
to  him.  Slavery  among  the  Hebrews  differed  widely  from  slavery  among  other 
ancient  and  modem  peoples  (ch.  xxv.  10 ;  Ewald,  Ginsburg, '  Ecclesiastes,'  p.  283  ; 
'  Eoce  Homo ').  "  By  Christianising  the  master  the  gospel  onfranchised  the  slave. 
It  did  not  legislate  about  mere  names  and  forms,  but  it  went  to  the  root  of  the  evil, 
it  spoke  to  the  heart  of  man.  When  the  heart  of  the  master  was  filled  with  Divine 
grace  and  was  warmed  with  the  love  of  Christ  the  rest  would  soon  follow.  The 
■  lips  would  speak  kind  words,  the  hands  would  do  liberal  things "  (Words-vorth, 
'  Com.  on  Philemon '). 

HI.  Serviceablb  to  his  benbpactobs.  1.  From  gratitude  for  the  benefit  received. 
No  human  heart  is  wholly  insensible  to  the  power  of  kindness.  2.  Under  a  solemm 
assurance  of  protection.  After  his  abandonment  by  his  master  he  could  have  no 
■cruple  concerning  his  right  to  his  continued  servi'ie,  if  any  such  right  ever  existed; 


1—81.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  6M 

bnt  ezperieBce  had  made  Um  fearful  and  suspicious  of  men,  and  therefore  he  said, 
"  Swear  unto  me  by  Qod,"  &o.  (yer.  15).  He  had  a  sense  of  religion,  and  believed 
that  Divine  justice  wonld  avenge  the  violation  of  an  oath,  though  it  should  be  taken 
to  a  slave.  8.  With  efficient  and  faithful  performance  of  his  engagements.  He  not 
only  gave  David  the  information  he  sought,  but  guided  him  to  the  camp  of  the 
enemy,  and  contributed  to  a  result  which  repaid  him  a  hundred-fold  (ver.  18). 

IV.  Pbbskbvbd  and  kmploted  by  Divine  peovidencb,  which — 1.  Cares  for  the 
lowliest.  "  Behold,  God  is  mighty,  and  despiseth  not  any  "  (Job  nsvi.  6).  "  Neither 
doth  God  respect  any  person  "  (2  Sam.  xiv.  14).  2.  Often  makes  use  of  the  feeblest 
instrumentality  for  tne  chastisement  of  the  "  wicked  in  great  power."  3.  And  for 
the  promotion  of  the  welfare  of  the  people  of  God,  and  the  establishment  of  hia 
kingdom.  What  a  rich  harvest  may  spring  from  a  single  act  of  kindnesa  toward 
•▼en  the  most  despised  I 

"  Ha  prayeth  well  who  loveth  well 

Both  man  and  bird  and  beat t. 
He  prayeth  best  who  loveth  best 

All  tfdngs  both  great  and  small  i 
Tor  the  dear  God  who  loveth  us 

He  made  and  loveth  aJl "  (Coleridge).  BL 

Vers.  21 — 81.  (The  bbook  Besob,  Ziklao.)— 7%«  fruUa  of  victory.  When  David 
overtook  the  Amalekites  in  the  evening  twilight  he  found  tnem  given  up  to  riotous 
indulgence,  undefended,  and  little  thinking  how  near  they  were  to  destruction.  He 
forthwith  fell  upon  them,  and  after  a  severe  conflict,  which  lasted  till  the  evening  of 
the  next  day,  gained  a  complete  victory.  He  "  recovered  all  "  that  had  been  carried 
away.  In  addition  he  obtained  much  spoil,  consisting  of  flocks  and  herds,  and  of 
"arms,  ornaments,  jewels,  money,  clothes,  camels,  accoutrements,  and  so  on."  The 
former  were  assigned  to  David  (according  to  his  wish,  and  as  better  adapted  to  the 
end  he  had  in  view),  and  driven  in  front  of  the  recovered  flock  with  the  exclamation, 
"This  is  David's  spoil."  The  latter  were  carried  away  for  distribution  among  his  men. 
By  his  victory  a  crushing  blow  was  inflicted  on  a  bitter  enemy  of  the  people  of  Israel, 
and  a  great  deliverance  wrought  for  them.  He  evidently  regarded  himself  as  (not 
merely  engaged  in  a  private  enterprise,  but  as)  acting  on  their  behalf,  and  carrying 
out  God's  purpose  ;  and  his  conduct  after  the  battle  was  marked  by — 1.  Gontideratt 
tympathji  witii  the  faint  and  weary  who  had  been  disabled  from  taking  an  active 
part  in  the  conflict  "  He  saluted  them  "  (ver.  21).  As  he  had  not  previously  urged 
them  beyond  their  strength,  so  now  he  exhibited  a  kindly  interest  in  them,  and  a 
marked  respect  toward  them.  His  heart  was  not  lifted  up  by  success.  They  had 
Hdone  what  they  could,"  and  formed  part  of  his  following.  "They  also  serve  who 
mly  stand  and  wait."  2,  Strermous  resistance  to  the  arrogant,  selfish,  and  unjust 
procedure  of  some  of  his  followers  (ver.  22).  "  Rough,  wild  men  were  many  among 
them,  equally  depressed  in  the  day  of  adversity,  and  recklessly  elated  and  insolent 
in  prosperity.  Nor  is  it  merely  the  discipline  which  David  knew  how  to  maintain  in 
such  a  band  that  shows  us  '  the  skilfulness  of  his  hands '  in  guiding  them,  but  the 
gentleness  with  which  he  dealt  with  them,  and  above  all  the  earnest  piety  with  which 
he  knew  how  to  tame  their  wild  passions,  prove  the  spiritual '  integnty '  or '  perf eotnesa 
of  his  heart ' "  (Edersheim).  The  spirit  which  these  "  wicked  and  worthless  men  "  dis- 
played is  sometimes  found  even  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  and  requires  to  be  met  with 
firm  and  uncompromising  opposition  (1  Pet.  v.  9).  3.  Devoid  recognition  of  the  hand 
of  God,  in  bestowing  whatever  good  is  possessed,  preserving  from  harm,  and  delivering 
from  dangerous  adversaries.  "  Ye  shall  not  do  so,  my  brethren,  with  that  which  the 
Lord  hath  given  us,"  &c.  (ver.  23).  "  Man  could  not  boast  of  his  own  merit  in 
obtaining  these  possessions  "  (Bwald).  They  were  a  gift  of  God,  and  should  be 
used  for  his  honour  and  the  good  of  all.  There  is  a  higher  law  than  that  of  self- 
interest.  Men  are  only  "  stewards  "  (not  absolute  owners)  of  property,  ability,  time, 
influence,  &c.,  and  as  such  it  behoves  them  to  "  be  found  faithful.^'  |'Freely  ye  have 
received,  freely  give."  4.  Equitable  distribution.  "And  who  will  hearken  mito 
you  in  this  matter  ?  "  &c.  (vers.  24,  25).  The  course  proposed  was  m  contrary  to 
the  common  convictions  of  men  concerning  what  is  reasonable  and  just  as  to  the 


660  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxx.  1-31. 

benevolent  purpose  of  God.  "  The  equity  of  this  law  appears  from  hence — ^that  by 
common  consent  these  200  men  were  left  behind  to  look  after  the  baggage  ;  were 
part  of  the  same  body  of  men,  linked  together  in  the  same  common  society;  bin' 
dered  by  mere  weariness  from  going  to  fight,  which  otherwise  they  would  have  4  me ; 
their  will  was  accepted  for  the  deed ;  and  they  were  in  the  same  common  danger, 
for  it  the  400  had  been  routed  their  enemies  would  have  soon  cut  them  off 
(Patrick).  "  The  members  should  have  the  same  care  one  for  another  "  (1  Cor.  xii. 
25).  6.  Graceful  acknowled^meiU  of  friendly  aid  during  his  "wanderings  in  the 
wilderness."  "  He  sent  of  the  spoil  unto  the  elders  of  Judah,  his  friends,"  &c.  (vers. 
26 — 31).  They  hfid  suffered  from  Amalekite  raids,  but  it  was  not  to  make  restitution 
for  their  losses  so  much  as  to  testify  his  gratitude  and  strengthen  their  attachment. 
His  victory  enabled  him  to  display  a  princely  munificence.  "It  is  a  remarkable 
proof  of  the  grateful  nature  of  David,  and  his  fidelity  to  his  early  friendships,  as 
well  as  a  curious  instance  of  undesigned  coincidence,  that  we  find  among  those  em- 
ployed by  David  in  offices  of  trust  in  the  height  of  his  power  so  many  inhabitants 
of  those  obscure  places  where  he  found  friends  in  the  days  of  his  early  difSculties  " 
('  Sp.  Com.').  6.  Gommendahle  policy — wise,  generous,  patriotiCj  and  religious. 
"  Behold  a  present"  (blessing,  gift)  "for  you  of  the  spoil  of  the  enemies  of  Jehovah." 
The  elders  of  Judah  and  others  looked  to  him  as  their  future  theocratic  ruler.  H* 
himself  felt  that  the  time  of  patient  waiting  was  nearly  gone,  and  the  time  of  active 
effort  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  Divine  purpose  concerning  him  well-nigh  come,  if, 
indeed,  the  tidings  of  the  death  of  Saul  had  not  already  reached  him.  He  also 
foresaw  that  he  must  look  for  his  chief  support  in  his  own  tribe,  and  adopted  the 
best  method  of  securing  it.  "  Piety  without  policy  is  too  simple  to  be  safe  ;  policy 
without  piety  is  too  subtle  to  be  good."  "  This  was  already  a  royal  act  in  vivid 
anticipation  of  his  impending  accession  to  the  throne.  Already  the  crown  of  Israel 
was  unmistakably  though  dimly  visible  above  his  head  "  (Krummaoher).  "  Whilst 
Saul's  star  sinks  in  the  north,  the  star  of  David  rises  in  the  south,  and  there  begins 
the  long  line  of  fulfilments  of  the  prophecy  concerning  the  Star  that  should  come 
out  of  Jacob"  (Num.  xxiv.  17)  (Erdmann). — ^D. 

Ver.  6. — FaUh  revimng  in  diftreti.  I.  Cobbbotior.  David,  being  b  true  but 
faulty  child  of  God,  was  corrected  by  the  rod.  Quickly  fell  stroke  after  stroke. 
First  he  had  to  bear  the  galling  scorn  and  suspicion  of  the  Philistine  lords.  This  was 
all  he  had  gained  by  cajoling  their  king.  Next  he  had  to  see  Ziklag  plundered  and 
burnt.  This  was  all  he  had  gained  by  attacking;  the  Amalekites  and  concealing  die 
deed.  Next,  and  in  some  respects  most  trying  of  all,  he  saw  the  loyalty  of  his  own 
followers  swept  away  in  their  passionate  grief.  "  The  people  spake  of  stoning  him." 
This  was  all  he  had  gained  by  all  his  unworthy  devices  to  save  his  own  life.  All 
refuge  failed  him.  So  God  in  loving-kindness  scourges  his  children  now  when  they 
have  faltered  in  faith,  and,  mistrusting  his  defence,  have  betaken  themselves  to  some 
Ziklag,  some  position  unworthy  of  them.  Their  new  confidences  reject  them,  and 
they  have  to  sit  like  David  in  dust  and  ashes. 

II.  Its  happy  issue.  Faith  revived.  When  all  refuge  failed  him,  David  returned 
to  his  Divine  stronghold.  "  He  encouraged  himself  in  Jehovah  his  God."  Mark  the 
contrast  with  Saul.  When  that  unhappy  king  was  stricken  he  departed  from  God 
more  and  more,  hardened  his  heart  in  pride,  found  no  place  of  repentance,  and  at 
last  betook  himself  to  unhallowed  and  forbidden  arts.  So  we  find  Saul  passing  from 
gloom  into  thicker  and  blacker  shadow,  while  David  emerges  into  the  sunshine.  Such 
is  the  happy  experience  of  many  of  the  children  of  God.  Faith  revives  in  distress, 
and  darkness  turns  to  light.  This,  too,  as  the  New  Testament  teaches  us,  always  by 
the  gracious  operation  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  reviving  childlike  trust,  rekindling  holy 
courage.  The  way  in  which  David's  recovered  faith  wrought  in  him  is  full  of  in- 
struction for  us.  1.  Revived  faith  rests  on  the  Divine  word  of  promise.  David  had 
let  the  promise  of  the  kingdom  made  to  him  through  Samuel  slip  from  his  mind  when 
he  began  to  despair  of  his  life ;  and  it  is  remarkable  that  he  gave  way  to  this  fear  at 
a  time  when  there  was  a  lull  in  the  persecution  directed  against  him.  But  when  real 
danger  was  upon  him,  when  he  had  lost  all,  and  his  own  followers  turned  against  him, 
his  faith  again  caught  hold  of  the  Divine  promise.    He  could  not  die  then  and  thara. 


OB.  zzz.  1— SI.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


081 


for  the  purpose  of  the  Lord  must  stand,  the  word  of  the  Lord  must  be  fulfilled.  Now 
those  who  believe  in  Christ  have  the  promise  of  eternal  life  in  him.  In  hours  of 
relaxed  diligence  they  perhaps  let  it  slip  ;  but  under  real  pressure  faith  revives  and 
grasps  the  promise  agam.  They  shall  not  perish.  They  may  be  humbled  and  dis- 
tressed, and  they  will  acknowledge  that  they  have  brought  this  on  themselves ;  but 
they  are  persuaded  that  he  is  faithful  who  promised,  and  so  will  not  cast  them  off. 
He  has  said,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee  nor  forsake  thee  ; "  so  that  we  may  boldly  say, 
"The  Lord  is  my  helper."  2.  Revived  faith  takes  to  prayer  and  to  diligent  ^<yrt.  The 
first  thing  which  David  did  was  to  inquire  of  God.  Faith  restored  always  acts  thus. 
Rising  against  discouragement,  it  is  sure  that  God  can  turn  darkness  into  light,  loss 
Into  gain,  death  into  life,  and  simply  asks  for  direction.  "  What  shall  I  do  ?  Shall 
I  Bit  still,  or  shall  I  move  ?  Shall  I  pursue  ?  "  There  are  trials  and  dangers  in  which 
the  only  wise  course  is  to  be  quite  patient  and  passive ;  the  "  strength  is  to  sit  still." 
When  Daniel  was  cast  to  the  lions  his  faith  was  shown  in  not  struggling  with  the 
wild  beasts,  but  sitting  among  them  calm  and  still  till  rescue  came  at  break  of  day. 
Bo  may  a  Christian  fall  into  a  den  of  troubles  out  of  which  no  efEort  of  his  own  can 
bring  him  up  ;  and  his  faith  is  shown  in  prayer  and  waiting  on  God,  who  is  able  to 
send  his  angel  to  minister  to  the  weak  and  protect  the  helpless.  Those  whose  faith 
has  not  failed  at  all  may  do  more  than  pray — may  sing  praises,  as  Paul  and  Silas  did 
in  the  dark  dungeon.  Other  cases  there  are,  and  more  frequent,  in  which  prayer 
should  be  promptly  followed  by  active  exertion.  David  did  not  ask  the  Lord  to 
work  a  miracle,  or  send  angels,  to  restore  to  him  what  the  Amalekites  had  taken.  It 
was  possible  for  him  and  his  men  to  pursue,  overtake,  and  defeat  the  spoilers.  So  he 
asked  the  Lord  whether  he  should  pursue  ;  and  receiving  the  Divine  command  to  do 
BOj  he  addressed  himself  at  once  to  the  pursuit,  and  obtained  a  splendid  success. 
Such  is  the  energetic  action  of  revived  faith.  DifScuIties  go  down  before  its  resolu- 
tions, and  lost  things  come  back  to  him  who  boldly  pursues.  Tears  of  defeat  are 
turned  into  song^  of  victory.  The  troubles  that  afflict  the  people  of  God  are  to  a 
large  extent  chastisements  for  unbelief  or  unfaithfulness.  At  the  time  they  are  not 
joyous,  but  gfrievous ;  nevertheless,  afterward  they  yield  the  peaceable  fruit  of  right- 
eousness to  those  who  are  exercised  thereby.  Such  are  suSerings  in  sympathy  with 
David.  But  to  some  extent  those  troubles  are  in  sympathy  with  and  for  the  sake  of 
the  Son  of  David,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     In  such  a  case  we  have  the  comfort  that 

"  Christ  leads  us  through  no  darker  rooms 
Than  he  went  through  before." 

He  ia  touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities.  He  has  wept  and  he  has  loved.  So 
if  we  are  despoiled,  he  is  our  present  help,  and  through  him  we  may  do  valiantly 
and  recover  all.  If  messengers  of  Satan  buffet  us,  \aS  grace  b  sufficient  for  oa,  for 
hia  "strength  ia  made  perfect  in  weakness." — F, 

EXPOSITION. 
DintAT  AND  Death  of  Saul  (oh.  xxxi.). 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

Sato  and  his  sons  slain  (vei*  1—7). 
Vers.  1,  2. — The  PhilistineB  fought  Lit- 
erally it  ia  a  participle  present,  "  the  Phi- 
listines are  warring,"  as  if  it  were  a  mere 
resimiption  of  ch.  zxviil  1.  In  the  battle 
fought  on  the  day  following  Saul's  visit  to 
the  witch  the  Israelites  were  defeated,  and 
fell  in  large  numbers  slain  in  Meant  Gilboa, 
either  because  the  Philistines  had  attacked 
them  there,  or  because,  after  fighting  in  the 
valley  of  Jezreel,  they  had  made  on  its  steep 
ridges  their  last  defence.  Among  those  thus 
•lam  were  the  three  sons  of  S«uT  mentioned 
1b  oh.  ziv.  49,  where  see  note. 
1  SAK 


Yers.  S,  4.— The  arohem  Literally,  as  in 
the  margin,  "shooters,  men  with  bows." 
As  the  first  word  would  equally  apply  to 
men  who  threw  javelins,  the  explanation  is 
added  to  make  the  meaning  clear.  Hit  hln;. 
literally,  "  found  him,"  i.  t.  found  out  his 
position,  and  came  up  to  where  he  was.  He 
was  sore  wounded.  Bather,  "he  was  sore  dis- 
tressed." In  Deut.  ii.  25  the  verb  is  ren- 
dered "be  in  anguish."  The  meaning  ia 
that  Saul,  finding  himself  surrounded  by 
these  archers,  and  that  he  could  neither 
escape  nor  come  to  close  quarters  with  them, 
and  die  fighting,  ordered  his  armour-bearer 
to  kill  him,  that  he  might  be  spared  the 
degradation  of  being  slam  by  "  uncircam< 
0« 


Ml 


THB  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


[oh.  zzzl  1— U. 


etod"  heaOisB.  AboM  bm.  Thia  T«Tb  b 
ttuulated  moek  in  Jer.  zzzrUL  19.  "  Mal- 
treat" would  be  a  better  rendering  in  both 
placea,  and  alao  in  Judges  zix.  26,  where, 
too,  the  word  occurs.  Its  exact  meaning  is 
to  practise  npon  another  all  that  passion, 
lust,  anger,  or  malice  dictate.  Probably 
Saul  thought  that  they  would  treat  him  as 
they  had  previously  treated  Samson  (Judges 
xvi.  21—25). 

Vera.  6,  6.  —  His  armour-bearer.  The 
Jewish  tradition  says  that  he  was  Doeg  the 
Edomite,  and  that  the  sword  on  which  Saul 
fell  was  that  with  which  he  had  massacred 
the  priests.  This  is  not  very  probable ;  but 
whoever  he  was,  his  horror  on  being  asked  to 
•lay  hia  master,  and  his  devotion  to  him,  are 
deserving  of  admiration.  All  his  men.  In 
1  Chron.  x.  6  "  all  his  house."  But  Ish- 
bosheth  and  Abner  survived,  and  the  mean- 
ing probably  is  not  that  his  whole  army,  but 
that  his  personal  attendants,  all  those  posted 
round  him,  fell  to  a  man,  fighting  bravely 
for  their  king,  as  the  Scots  fought  round 
King  James  V.  at  Flodden  Field  As  suicide 
was  very  rare  among  the  Israelites,  the 
death  of  Saul  is  made  more  intensely  tragic 
by  the  anguish  which  drove  him  thus  to  die 
by  his  own  hand. 

POLITIOAL  RESUIT  OF  THB  BATTLE  (VOT.  7). 

Ver.  7.  — The  men  of  Israel  The  term  is  here 
applied  to  non-combatants,  while  in  ver.  1 
it  meant  those  following  Saul  in  arms.  On 
the  other  side  of  the  valley.  I.  e.  of  Jezreel, 
and  80  all  the  Israelites  inhabiting  the  tribes 
of  Iiaachar,  Zabulon,  and  Naphthali,  and  the 
reraon  generally  to  the  north.  In  1  Ohron. 
z.  7  this  flight  is  confined  to  the  inhabitants 
of  the  valley,  one  of  the  most  fertile  districts 
of  Palestine;  bnt  probably  the  statement 
made  here,  that  a  very  large  extent  of 
conntry  was  the  prize  of  victory,  is  the  more 
correct.  On  the  other  side  Jordan.  This 
phrase  constantly  means  the  eastern  side  of 
the  Jordan,  nor  need  we  doubt  but  that  the 
people  living  near  it  abandoned  their  homes 
and  fled;  for  the  river  would  form  but  a' 
slight  protection  for  them  in  this  northerly 
part  of  its  course.  Still  the  conquests  on 
the  eastern  bank  of  the  Jordan  must  have 
been  confined  to  a  small  district  near  the 
lake  of  Tiberias,  as  Abner  was  able- to  place 
Ishbosheth  as  king  at  Mahanaim,  a  town 
about  twenty  miles  to  the  east  of  the  river, 
and  not  far  from  Jabez-Gilead.  South  of 
Jezreel  the  Philistines  made  no  conmiests, 
and  thus  Ephraim,  Benjamin,  and  Judah 
remained  free,  and  of  course  Oilead,  and 
the  most  part  of  the  region  beyond  Jordan 
(lee  2  Sam.  iL  8—11). 

MaiiTbbatuent  or  thi  bodies  or  Saul 
AXD  BIS  SONS  (vers.  8—10).  Yer.  8. — ^It 
•Mna  to  pan  \  m  the  morrow.  The  previooi 
VMM  gave  w  the  result*  of  the  victorj  as 


they  were  in  course  of  time  developed.    We 

now  return  to  the  narrative  of  the  battle  and 
its  immediate  consequences.  Aa  the  spoiling 
was  deferred  till  the  morrow,  the  struggle 
must  have  been  obstinately  contested,  and 
decided  only  just  before  nightfall. 

Vera.  9,  10.— They  cut  off  hia  head. 
This  was  probably  done  not  simply  in  retali- 
ation for  what  had  happened  to  their  cham- 
pion Goliath,  bat  in  accordance  with  the 
cnstoms  of  ancient  warfare.  The  fierce  joy 
of  the  Philistines  over  the  fallen  Saul  proves 
how  great  had  been  their  fear  of  him,  and 
how  successful  he  had  been  in  brealdng  their 
yoke  off  Israel's  neck.  Had  he  still  had 
David  with  him  the  victory  would  assuredly 
have  remained  on  his  side.  TBey  put  his 
armour  in  the  house  of  Ashtaroth.  Hebrew, 
"of  the  Ashtarotli."  Whether  it  was  di- 
vided amonp  the  various  shrines  of  Astarte, 
or  whether  it  was  all  placed  in  her  famous 
temple  at  Askelon,  described  by  Herodotus 
(L  105)  as  the  most  ancient  of  the  fanes  of 
the  Syrian  Venns,  is  imcertain.  The  former 
view  agrees  best  with  the  Hebrew  text  and 
with  what  is  said  in  1  Chron.  x.  10,  where 
we  have  the  additional  information  that 
they  suspended  Saul's  head  in  the  temple  of 
Dagon.  They  fastened  his  body  to  the  wall 
of  Beth-shan,  as  also  the  bodies  of  his  sons 
(ver.  12).  Beth-shan  or  SOTthopolis  lies 
abont  four  miles  from  the  Jordan  on  the 
west,  and  twelve  miles  south  of  the  lake  of 
Tiberias.  It  is  almost  in  a  straight  lino 
to  the  west  of  Mahanaim,  and  must  have 
been  at  once  occupied  by  the  Philistines, 
and  as  the^  hung  the  bodies  of  the  fallen 
king  and  hia  sons  on  its  wall,  they  evidently 
intended  to  retain  it. 

Beootbbt  of  the  bodies  07  Saul  Ain> 
HIS  80N8  (vera.  11 — 18).  Ver.  11.— Jahesh- 
Oilead.  Ensebina  describes  this  place  as 
situated  on  the  road  from  Fella  to  Gerasa, 
and  therefore  it  would  be  mnch  nearer  the 
Jordan  than  Mahanaim,  and  probably  was 
not  more  than  twelve  or  fourteen  miles 
distant  from  Beth-shan.  The  people  there 
had  not  forgotten  how  bravely  Saul  had 
saved  them,  and  now  showed  their  gratitude 
by  rescuing  his  remains  from  disgrace.  ' 

Vers.  12, 13.— They  burnt  them.  Crema- 
tion, though  highly  honourable  among  clas- 
sical nations,  is  here  mentioned  for  the  first 
time  in  Holy  Scripture,  and  was  probably 
resorted  to  on  this  occasion  to  insure  the 
bodies  of  Saul  and  his  sons  against  further 
maltreatment,  as,  if  buried,  the  Philistine* 
might  have  made  the  attempt  to  get  them 
again  into  their  power.  Some  suppose  that 
the  burning  of  the  dead  was  afterwards  prac- 
tised by  the  Jews,  and  quote  in  its  &vonr 
2  Chron.  xvi.  14  ;  Isa.  zxxiii.  12 ;  Jer.  zxzL 
40 ;  zxziv.  6  ;  Amos  vL  10,  but  these  pa*- 
•ages  bear  a  different  interpretation.     Aftat 


oa.  XXXI.  1—13.] 


THE  FIRST  BOOK  OP  SAMUEL. 


66a 


the  exile,  interment  was  the  sole  method  of 
disposing  of  the  dead  among  the  Jews,  and 
in  the  Talmud  cremation  is  condemned  as  a 
heathen  practice.  The  burial  of  the  bones 
of  Saul  and  his  sons  proves  that  their  bodies 
here  were  really  burnt.  Under  a  tree. 
Hebrew,  "under  the  tamarisk,"  the  famous 
tree  of  that  species  at  Jabesh.  It  was  under 
one  tamarisk  that  Saul  commanded  the  mas- 
sacre of  the  priests  (ch.  xxii  6),  and  now  his 
bones  are  placed  in  rest  beneath  another. 
Perhaps  the  people  remembered  the  king's 


fondness  for  trees.  For  the  final  fate  of  these 
relics  see  2  Sam.  xxi  12 — 14.  They  fasted 
seven  days  (see  Gen.  1.  10).  The  time  of 
mourning  was  thirty  days  for  Aaron  (Numb. 
XX.  29)  and  for  Moses  (Dent,  xxxiv.  8).  The 
Talmudic  rule  is  strict  mourning  for  seven 
days,  less  strict  for  the  next  twenty-three,  in 
all  thirty ;  and  for  a  father  or  mother  mourn- 
ing was  continued  for  a  year.  The  fastin" 
was  mourning  of  the  strictest  kind,  and 
proves  that  the  people  of  Jabesh-Gilead 
honoured  to  the  utmost  their  deliverer. 


H0MILETIC8. 

Vera.  1 — 6. — Jvdgmewl  at  last.  The  facts  are — 1.  In  the  battle  at  Oilboa  the 
men  of  Israel  sufEer  a  defeat  from  the  Philistines.  2.  His  sons  being  slain,  the  con- 
flict presses  hard  on  Saul.  3.  Dreading  to  fall  by  the  hand  of  a  Philistine,  and 
failing  to  find  death  through  the  hand  of  his  armour-bearer,  he  falls  on  his  own 
Bword,  his  example  being  followed  by  his  armour-bearer.  Here  we  have  the  closing 
scene  in  the  tragedy  of  Saul's  life,  verifying  the  prediction  of  Samuel.  Our  heart 
mourns  over  an  end  so  sad,  and  as  we  read  the  narrative  we  are  sensible  of  a 
strange  pity  for  this  once  promising  but  now  ruined  man.     Notice — 

I.  The  prbsshrb  of  bvbnts  wobkinq  out  a  bighteous  judgment.  Connecting 
this  defeat  and  death  of  Saul  with  the  early  prediction  of  Samuel  (ch.  xv.  23,  28, 
29)  and  the  recent  solemn  declaration  in  the  cave  at  Endor  (ch.  zxviii.  16 — 20),  we 
see  how,  as  by  an  unseen  hand,  Saul  was '  urged  on  to  his  doom.  For  instead  of 
making  terms  with  the  enemy,  or  fleeing  from  the  scene  of  conflict,  he,  knowing  his 
doom,  drew  up  his  men,  pressed  on  to  the  thickest  battle,  became  a  conspicuous 
mark  for  arcHers,  and  drew  around  himself  and  heirs  to  the  throne  the  fiercest  of  the 
assault.  We  cannot  but  observe  how  the  Philistine  force  was  unrestrained  by  the 
power  which  checked  Pharaoh's  army  at  the  Red  Sea,  weakened  Amalek  when  the 
hands  of  Moses  were  raised  (Exod.  xvii.  11 — 13),  inspired  terror  in  the  army  opposed 
to  Jonathan  (ch.  xiv.  16 — 28),  and  generally  put  fear  in  the  hearts  of  Israel's  foes. 
Samuel's  words  make  clear  to  us  that  Providence  was  leaving  Saul  to  the  impulses 
which  led  him  to  death,  and  withholding  from  the  Philistines  all  that  would  other- 
wise have  impeded  their  way  to  victoiy.  It  is  a  fearful  thing  thus  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  the  living  God.  The  truth  brought  out  here  is,  that  though  judgment  is 
often  for  unrevealed  reasons  long  deferred,  yet  events  are  so  disposed  as  to  con- 
centrate irresistibly  on  the  enforcement  of  the  penalty  of  sin.  Men  pursue  a  crooked 
and  unholy  course  for  years,  during  which  time  justice  seems  to  linger ;  but  the  time 
comes  on  when,  as  by  infatuation,  they  go  straight  into  the  concurrences  of  events 
which  Providence  has  permitted  for  their  downfall.  So  also  fell  Babylon,  Home, 
and  other  nations,  made  drunk  with  the  wine  of  the  wrath  of  G-od  (Isa.  Ixiii.  6).  So 
likewise,  under  the  pressure  of  Providence,  will  the  sea  give  up  its  dead,  and  all  that 
are  in  their  graves  come  forth,  to  receive  according  to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body 
(John  V.  28,  29  ;  2  Cor.  v.  10 ;  Bev.  xx.  13). 

II.  The  bins  of  parents  cut  off  thb  hopes  of  sons.  We  feel  deep  sympathy 
with  Jonathan  that  he,  the  brightest  and  best  of  Israel's  manhood,  should  perish 
in  the  calamity  brought  on  by  his  father's  persistent  impenitence.  Brave,  gallant 
son,  knowing  and  lamenting  the  failings  of  his  parent,  and  the  woes  his  con- 
duct was  bringing  on  the  kingdom,  with  true  filial  piety  he  stands  by  him  and  the 
kingdom  to  the  end  I  It  was  better  to  die,  if  so  God  willed  it,  than  to  live  and  share 
in  the  joys  of  even  a  David's  friendship.  The  fond  hopes  of  seeing  David  enthroned 
over  a  happy  and  prosperous  people  after  his  father's  natural  decease  (ch.  zx.  12— 
17 ;  xxiii.  16 — 18)  were  rudely  blighted.  It  is  the  old  sad  story  of  the  sin  of  on« 
bringing  sorrow  and  suSering  to  many  innocent.  The  fearful  havoc  made  by  sin  1 
The  awful  responsibility  of  our  conduct  I  Millions  die  before  their  proper  time,  and 
a  wail  of  wo«  lisea  daUy  from  myriads  of  hearts  because  of  the  transgrewdon  ut 
wranti. 

•  •t 


664  TUfi  f  litST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [CB.  ZXXI.  1—18 


III.  A  SAD  END  OF  LIFE  IN  KBBPiNG  WITH  ITS  OBDiKABT  (XJUBBi.  There  IB  a  aingular 
blending  of  diverse  thought  and  motive  in  the  last  utterances  and  actB  of  Saul.  He 
knew  his  doom  was  at  hand ;  and  yet,  partly  under  a  sense  of  utter  wretchedness 
which  made  him  willing  to  die,  and  partly  from  the  patriotic  feeling  that  his  unwill- 
ingness to  face  his  country's  foe  should  not  be  added  to  his  crimes,  he  goes  forth 
to  battle.  Then,  also,  when  pressed  in  battle  and  in  great  straits,  was  there  not  a 
■ense  of  misery,  a  conMiiousness  of  Divine  abandonment,  which  made  the  con- 
tinuance of  life  a  burden  no  longer  to  be  endured,  blended  with  the  thought  precious 
to  the  Hebrew,  that  he  was  one  of  the  chosen  race,  allied  by  nationality  with  the 
great  Messianic  purpose,  and  that,  as  such,  it  must  never  be  said  that  Israel's  king 
was  abused  by  the  touch  of  the  "  uncircumcised  "  alien  ?  In  this  commingling  of 
light  and  darkness,  moral  quickenings  and  mad  infatuation,  we  have  an  analogue  to 
his  conduct  all  through  his  sad  career.  It  is  not  for  us  to  say  whether  there  was 
not  in  those  last  sad  moments,  as  he  lay  on  the  earth,  a  melting  of  that  heart  which 
had  so  long  striven  against  God.  As  in  many  other  instances,  there  is  no  light 
thrown  on  the  inner  experience  of  the  soul  in  its  most  sacred  relations  to  God.  The 
case  of  the  thief  on  the  cross  may  suggest  the  possibility  of  a  cry  from  the  heart  to 
which  the  mercy  that  endureth  for  ever  responds.  But  it  is  for  us  to  stand  in  awe, 
and  take  to  ourselves  the  solemn  lesson  of  this  sad  and  perverted  life. 

IV.  A  QUESTION  AS  TO  THE  MORAL  CHABACTEB  OF  SDiciDE.  Willet,  in  his  '  Har- 
monic upon  the  first  Booke  of  Samuel,'  quotes  authorities  pro  and  con  on  the 
general  question  and  on  Saul's  act ;  but  without  entering  on  a  wide  subject,  it  may 
sufiSce  to  note  that  moral  cowardice  is  ordinarily  the  cause  of  suicide,  and  that  it  is  a 
violation  of  the  prerogatives  of  God.  As  we  have  indicated,  there  may  have  been 
considerations  of  a  semi-religious  character  which  influenced  Saul  in  desiring  not  to 
be  slain  by  the  "  imcircumcised,"  and  to  him  it  was  certain  that  death  was  at  hand. 
Nevertheless,  no  private  feeling,  no  relief  from  dishonour,  can  justify  a  forestalling, 
in  the  matter  of  ufe  and  death,  of  the  course  of  Providence.  The  principle  involved 
is  most  vital,  and  when  once  the  door  for  its  violation  is  opened,  the  whole  fabric  of 
society  is  sapped  at  its  foundation. 

General  lessons : — 1.  It  is  instructive  to  contrast  the  begining  and  end  of  lives, 
and  note  how  by  the  action  of  a  deceitful  heart  the  fatal  turn  is  taken  toward  dis- 
grace and  despair.  2.  Although  some  parents  ruin  their  sons  by  their  sins,  yet  we 
all  do  them  wrong  and  damage  in  so  far  as  sin  taints  our  life.  3.  Although  God 
cuts  off  the  hopes  of  the  good  by  the  calamities  which  come  through  the  sins  of 
others,  yet  in  his  mercy  he  raises  them  to  a  purer  and  safer  joy.  4.  Whateyer  judg- 
ments God  brings  should  be  submitted  to  with  resignation. 

Vera.  7 — 18. — The  final  issues  of  life  a  criterion  of  worth.  The  facts  an — 1. 
The  defeat  of  Saul  is  followed  by  the  general  flight  of  the  men  of  Israel  from  the 
neighbouring  cities,  and  the  occupation  of  these  by  the  Philistines.  2.  The  bodies  of 
Saul  and  of  his  sons  being  found,  the  Philistines  strip  the  king's  of  his  armour,  publish 
the  fact  in  the  houses  of  idols,  and  dishonour  him  on  the  wall  of  Beth-shan.  3.  The 
men  of  Jabesh-Gilead,  hearing  of  this,  rescue  the  bodies  and  bury  them  at  Jabesl: 
amidst  much  mourning.  The  historian  closes  the  narrative  concerning  Saul's  reign 
by  a  reference  to  the  immediate  result  of  the  defeat  on  the  adjacent  cities,  and  to 
the  barbarous  treatment  of  Saul's  body.  The  people  who  had  demanded  a  king,  and 
who  were  proud  of  his  powerful  bodily  presence,  were  now  to  learn  in  saddest  form 
how  much  better  it  is  to  wait  the  time  of  God,  and  to  trust  rather  to  righteousness 
of  national  life  than  to  physical  force  and  martial  display.  The  people  and  the  king 
were  at  fault,  and  the  judgment  falls  on  both.    We  nere  see — 

I.  That  life's  worth  is  tested  bt  its  final  resxHiT.  The  pablio  life  of  Saul  at 
one  time  promised  well  for  himself  and  Israel.  Evei7  aid  whloh  wise  advice  and 
holy  influence  could  render  had  been  freely  bestowed  by  Samuel,  the  man  of  God, 
and  the  promise  of  Divine  help  was  given  on  condition  of  obedience  to  the  Divine 
voice.  Although  troubles  came  in  consequence  of  disobedience,  and  thus  indicated 
that  his  life  was  proving  a  failure,  there  were  doubtless  men  so  blind  to  the  signs  of 
the  times  as  to  refer  the  troubles  to  accidents  and  unforeseen  circumstances,  and  to 
hope  still  that  there  would  be  a  turn  in  the  tide  of  ailairs  which  would  insni*  m  pro*- 


OH.  xxu.  1— 13.J  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  Ml 


perous  reign.  But  the  panio  which  came  on  Israel  on  Saul's  death  and  the  occupa- 
tion ot  cities  by  the  detested  Philistine  must  have  made  clear  to  the  most  prejudiced 
that  his  pubho  career  was  disastrous  and  unrighteous.  The  issue  o£  a  monarch'i 
reign  should  be  the  moral  and  material  elevation  of  the  people,  the  improved 
administration  of  law,  the  greater  security  of  life  and  property,  a  prevalence  of  the 
blessings  of  internal  peace  and  freedom  from  foreign  oppression,  and  a  higher 
degree  of  national  influence.  The  reverse  of  this  was  the  outcome  of  Saul's  life. 
By  thus  looking  at  the  result  of  life's  labours  we  may  form  an  estimate  of  the  worth 
of  monarchs,  statesmen,  merchants,  and  professed  Christians.  Have  men  blessed 
their  fellow-creatures  with  permanent  good?  Is  the  great  enemy,  sin,  more  in 
occupation  of  country,  home,  and  the  soul  at  the  end  than  at  the  beginning  ?  The 
day  is  coming  when  every  man's  work  will  be  tried  of  "  what  sort  it  is  "  (1  Cor.  iii. 
13).  Can  we  face  that  test?  Will  the  end  be  better  than  the  beginning?  Dare 
some  men  try  to  answer  this  question  in  relation  to  their  spiritual  condition  and  the 
spiritual  effect  of  their  personal  influence. 

IL  That  the  appakbnt  tbiumph  of  the  wicked  is  one  op  the  saddest  oon- 
SEQTTBNCEs  OF  THE  BINS  OF  Ood's  PEOPLE.  The  triumph  of  the  "  uncircumcised  "  was 
complete  when,  stripping  the  body  of  Israel's  king,  they  carried  his  head  in  savage 
delight  to  the  house  of  Dagon  (1  Chron.  x.  10),  nailed  his  corpse  to  the  wall  of 
Beth-shan,  and  proclaimed  their  victory  in  honour  of  their  gods.  It  was  this  result 
following  on  the  death  of  Saul  and  defeat  of  Israel  that  seemed  to  be  an  occasion 
of  80  much  sorrow  and  dread  to  David  (2  Sam.  i.  20).  The  fond  hopes  cherished 
by  the  pious  on  the  solemn  day  of  repentance  and  consecration  at  Mizpeh  and  Ebon-, 
ezer  (ch.  vii.  9 — 12)  were  now  rudely  destroyed.  Heathenism  gloried  in  its  strength ; 
while  Israel,  smitten  with  fear,  mourned  in  bitterness  of  soul.  Ignorance,  barbarity, 
idolatry  took  a  new  lease  of  power,  and  Jehovah's  name  was  dishonoured  in  the 
eyes  of  the  nations.  The  death  of  a  king  is  comparatively  a  small  matter,  the 
wasting  swee^  of  war  over  fair  fields  and  flourishing  cities  is  a  material  calamity ; 
but  for  irreli^on  to  flourish,  debasing  religious  rites  to  manifest  all  their  vileness, 
and  the  cause  of  purity,  truth,  and  righteousness  to  be  made  to  suffer  even  apparent 
defeat,  this  was  the  most  fearful  consequence  of  Saul's  unhappy  reign.  All  actions 
in  public  and  private  individuals  are  to  be  judged  by  their  bearing  on  the  honour  of 
God's  name  and  the  extension  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Does  a  monarch's  or  a 
statesman's  policy  give  greater  scope  for  whatever  is  alien  to  the  supremacy  of 
Christ  in  heart,  conduct,  and  home  ?  If  so  it  is  very  criminal.  Does  our  private 
life  give  occasion  for  the  enemies  of  the  cross  to  blaspheme  ?  He  who  so  lives  and 
dies  as  to  strengthen  the  hold  of  ignorance,  superstition,  immorality,  and  anti- 
Christian  principles  on  the  world  is  the  enemy  of  his  country  and  of  God.  When 
men  professedly  in  the  Church  of  God,  as  Saul  was  in  Israel,  so  become  unfaithful 
to  their  privileges  as  to  give  an  apparent  triumph  to  the  irreligious  and  profane, 
they,  in  whatever  degree  this  is  true,  perpetrate  an  injury,  the  spiritual  issues  of 
which  are  beyond  all  calculation, 

III.  That  the  most  terrible  trials  mat  give  rise  to  occasional  deeds  of 
HEROISM.  Various  were  the  effects  of  Saul's  death  on  Israel.  On  all  there  must 
have  come  that  inexpressible  anguish  which  in  some  degree  David  sought  to  express 
in  his  beautiful  "song  of  the  bow"  (2  Sam.  i.  18 — 27).  But  there  were  faithful 
men  who  could  not  yield  to  inaction  while  God's  name  was  being  dishonoured  and 
Israel,  in  the  person  of  the  king,  covered  with  ignominy.  The  men  of  Jabesh- 
Gilead  had  not  forgotten  the  day  when,  in  the  prime  of  his  strength,  and  bidding 
fair  to  defend  his  country  in  the  fear  of  God,  Saul  had  come  to  their  rescue  and  had 
aroused  the  patriotism  of  the  nation  (ch.  xi.  4 — 11).  To  them  he  was  more  than 
king ;  he  was  hero  and  friend,  and  doubtless  their  children  had  used  his  name  as  a 
household  word.  And  now  dead,  forsaken,  mutilated,  the  tall,  majestic  form  exposed 
to  heathen  scorn — should  they  suffer  it?  Never  I  "All  the  valiant  men  arose." 
With  set  purpose,  at  risk  of  life,  they  bring  away  the  mangled  remains,  and  sorrow- 
fully lay  them  low  in  the  place  that  witnessed  his  early  heroism.  Thus  do  we  see 
how  misfortune,  sorrow,  and  death  call  forth  the  nobler  qualities  of  men,  and  bring 
to  light  hidden  sympathies  and  secret  friends.  There  was  some  hope  for  Israel  yet 
The  terrible  disasters  of  life  stir  up  the  energies  of  the  faithful  few,  and  though  the} 


166  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUBL.  [oh.  zxxl  1—13. 

Cannot  at  ohm  redeem  all  that  others  have  lost,  they  can  reassert  the  supremacy  of 
love  and  the  nobler  sentiments  of  life,  and  so  pave  the  way  for  a  better  order  of 
things.  Men  in  Israel  revived  a  little  from  despair  when  they  heard  of  this  heroism 
and  affection.  Was  there  not  a  darker  night  and  more  complete  apparent  defeat  of 
Israel's  high  purpose  in  the  world  when  another  and  more  sacred  body  was  exposed 
"a  spectacle  to  angels  and  to  men"?  Then  also  one  was  found  who  dared  to 
identify  his  reputation  and  all  that  was  dear  with  respect  and  love  for  that  holy 
body.  Joseph  of  Arimatliea  was  morally  more  heroic  than  the  men  of  Jabesh- 
Gilead.  In  similar  ways  the  disasters  of  life  have  drawn  forth  the  heroism  of  many 
who  could  not  endure  to  see  the  "  uncircumcised  "  triumph.  Thus  light  shines  forth 
in  darkness,  assuring  us  that  in  the  long  conflict  with  evil  the  morning  of  an  endless 
day  full  of  the  joy  of  the  ransomed  will  dawn  on  the  sorrowful  earth. 

General  lessoTU : — 1.  To  form  a  just  estimate  of  our  life  we  should  not  regard  oar 
personal  enjoyments  as  pain,  but  have  chief  respect  to  the  ultimate  effect  of  it  on 
our  home  and  country.  2.  Wicked  men  find  encouragement  to  believe  in  their  false 
principles  when  men  professing  opposite  principles  are  nntme  to  them.  3.  We 
ought  to  consider  how  much  of  the  power  of  irreligious  principles  and  practices  over 
men  is  due  to  our  want  of  consistency.  4.  It  will  be  blessed  for  ns  and  our  sur- 
vivors if  friends  are  able  to  commit  our  body  to  the  grave  with  affection  and 
gratitude  unalloyed  with  painful  memoriea. 

HOMILIES  BY  VABI0U8  AUTHORS. 

Vert.  1—9.  (GiLBOA.)— ^A*  death  of  Saul.  "  So  Saul  died  "  (yer.  0 ;  2  Sam.  I. 
1 — 16 ;  1  Chron.  x.).  While  the  events  mentioned  in  the  preceding  chapter  were 
taking  place  in  the  south,  and  even  before  their  occurrence,  "  the  great  drama  so 
closely  connected  with  them  was  being  played  out "  in  the  north.  On  the  morrow 
jf  Saul's  consultation  of  "  the  witch  of  Endor "  the  Philistines  marched  across  the 
plain,  with  their  archers,  chariots,  and  horsemen  (2  Sam.  i.  6),  and  attacked  the  army 
of  Israel.  The  issue  appears  to  have  been  soon  decided.  "  The  men  of  Israel  fled 
^ora  before  the  Philistines,  and  fell  down  slain  in  Gilboa,"  up  the  slopes  of  which 
;hey  had  been  pursued.  "And  the  Philistines  followed  ham  upon  Saul  and  his 
sons,"  who  fell  fighting  around  him.  Hard  pressed  and  found  by  the  archers,  he  trem- 
bled ("was  sore  wounded,"  A.  V.)  before  them,  seeing  no  way  to  escape  falling  into 
their  hands;  and  (as  the  night  set  in),  with  the  reckless  courage  of  despair  with 
which  he  had  fought,  his  armour-bearer  having  refused  to  slay  him,  he  "  took  the 
sword  and  fell  upon  it."  His  armour-bearer  followed  his  example.  "At  that 
moment  a  wild  Amalekite,  lured  probably  to  the  field  by  the  hope  of  spoil,  came  up 
and  finished  the  work  which  the  arrows  of  the  Philistines  and  the  sword  of  Saul  him- 
self had  all  but  accomplished  "  (Stanley),  "  A  remarkable  dispensation.  As  the 
curse  on  Amalek  was  accomplished  by  ^ul,  so  that  on  Saul  was  accomplished  by 
Amalek "  (Hengstenberg).  Or,  perhaps,  the  story  of  the  Amalekite  was  false,  and 
told  to  ingratiate  himself  with  David  and  obtain  a  reward  for  the  diadem  and  bracelet 
of  which  he  had  stripped  the  fallen  king.  In  either  case,  self-willed  to  the  last, 
scorning  "  these  uncircumcised,"  and  more  concerned  about  his  own  honoor  than  tbe 
honour  of  Ood,  he  rushed  upon  his  own  destruction. 

"OSaulI 
How  ^haatly  didst  thou  look,  on  thine  own  nrord 
Expinng  in  Gilboa,  from  that  hour 
Ne  er  visited  with  rain  from  heaven  nor  dew  "  (Dante,  '  Frag,'  TdL)- 

Obwrve  that — 

I.  Betbibution  bubelt  otbbtaees  the  impenitent  tbansobbsbob.  t.  The  full 
desert  of  sin  might  be  justly  inflicted  immediately  on  its  commission.  But  in  a  state 
of  probation  space  is  allowed  for  repentance  and  motives  afforded  to  induce  it.  Yet, 
if  sin  be  persisted  in,  guilt  increases  and  judgment  becomes  more  inevitable  and 
severe.  "  He,  that  being  often  reproved  hardeneth  his  neck,  shall  suddenly  be  de- 
stroyed, and  that  without  remedy  "  (Prov.  xxix.  1).  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death  " 
(Bom.  vL  23).     "  The  wages  may  be  deferred  or  may  not  be  oonscioosly  received, 


CH.  XXXI.  1—18.]  THE  FIEST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  «W 


but  they  are  paid  without  stint  sooner  or  later;  the  fatal  oonseqnenoes  may  not 
always  equally  appear,  but  thejr  never  fail  in  some  form  or  other."  2.  Although 
inflicted  by  the  free  act  of  man,  it  is  not  less  the  result  of  the  operation  of  retributive 
justice.  "  Saul  took  the  sword  and  fell  upon  it ;  "  but  he  "  died  for  his  transgression 
which  he  committed  against  the  Lord  ;  therefore  the  Lard  slew  him,  and  turned  the 
kingdom  unto  David,  the  son  of  Jesse  "  (1  Chron.  x.  14).  3.  The  operation  of  the 
law  of  retribution,  so  manifest  in  history  and  to  observation,  shows  the  evil  of  sin  in 
the  sight  of  God,  and  is  a  solemn  warning  against  its  indulgeno*.  Even  repentance 
may  come  too  late  to  avert  its  consequences  in  this  life. 

"  Look  to  thyself  then,  deal  with  sin  no  more. 
Lest  he  that  saves,  against  thee  shuts  the  doer"  (BnnyaaX 

_  II,  BsLr-WILL  NATUKALLT  CULMINATES  IN  SELF-DKBTBUCTION.  All  Self -will,  in  Oppo- 
sition to  the  will  of  God,  is  a  self-injury  (Prov.  viiL  36) ;  and  not  less  so  because  the 
sinner  seeks  what  he  falsely  imagines  to  be  for  his  good.  Its  tendency  is  ever 
towards  destruction,  and,  unless  checked  in  its  course,  it  infallibly  conducts  to  that 
end.  It  is  a  special  and  aggravated  form  of  it  when,  in  order  to  escape  the  misery 
and  shame  which  are  experienced  or  expected,  he  directly  and  voluntarily  takes  away 
his  own  life.  Suicide  is — 1.  Contrary  to  the  natural  instinct  of  seU-preservation 
and  a  properly  enlightened  and  regulated  self-love.  2.  An  act  of  unfaithfulness  to 
the  trust  that  is  committed  to  man  by  God  in  the  bestowment  of  life,  and  of  refusal 
to  fulfil  the  duties  that  he  has  ordained  in  Ufe,  which  cannot  be  rightly  surrendered 
or  left  without  his  consent  nor  until  the  time  he  has  appointed.  "  Pythagoras  forbids 
us  to  abandon  the  station  or  post  of  life  without  the  orders  of  our  commander,  that 
is,  of  God  "  (Cicero).  "  '  Why  do  I  tarry  on  earth,  and  not  hasten  hence  to  come  to 
you  ? '  '  Not  80,  my  son,'  he  replied ;  '  unless  that  God,  whose  temple  is  all  this 
which  you  behold,  shall  liberate  you  from  the  imprisonment  of  the  body,  yon  can 
have  no  admission  to  this  place'"  ('Scipio's  Dream').  3.  An  act  of  cowardice  in 
the  presence  of  real  or  imaginary  evils,  whatever  reckless  bravery  it  may  exhibit 
with  respect  to  death  and  that  which  lies  beyond,  "  To  die  and  thus  avoid  poverty, 
or  love,  or  anjrthing  painful  is  not  the  part  of  a  brave  man,  but  rather  of  a  coward ; 
for  it  is  cowardice  to  avoid  trouble ;  and  the  suicide  does  not  imdergo  death  because 
it  is  honourable,  but  in  order  to  avoid  evil "  (Aristotle,  '  Ethics,'  book  vii.  ch.  7).  In 
Saul  it  was  "  the  act  of  completed  despair."  4.  Expressly  prohibited  by  the  Divine 
command:  "Thou  shalt  not  kill."  In  accordance  with  this  Paul  said  to  the  Philip- 
pian  gaoler,  when  "  he  would  have  killed  himselJ^"  "  Do  thyself  no  harm "  (Acts 
xvi.  28).  5.  Virtually  fwrhidden  by  all  the  exhortations  of  the  New  Testament  to 
endure  affliction  with  patience  and  submission  to  the  will  of  God,  "  Suicide  is  the 
result  of  impatience*  (see  Paley,  'Mor,  Phil,,'  book  iv,  ch.  3).  6.  Injurwws  to 
others  in  many  ways :  inflicting  much  distress,  teaching  pernicious  lessons,  setting  a 
bad  example.  It  is  "as  unfavourable  to  human  talents  and  resources  as  it  is  to 
human  virtues.  We  should  never  have  dreamt  of  the  latent  power  and  energy  of 
our  nature  but  for  the  struggle  of  great  minds  with  great  afflictions,  nor  known  the 
limits  of  ourselves  nor  man's  dominion  over  fortune.  What  would  the  world  now 
have  been  if  it  had  always  been  said.  Because  the  archers  smite  me  sore,  and  the 
battle  goeth  against  me,  I  will  die?"  (Sydney  Smith).  7.  Condemned  l^  the  ex- 
ample of  good  men,  who  have  borne  the  heaviest  calamities  with  holy  courage,  and 
sanctioned  only  by  evil  men,  like  Ahithophel  and  Judas.  How  far,  indeed,  Saul  was 
in  full  possession  of  his  faculties  and  responsible  for  his  act,  or  what  was  his  flnal 
destiny,  is  not  stated.  "  It  is  evident  that  more  arguments  may  be  gathered  of  his 
condemnation  than  of  his  salvation ;  yet  because  nothing  is  expressly  let  down 
toaching  hia  state  before  God,  it  is  better  to  leave  it"  (Willet). 

••  O  mortal  men  1  he  wary  how  ye  judge  i 
For  we,  who  see  our  Maker,  lojow  not  yet 
The  number  of  the  chosen  "  ('  Par.'  xx.). 

"There  appears  to  be  but  one  efficient  means  by  which  the  mind  can  be  armed  agahat 
the  temptations  to  suicide,  because  there  is  but  one  that  can  support  it  against  enerf 


Ms  tHE  FIRST  BOOK  Of  SAMUEti.  [oh.  zzzl  l—lA 

•▼il  of  life — practical  religion,  belief  in  the  providence  of  Qod,  confidence  in  hit 
wisdom,  hope  in  his  goodness  "  (Dymond, '  Essays '). 

"  Nor  love  thy  life,  nor  hate  ;  but  what  thon  liv'it 
Live  well,  how  long  or  short,  permit  to  Heaven"  ('  Par.  ImA,'  Vk.  t,). 

III.  Thb  evil  bxamflb  of  men  in  hioh  station  is  onlt  too  faithfully  imitated. 
"  And  when  his  armour-bearer,"  &o,  (ver,  5).  He  had  faithfully  fought  by  his  side 
to  the  last,  and  feared  to  take  away  his  life  (of  which  he  was  appointed  guardian)  ; 
perhaps  out  of  reverence  for  his  sacred  person ;  doubtless,  also,  he  dreaded  to  fall 
alive  into  the  hands  of  the  Philiatinea  and  to  be  put  to  a  shameful  death  by  them  ; 
and  now,  incited  by  his  example,  "  dares  to  do  that  to  himself  which  to  his  king  he 
durst  not"  Example  is  proverbially  powerful  .No  one,  especially  if  he  occupy  a 
position  of  power  and  influence,  can  do  wrong  without  thereby  inducing  others  to 
follow,  who  thus  share  his  ^ilt  and  may  not  have  equal  excuse  for  their  transgression. 
According  to  Jewish  tradition  the  armour-bearer  was  Doeg  the  Edomite  (ch.  xxii. 
18,  19),  "a  partner  before  of  his  master's  crimes,  and  now  of  his  pnnishment." 
"That  Saul  and  his  armour-bearer  died  by  the  same  sword  is,  I  think,  sufficiently 
evident.  '  Draw  thy  sword,'  says  he  to  him, '  and  thrust  me  through ; '  which  when 
he  refused,  'Saul  took  the  sworl  and  fell  upon  it.'  What  sword?  (Not  his  own, 
for  then  the  text  would  have  said  so.)  Why,  in  the  plain,  natural,  grammatical 
construction,  the  sword  before  mentioned  must  be  the  sword  now  referred  to,  that  is, 
the  armour-bearer's.  Saul  and  his  executioner  both  fell  by  that  very  weapon  with 
which  they  had  before  massacred  the  priests  of  God  "  (Delany). 

IV.  The  innocent  often  suffeb  along  with  the  guilty.  "  And  the  Philistines 
slew  Jonathan,"  &c.  (vers.  2 — 6).  It  is  impossible  not  to  lament  the  untimely  fate 
of  the  friend  of  David  and  of  God.  The  sins  of  the  father  were  visited  upon  the 
son.  But  let  it  be  considered  that-^l.  God  is  the  supreme  Proprietor  of  every 
human  life,  and  has  a  right  to  dispose  of  it  as  it  pleases  him.  Moreover,  "  death 
passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  sinned"  (Rom.  v.  12).  2.  He  has  united  men 
to  each  other  in  relations  more  or  less  intimate,  whereby  they  necessarily  affect  each 
other  for  good  as  well  as  for  eviL  3.  The  sufferings  of  the  godly,  in  consequence 
of  their  connection  with  the  wicked,  serve  many  beneficent  purposes.  The  death  of 
Jonathan  would  deepen  the  impression  of  the  severity  of  the  Divine  judgment  on  the 
house  of  Saul  for  disobedience,  and  be  a  perpetual  warning.  It  also  made  David's 
accession  to  the  throne  clearer  and  more  indisputable.  4.  The  godly  cannot  experi- 
ence the  worst  sufferings  of  the  wicked — remorse,  f earf ulness,  despair ;  and  if  some 
are  called  to  an  early  death  in  the  path  of  duty,  they  are  only  called  a  little  earlier 
than  others  to  their  inheritance  in  "  a  better  country,  that  is,  a  hearenly,"  ma  eternal 
kingdom. 

"  Joy  past  compare  ;  gladness  unutterable  ; 
Imperishable  life  of  peace  and  love ; 
Exhaustless  riches  and  unmeasured  bliss."  D. 

Vers.  7 — 10.  (OiLBOA. ) — The  chastisement  of  Isrci/d'  The  thunderstorm  of  which 
they  were  long  ago  warned  (ch.  xii.  18,  25)  had  now  burst  upon  the  people  of 
Israel.  Since  tho  capture  of  the  ark  they  had  not  experienced,  so  great  a  calamity, 
and  in  it  tlie  fatal  results  of  their  demand  for  a  king  were  made  manifest.  Although 
the  demand  was  evil,  it  contained  an  element  of  good,  and  was  complied  with  by 
God  in  judgment  mingled  with  mercy.  "  As  no  people  can  show  a  visible  theocracy, 
80  no  monarchy  can  be  accused,  simply  as  such,  of  usurping  the  Divine  prerogative. 
But  still  the  transaction  does  involve  a  moral  lesson,  which  lies  at  the  foundation  of 
all  sound  policy,  condemning  the  abandonment  of  principle  on  the  plea  of  expe- 
diency, and  pointing  by  the  example  of  Israel  the  doom  of  every  nation  that  seeks 
safety  and  power  in  a  course  known  to  be  wrong  "  (P.  Smith,  '  Ancient  History '). 
They  bad  their  own  way,  yet  the  purpose  of  God  was  not  defeated,  but  accomplished 
less  directly,  and  in  such  a  manner  as  to  convince  them  of  the  folly  of  their  devicee, 
and  exhibit  his  over-ruling  wisdom  and  power.  Whilst  they  pursued  their  course 
under  a  king  "  according  to  the  will  of  man,"  their  Divine  King  was  preparing  "  • 
man  after  his  own  heart  to  be  captain  over  his  people  "  (ch.  xiiL  14 ;  Acts  ziii.  38)> 


m.  xxM.  1—13.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  St» 


\\  hen  the  end  came  David  stood  ready  to  occupy  the  throne,  and,  after  a  brief  period 
St  conflict  and  confusion,  the  whole  nation,  taught  by  experience,  gladly  received 
hira  as  Its  ruler.  This  is  the  theocratic  "argument"  of  the  greater  port;ion  of  the 
LJook.     In  the  temble  defeat  of  Israel  we  see— 

I.  Thbir  idol  broken  in  pieces.  «  So  Saul  died,"  Ac.  "  The  men  of  Israel  fled, 
and  baul  and  his  sons  were  dead,"  &c.  (vers.  6,  7).  Men  are  apt  to  imagine  that 
Bomething  else  beyond  what  God  has  ordained  is  necessary  to  their  welfare,  to  be 
impatient  of  his  time,  to  attach  an  undue  value  to  the  expedients  which  in  their 
imperfect  knowledge  and  sinful  desires  they  devise,  to  set  their  hearts  upon  earthly 
and  visible  objects,  and  depend  upon  them  rather  than  upon  "  him  who  is  invisible.'^' 
This  tendency  finds  expression  in  many  ways,  and  embodies  itself  in  many  forms. 
And  although  God  may  permit  such  idols  to  continue  for  a  time,  he  always  over- 
throws them.  When  Israel  made  an  idol  of  the  ark  it  was  given  into  the  hands  of 
the  Philistines,  and  when  they  made  an  idol  of  "a  king"  (ch.  viii.  5)  he  was  slain. 
Their  hope  in  him  was  bitterly  disappointed,  and  inasmuch  as  he  was  (according  to 
Divine  prescience,  though  not  by  absolute  necessity  nor  without  personal  guilt)  a 
representation  and  reflection  of  their  sin  (worldliness,  formalism,  self-will),  they 
were  severely  punished  in  him  and  by  his  instrumentality.  How  little  did  they  gain, 
how  much  did  they  lose,  by  having  their  own  way  I  "  I  gave  thee  a  king  in  mine 
anger,  and  took  him  away  in  my  wrath  "  (Hosea  xiii.  11).  "Cease  ye  from  man.'&c. 

II.  Theib  cities  FOESAKlN.  "And  when  the  men  of  Israel  that  were  by  the  side 
of  the  plain  "  (west  of  the  central  branch  of  the  valley  of  Jezreel,  "  opposite  to  the 
place  of  conflict,  which  the  writer  assumed  as  his  standpoint " — Keil),  "  and  by  the 
Bide  of  the  Jordan  "  (east  of  the  plain,  between  Gilboa  and  the  Jordan),  "  saw  that  the 
men  of  Israel "  (who  were  engaged  in  the  battle)  "  fled,"  &c. "  they  forsook  the  cities ; 
and  the  Philistines  came  "  (from  that  time  onward)  "and  dwelt  in  them"  (so  thai 
the  whole  of  the  northern  part  of  the  land  fell  into  their  hands).  Instead  of  over- 
coming their  enemies,  they  were  overcome  by  them,  driven  from  their  homes,  reduced 
to  the  most  abject  condition,  and  without  any  prospect  of  regaining  by  their  own 
strength  their  lost  possessions.  "Your  country  is  desolate,"  &c.  (Isa.  i.  7).  The 
peaceful  government  of  Samuel  gave  them  prosperity  (ch.  vii.  13,  14)  ;  but  the  war- 
like rule  of  Saul,  which  they  preferred,  ended  in  their  overthrow.  "Sore  distressed," 
like  him  (ch.  xxviii.  16),  whither  should  they  turn  for  help  ?  Men  are  deprived  of 
all  hope  in  themselves  that  they  may  "  set  their  hope  in  God." 

III.  Their  enemies  triumphant.  "  And  it  came  to  pass  on  the  morrow  "  (after  the 
battle,  which  ended  at  nightfall)  "  when  the  Philistines  came,"  &c.  "  And  they  cut  ofl 
his  hold  {as  in  the  case  of  Goliath  of  Gath,  and  afterwards  deposited  it  in  the  temple 
of  Dagon,  in  Ashdod,  1  Chron.  x.  10;  ch.  v.  1),  and  sent  (messengers  bearing  his 
head  and  armour)  into  the  land  of  the  Philistines  round  about,  to  proclaim  the  good 
tidings  in  their  idol  temples  (to  their  idols)  and  among  the  people  (2  Sam.  i,  20). 
And  they  put  his  armour  in  the  house  of  Ashtaroth  (in  Askelon),  and  they  fastened 
his  bodif  to  the  wall  of  Bethshan  "  (Judges  i.  27).  It  has  been  remarked  of  the 
Philistines  that  '*  so  implacable  was  their  enmity  to  the  Israelites,  that  one  would  be 
almost  tempted  to  think  that  they  had  been  created  on  purpose  to  be  a  thorn  in  their 
sides  "  (Bussell,  'Connection,'  History  of  the  Philistines).  Their  victory  was  the 
victory  of  their  gods ;  the  defeat  of  Israel  the  dishonour  of  Jehovah.  Bather  than 
sanction  sin  in  his  people,  God  not  only  suffers  them  to  be  overthrown  by  their 
enemies,  but  even  his  own  name  to  be  for  a  while  despised  and  "  blasphemed  among 
the  heathen."    But  the  triumph  of  the  wicked  is  short  (2  Sam.  v.  17 — 25). 

IV.  Theib  true  strength  undesteoybd.  It  consisted  in  the  presence  and  power 
of  their  Divine  and  invisible  King ;  his  benevolent  and  unchangeable  purpose  con- 
cerning them  (ch.  xii.  22) ;  his  faithful,  praying,  obedient  subjects  in  their  midst, 
who  had  been  long  looking  to  David  as  his  chosen  "  servant,"  and  were  now  rallying 
round  him  daily  until  his  following  became  "a  great  host  like  the  host  of  God  '  (1 
Chron.  xii.  22).  There  was  an  "  Israel  after  the  flesh  "  (constituting  the  State),  and 
there  was  an  Israel  "  ^er  the  spirit "  (constituting  the  Church) ;  and  in  the  latter 
lay  "  the  power  of  an  endless  life."  Judgment  might  sweep  over  the  nation  like  a 
destroying  haiktorm,  and  leave  it  like  a  tree  bereft  of  all  its  leaves,  and  even  "  out 
it  down  *  to  the  ground.    Bat  its  true  life  would  be  spared,  woiud  be  tried  and 


670  THJS  MiBST  BOOK  OS  SAMUEL.  [uH.  xxxi.  1—13. 

purified  by  a£3iction,  and  become  a  source  of  renewed  power  and  greater  glorj,  "  Aa 
a  teil  tre^  and  as  an  oak,  whose  substance  is  in  them,  when  they  cast  their  leaves : 
■0  the  holy  seed  snail  be  the  guhstance  thereof  "  (Isa.  t1.  13 ;  i.  9 ;  Ixv.  8). 

OhitrvalioM : — 1.  That  which  is  wrongly  desired  as  an  instrument  of  good  becomes 
when  obtained  an  instrument  of  evil.  2.  Men  may  have  their  own  way  apparently 
in  opposition  to  the  way  of  God,  but  his  purpose  does  not  change,  and  he  knows 
how  to  carry  it  into  effect.  3.  The  people  who  sanction  the  sins  of  their  rulers 
justly  share  their  punishment.  4.  When  the  people  of  God  expect  to  prevail  against 
their  enemies  by  adopting  their  sinful  policy  (ch.  viii.  20),  they  are  certain  to  be 
ultimately  defeated.  6.  The  suffering  and  humiliation  that  follow  sin  are  the  most 
effectual  means  of  its  correction.  6.  The  hope  of  a  nation  in  the  day  of  trouble 
lies  in  its  praying,  believing,  godly  men.  7.  God  over-rules  all  things,  including 
the  sins  and  sorrows  of  his  people,  for  the  establishment  of  his  kingdom  upon  earth 
(ch.  ii  10).— D. 

Vera.  11 — 13.  (Bethshan,  Jabesh-Gilead.) — Gratitude.  The  first  victory  of  Saul 
(ch.  li.)  is  connected  with  his  death  by  the  noble  exploit  of  tiie  men  of  Jabesli.  It 
was  due  partly  to  loyalty  and  patriotism  ;  chiefly  to  gratitude  for  benefits  formerly  con- 
ferred upon  tliem.  It  is  seldom  that  any  one  closes  his  earthly  course  without  some 
token  of  grateful. remembrance.  Of  one  of  the  worst  tyrants  that  ever  held  the  reins 
of  power  in  Rome  (Nero),  it  is  recorded  that  on  the  morning  after  he  was  buried 
amidst  general  execration  fresh  flowers  were  found  strewn  by  an  unknown  hand 
upon  his  grave.  Saul  had  done  many  generous  deeds,  and  they  were  not  forgotten. 
The  gratitude  of  the  men  of  Jabesh  was  marked  by  many  admirable  features.  It 
was — 1.  Unexpected.  Who  would  have  thought  that  the  city  which  was  so  faithless 
and  cowardly  as  to  say  to  Nahash,  "  Make  a  covenant  with  us,  and  we  will  serve 
thee,"  could  have  furnished  such  an  instance  of  devotion  ?  The  noblest  qualities 
sometimes  appear  in  association  with  the  meanest,  and  where  men  expect  to  find  no 
good  thing.  Let  us  not  despise  our  nature,  nor  think  that  at  its  worst  it  is  wholly 
incapable  of  generous  acts.  2.  Lang-cherished.  It  was  many  years  previously  that 
Jabesh  had  been  saved  by  Saul ;  but  its  grateful  feeling  had  not  (as  is  sometimes 
the  case)  grown  cold  with  the  lapse  of  time.  When  a  philosopher  was  asked,  "  what 
doth  soonest  grow  cold?"  he  replied,  "Thanks."  3.  Spontaneous.  No  special  appeal 
was  made  to  them ;  but  perceiving  that  they  could  do  something  to  testify  their 
gratitude  to  their  benefactor  by  rescuing  his  remains  from  the  indignity  to  which 
they  were  subjected,  "  11  the  valiant  men  arose  "  of  their  own  accord,  "  and  went  all 
night"  (a  distance  of  ten  miles,  across  the  Jordan)  and  accomplished  it.  Gratitude 
loses  its  proper  character  and  ceases  to  be  gratitude  when  it  requires  to  be  solicited 
and  urged.  4.  Disinterested.  Saul  and  his  sons  were  dead,  and  no  reward  for  their 
daring  effort  might  be  expected.  It  was  performed  in  somewhat  of  the  same  spirit 
as  that  with  which  Saul  himself  foimerly  acted  ;  what  was  best  in  his  life  was  re- 
membered and  admired  by  them  (as  it  was  by  David,  2  Sam.  i.  23),  and  it  aeived  to 
stir  them  to  similar  excellence.     Disinterested  conduct  begets  its  like. 

"  Good  deeds  immortal  are — ^they  cannot  die  ; 
Unscathed  by  envious  blight  or  withering  frost, 
They  live,  and  bud,  and  bloom  ;  and  men  partake 
StUl  of  their  freshness,  and  are  strong  thereby  "  (Aytoilll)L 

6.  Heroic  and  self-sacrificing ;  exhibited  practically  and  at  the  risk  of  life,  and  dis- 
playing great  energy  and  valour.  "The  pillars  of  fire  of  genuine  human  heroism 
are  the  noble  lights  of  history,  which  make  us  feel  at  ease  while  sojourning  among 
spectres,  and  horrors,  and  graves"  (Lange).  6.  Complete.  It  did  not  stop  short  of 
doing  its  best.  "  They  took  their  bones,  and  buried  them  under  the  tamarisk  at 
Jabesh,  and  fasted  seven  days  "  (ver.  13 ;  2  Sam.  xzi.  14).  They  could  do  no  more  ; 
and  what  they  did  was  done  tenderly,  mournfully,  reverently,  and  in  fulfilment  of  a 
sacred  custom  and  religious  duty. 

Exhortation : — 1.  Endeavour  so  to  live  that  when  you  are  gone  you  may  be  remem- 
bered with  gratitude,  and  leave  behind  the  recollection  of  good  deeds  which  may 
incite  others  to  the  like.    2.  Fail  not  to  render  gratitoda  to  aveiy  one  who  hai 


n.  XXXI.  1— IS.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  fll 


mi^rred  a  benefit  upon  jon  in  the  best  way  you  can;  be  thankfnl,  eBpeoiaDy  t» 
God,  for  all  his  benefits  towards  yon.     "Nothing  more  detestable  does  the  earth 

Eroduce  than  an  ungrateful  man  "  (Ausonius).  8.  Seek  above  all  things  t»  obtain  ia 
fe  and  death  the  honour  that  comes  from  God.  "  This  Book  began  with  Samuel's 
birth,  and  now  ends  with  Saul's  burial,  the  comparing  of  which  together  will  teaoh 
ns  to  prefer  the  honour  which  comes  from  God  before  any  hononis  of  which  this 
world  pretends  to  dispose  "  (M.  Henry). — D. 

Ch.  xxxi. — Saul  of  Oibecih,  and  Saul  of  Tarsus.  It  is  instmctiye  to  compare  the 
characters  of  difEerent  men  with  each  other.  This  is  done  by  Plutarch  in  his  Lives  of 
celebrated  Greeks  and  Bomans ;  and  it  may  be  done  with  advantage  in  the  case  of 
some  of  the  characters  described  in  the  Scriptures.  There  was  an  interval  of  a 
thousand  years  between  Saul  of  Gibeah  and  Saul  of  Tarsus,  "  who  also  is  called  Paul " 
(Acts  xiii.  9).  But  if  we  look  at  them  attentively,  "  and  examine  the  several  parts 
of  their  lives  distinctly,  as  we  do  a  poem  or  a  picture"  (Plutarch),  we  shall  find  in 
these  two  illustrious  Hebrews,  the  one  under  the  Old  Covenant,  the  other  under  the 
New — 

I.  Resemblanck  in  their — 1.  Ancestral  relation,  religious  privileges,  and  outward 
circumstances.  Both  belonged  to  "  the  tribe  of  Benjamin  "  (Acts  xiii.  21 ;  Phil,  iii 
5),  received  the  name  of  Saul  when  "  circumcised  the  eighth  day,"  were  brought  up 
"  under  the  law,"  after  early  years  of  obscure  diligence  held  important  public  posi- 
tions,— the  one  as  first  king  of  Israel,  the  other  as  a  "  chosen  vessel"  unto  the  Lord, 
to  bear  his  name  "  before  the  Gentiles,  and  kings,  and  the  people  of  Israel "  (Acts 
ix.  15), — lived  a  long  life  (over  sixty  years),  and  died  a  sudden  and  violent  death. 
2.  Natural  qualities:  passionate,  impulsive,  warlike,  zealous,  daring  even  to  rash- 
ness, resolute,  persistent ;  inherited  from  their  common  ancestor,  of  whom  it  was 
said, "  Benjamin  as  a  wolf  shall  ravin,"  &c.  (Gen.  xlix.  27) ;  and  characteristic  of  their 
tribe,  as  appears  in  Ehud  (Judges  iii.  15).  The  Apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  "  in  the 
prompt  audacities  of  his  apostolic  career,  does  not  allow  us  to  forget  of  what  tribe  he 
was.  3.  Sudden  conversion:  the  one  on  the  way  to  Gibeah,  on  beholding  "  a  com- 
pany of  the  prophets  "  (ch.  x.)  ;  the  other  on  the  way  to  Damascus,  overcome  by  the 
glorious  revelation  of  the  Lord  (Acts  ix. ),  whose  followers  he  was  persecuting ;  a 
startling  surprise  to  all,  and  the  commencement  of  a  difEerent  course  of  life.  "Is 
Saul  also  among  the  prophets  ?  "  "  They  were  all  afraid  of  him,  and  believed  not 
that  he  was  a  disciple."  4.  Energetic  enterprises,  to  which  they  were  called  by 
the  Divine  Spirit,  on  behalf  of  the  kingdom  of  God  against  its  adversaries ;  in 
the  one  case  with  the  sword,  in  the  other  with  the  word  (ch.  zi. ;  Acts  ziL  26 ;  xiii 
1—3). 

II.  CoNTBABT  in  still  more  numerous  particulars.  They  were  the  •ppoeite  of 
each  other ;  as  in  physical  appearance  and  mental  culture,  so  also  in  their — 1.  Ex- 
traordinary change,  which  in  the  one  was  partial,  superficial,  and  temporary ;  fai  the 
other  complete,  deep,  and  enduring.  2.  Real  character.  The  one  lived  unto  himself, 
and  did  not  freely  and  fully  surrender  himself  to  the  Divine  will ;  the  other  lived 
unto  the  Lvrd,  not  being  disobedient  to  the  heavenly  vision  (Acts  xxvi.  19 ;  Gal.  i. 
16;  PhiL  i.  21).  3.  Gradual  progress:  in  the  one  case,  after  brilliant  promise, 
downward,  ill  "  pride,  caprice,  jealousy,  cruelty,  excusive  avenging  of  himself,  and 
«t  last  open  contempt  and  defiance  of  God ; "  in  the  other  upward,  in  heavenly- 
mindedness,  spiritual  power,  and  higher  usefulness.  4.  Fierce  persecution.  "The 
second  Saul  for  a  while  followed  only  too  faithfully  in  the  footsteps  of  the  first.  If 
the  one  persecuted  David,  the  other,  with  an  energy  of  hate  that  did  not  fall  short  of 
his,  David's  greater  Son.  Presently,  however,  their  lives  divide,  and  one  is  the 
Saul  of  reprobation,  the  other  of  election "  (Trench).  The  latter  began  where  the 
former  ended  (Gal.  i.  23),  and  became  himself  an  object  of  the  persecution  in  which 
he  once  shared.  5.  Representative  relation.  The  one  represented,  embodied,  and  pro- 
moted what  was  worst  in  his  tribe  and  nation,  the  other  what  was  best.  6.  Tragical 
end :  the  one  in  despair  by  his  own  hand,  the  other  in  glorious  hope  as  a  martyr  of 
Christ  (2  Tim.  iv.  6 — 8).  7.  Lasting  memorial :  the  one  is  a  warning,  the  other  is 
hpattem  (1  Tim.  i.  16;  Phil.  iii.  17).  The  second  Saul  was  "the  likeness  in  the 
Christian  Church"  not  so  much  of  what  the  first  was  as  of  "what  he  might  have 


672  THE  FIBST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  [oh.  xxxi.  1—13 

been — ^tha  trne  David,  restorer  and  enlarger  of  the  tnie  kingdom  of  Ood  upon 
earth"  (Stanley). 

IIL  Inbtbuction.  1.  Religious  advantages  and  eminent  positions  are  of  no  real 
benefit  unless  they  be  rightly  used.  2,  The  natural  qualities  which  make  one  man 
a  power  for  evil,  make  another,  when  sanctified,  a  power  for  good.  3.  The  heart 
must  be  right  with  God  in  order  to  a  'proper  use  of  his  gifts  and  a  worthy 
course  of  life.  "If  the  heart  be  not  upright,  whatever  favourable  beginnings  there 
may  be,  there  cannot  be  a  uniform  perseverance  in  goodneiss  or  any  happy  con- 
clusion" (Robinson).  4.  Divine  grace  when  persistently  resisted  is  withdrawn, 
leaving  the  soul  a  prey  to  the  "  evil  spirit ; "  when  humbly  and  faithfully  received,  is 
followed  by  more  grace.  6.  In  proportion  as  a  man  lives  to  himself  or  to  God  he 
becomes  weak,  sinful,  and  miserable,  or  strong,  holy,  and  happy.  6.  There  is  no 
standing  still  in  moral  life ;  if  men  do  not  become  better  they  infallibly  become 
worse.  7.  As  a  man  lives  so  he  dies.  "Think  of  the  end  of  Saul  of  Gibeah,  and 
learn  in  time  to  be  wise."  Think  of  the  end  of  Saol  of  Taraus,  and  "be  faithful 
unto  death." — D. 

Vers.  3 — 6. — The  bitter  end.   The  tragic  element,  so  oonspicuons  in  this  hiatoiy,  it 

intense  in  the  last  scene  of  all. 

I.  Saul's  death.  1.  His  despair.  When  the  battle  went  against  him,  and  the 
Philistines,  keeping  beyond  reach  of  his  long  arm  and  terrible  sword,  hit  him  from 
a  distance  with  their  arrows,  the  king's  spirit  suddenly  failed  and  died  within  him. 
"  He  trembled  sore  because  of  the  archers."  Always  fitful  in  his  moods,  liable  to 
sudden  elation  and  sudden  depression,  he  gave  up  tdl  for  lost.  He  would  not  flee, 
but  he  wwuld  fight  no  more.  Probably  the  horrible  recollection  of  the  wordi  spoken 
to  LIm  by  the  spectre  at  Endor  increased  his  despair,  and  he  thought  only  how  to 
die.  2.  His  pride.  Saul  had  never  shown  much  regard  for  the  sacredness  of 
human  life,  but  he  cherished  a  most  exalted  sense  of  the  sacredness  of  his  own  person 
as  the  Lord's  anointed.  No  descendant  of  a  long  line  of  so-styled  Christian  or  Catholic 
sovereigns  has  held  a  loftier  claim  of  personal  inviolability.  So  he  resolved  that  no 
heathen  should  cut  him  down  in  battle.  Anything  rather  than  this.  If  his  armour- 
bearer  would  not  kill  him,  he  would  kill  himself.  3.  His  suicide.  With  all  his  horror 
of  being  slain  by  a  heathen,  Saul  died  like  a  heathen — dismissed  himself  from  life 
after  the  manner  of  the  pagan  heroes ;  not  with  any  sanction  from  the  word  of  God 
or  the  history  of  his  servants.  (Illustrate  from  the  stories  of  Brutus  and  Cassias  and 
the  younger  Cato.)  The  only  instance  of  what  can  be  called  self-destruction  among 
the  men  of  Israel  prior  to  the  days  of  Saul  was  that  of  Samson,  and  his  was  a 
self-devotion  for  the  destruction  of  his  country's  enemies  which  ranks  with  the 
heroism  of  one  dying  in  battle  rather  than  with  cases  of  despairing  suicide.  There 
is  a  case  after  the  days  of  Saul,  viz.,  that  of  Ahithophel,  who,  in  a  fit  of  deep  cha- 
grin, deliberately  hanged  himself.  To  the  servants  of  God  suicide  most  always  appear 
as  a  form  of  murder,  and  one  that  implies  more  cowardice  than  courage.  English 
law  regards  it  as  a  very  gp-ave  crime,  and  to  mark  this  our  old  statutes,  unable  to 
punish  the  self-murderer,  assigned  to  his  body  ignominious  burial  It  is,  however, 
the  charitable  custom  of  our  times  to  assume  that  one  who  kills  himself  must  be 
bereft  of  rebson,  and  so  to  hold  him  morally  irresponsible.  Apology  of  this  kind 
may  be  pleaded  for  King  Saul,  and  pity  for  his  disordered  brain  takes  away  the 
sliarpness  from  our  censure.  Still  we  must  not  overlook— 4.  The  admonition  which 
his  death  amveys-  Saul  had  really  prepared  for  himself  this  wretched  death.  He 
had  disregarded  the  prophet,  and  so  was  without  consolation.  He  had  killed  th« 
priests,  and  so  was  without  sacrifice  or  intercession.  He  had  driven  away  David, 
and  so  was  without  the  help  of  the  best  soldier  in  the  nation,  a  leader  of  600  men 
inoied  to  service  and  familiar  with  danger.  He  had  lived,  in  his  later  years 
at  least,  like  a  madman;  and,  like  a  madman,  he  threw  himself  on  his  sword 
and  died.  Here  lies  admonition  for  us.  As  a  man  sows  he  reaps.  As  a  life 
is  shaped,  so  is  the  death  determined.  We  speak  of  the  penalty  on  evil-doers,  but  it 
is  no  mere  arbitrary  infliction ;  it  is  the  natural  fruit  and  necessary  result  of  the  mis- 
condnot  One  leads  a  sensual  life,  and  the  penalty  on  him  is  that  of  exhaustion, 
disease,  and  premature  decay.    One  leads  a  selfish  life,  hardening  his  heart  against 


€■.  xixi.  1—18.]  THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL.  »7I 

appeal  or  reproach,  and  his  doom  is  to  lose  all  power  and  experience  of  empathy, 
to  pass  through  the  world  winning  no  love,  and  pass  out  of  the  world  drawing  aftei 
him  no  regpret. 

II.  Jonathan's  death.  1.  lu  innocence.  Look  at  the  pious,  generous  prince,  aa 
well  as  the  proud  and  wilful  king,  slain  on  that  woeful  day.  A  man  who  loves  God 
and  whom  God  loves  may  he  innocently  involved  in  a  cause  which  is  bound  to  fail. 
It  may  be  by  ties  of  family,  or  by  official  position  which  he  cannot  renounce  ;  and, 
unable  to  check  the  fatal  course  of  his  comrades,  he  is  dragged  down  in  the  common 
catastrophe.  Jonathan  died  in  the  same  battle  with  his  father,  but  not  as  his  father 
died.  Let  us  remember  that  men  are  so  involved  with  one  another  in  the  world,  in 
ways  quite  defensible,  sometimes  unavoidable,  that  as  one  may  share  the  success  of 
another  without  deserving  any  part  of  the  praise,  so  also  may  one  share  the  downfall 
of  others  without  being  at  all  to  blame  for  the  courses  or  transactions  which  brought 
about  the  disastrous  issue.  2.  Its  timelinest.  The  death  of  Jonathan,  occurring 
when  it  did,  brought  more  advantage  to  the  nation  than  his  continued  life  could 
possibly  have  rendered.  It  opened  the  way  for  David's  succession  to  the  throne. 
Had  Jonathan  survived  his  father,  he  might  have  been  willing  to  cede  the  succession 
to  David,  but  it  is  not  at  all  probable  that  the  people  would  have  allowed  his  obviona 
claim  to  be  set  aside,  and  any  conflict  between  the  partisans  of  two  such  devoted 
friends  would  have  been  most  painful  to  both.  So  it  was  well  ordered  and  well 
rimed  that  Jonathan  died  as  a  brave  soldier  in  the  field.  He  missed  an  earthly 
throne  indeed,  but  he  gained  all  the  sooner  a  heavenly  home.  So  is  it  with  many  a 
death  which  seems  to  be  sad  and  untimely.  A  man  of  God  cannot  lose  by  dying. 
To  die  is  gain.  But  he  may  by  dying  advance  the  cause  of  God  more  than  he  could  bj 
living,  His  departure  may  clear  the  ground  for  other  arrangements  under  Divia« 
providor.oe,  for  which  the  time  is  ripe,  or  open  the  way  for  some  one  who  is  choMS 
«ad  called  to  4o  »  work  for  God  and  man  that  must  no  longer  be  delayed. — V. 


HOMILETICAL  INDEX  TO 

THE  FIRST  BOOK  OF  SAMUEL. 


CHAPTER  I. 

CHAPTER  m. 

taxxm 

FAai 

THEMB 

PAOI 

Traasitions 

8 

Light  Withheld  . . 

.      67 

Domestic  Troubles        <     . . 

6 

Lowly  Instruments 

.      70 

A  Hebrew  Family 

7 

Call  to  Higher  Service 

.      71 

Public  Worsbip  .. 

9 

Privileges  and  Cares 

.      73 

Tbe  Lord  of  Hosts 

10 

Diverse  Experiences 

.      74 

Trial  Sanctified        . .         L . 

13 

The  Old  Priest  and  the  Child-Prophet      76 

Character  Misjudged 

15 

Samuel's  Call  to  the  Prophetic  Office      78 

Conjugal  Sympathy 

16 

The  Faithful  Servant 

.      80 

The  Temple  of  the  LoTd     . . 

18 

Parental  Restraint 

.      81 

Effectual  Prayer  . . 

19 

Resignation 

.      83 

Vows      .. 

20 

Samuel  the  Prophet 

.      88 

O^ndeserved  Rebuke 

SI 

Harsh  Judgment  Meekly  Answered 

23 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Samuel's  Birth  and  Infancy 

34 

Moral  Causes  of  Disaster   . . 

.      87 

Unexpected  Coincidences  . . 

.      89 

Victory  in  Defeat 

.      90 

CHAPTER  II. 

Neutralised  Usefulness 

.      93 

Salvation 

37 

Ichabod  . . 

.      93 

Rejoicing  in  the  Lord 

The  Prayer-Song  of  Hannah 

The  Rock  of  Israel 

81 
84 
85 

Judgment  Inflicted  on  Israel 
The  Inquiry  of  the  AflSicted 
Symbol  and  Spiritual  Truth 

.  95 
.  97 
.      98 

The  Divine  Judgment  of  Human 

The  Ark  Misplaced  and  Lost 

.      93 

Actions             - . 

80 

The  Judgment  of  God  on  the  Judge 

GFod's  Guardianship  of  EQs  Saints   . . 
The  King  Messiah 

87 

88 

of  Israel 
Ichabod  . . 

.  100 
.     100 

Degenerate  Sons  . . 

41 

CHAPTER  V. 

Great  Sinners 

43 

Foreshadowings  .. 

.    108 

routhful  Piety    .. 

44 

Coercive  Providences 

,     105 

Faith's  Symbols  . . 

46 

The  Ark  among  the  Heathen 

.     106 

Solid  Character    . , 

48 

The  Overthrow  of  Idolatry 

.    109 

Abandoned 

49 

Infatuation 

.     110 

Samuel's  Childhood  and  Orowth    . . 

51 

A  Degenerate  Priesthood  . . 

63 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Ineffective  Reproof 

64 

Seeking  Light     .. 

.    114 

Impending  Retribution     . .            . . 

58 

Restored  Blessings 

.    116 

A  Message  of  Approaching  Judgment 

61 

Trophies  and  Chastisement 

.    117 

Honour  and  Dishonour 

63 

The  Return  of  the  Ark      . . 

.    118 

OfiBce  Nothing  wi  bout  Character  .. 

63 

The  Ark  in  Harvest 

119 

A  Faithful  Priest 

64 

Irreverence 

12C 

u 


INDEX. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

THIMK  rASE 

FitnesB  for  Service              .  •  . .  125 

DivlDe  Reserve    . .            .  •  •  •  136 

Ebenezer  ..  ..  ..127 

First-fruits  of  Repentance  ..  ..  129 

Steps  of  Return  to  God     . .  . .  130 

A  National  Revival  ..  ..181 

Confession  of  Sin  . .            . .  . .  183 

The  Victory  of  Ebeneier   . .  . .  184 

The  Stone  of  Help  ..  ..186 

Samuel  the  Judge              . .  . .  187 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Discontent  with  Qod's  Methods  . .  145 

Permitted,  not  Approved  . .  . .  148 

Ignoble  Sons  of  an  Honoured  Father  150 

Israel's  Desire  for  a  King  . .  . .  151 

The  Popular  Desire  for  a  King  . .  152 

The  Benefit  of  Prayer        ..  ..155 

The  Unwise  Demand  Qranted  . .  166 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Divine  Consideration         . .  . .  161 

Man's  Accidents  God's  OrdlDations  162 

Shadows  of  Coming  Events  . .  164 

Interest  in  Public  Affiiirs  . .  . .  166 

The  King  Drsired  by  the  People    . .  166 

Perplexity  ..  ..  ..169 

Guests  at  a  Sacred  Feast   . .  . .  170 

Saul  Privately  Anointed  King  . .  172 

The  Man,  yet  not  the  Man  . .  178 

CHAPTER  X. 

Supports  to  Faith  and  Duty  . .  177 

Another  Man       . .            . ,  . .  179 

Limitations  of  Prerogative  . .  180 

The  Reasonableness  of  Incongraitles  181 

Wise  Reticence   . .            . .  . .  183 

A  Company  of  Prophets    . .  . .  184 

Saul  among  the  Prophets  . .  . .  185 

Inqulsitiveness     . ,            . .  . .  186 

Casting  the  Lot  in  Life      ..  ..189 

Sympathy  and  Disparagement  . .  191 

Saul  Publicly  Chosen         . .  . .  192 

God  Save  the  King            . .  . .  194 

Friends  and  Opponents  in  Godly  En- 

terprise             ..            ..  ..  195 

Illusive  Presages  . .           . .  . .  196 

CHAPTER  XL 

The  Relative  Power  of  Evil  and  Good  199 

The  Perfecting  Oifl           . .  . .  201 


THEMS  TkQM 

The   Concurrence    of    Human  and 

Divine  Action  . .            . .  . .     202 

Saul's  First  Victory           ..  ..204 

Generosity  toward  Enemies  . .     206 

Saul  at  his  Best   .              ..  ..207 

CHAPTER  Xn. 
Character  a  Power             .  . .     211 
The  Immutable  Condition  of  Well- 
being  . .            . .            . .  . .    213 

The  Outward  Sign            ..  ..213 

Samuel's  Admonitions  to  Israel  . .    216 

Piety  in  Old  Age               ..  ..219 

Integrity  in  Public  Office  . .  . .    221 

Doctrine  in  History            . .  . .     221 

Intercessory  Prayer           . .  . .     233 

The  Good  and  Right  Way  ..     224 

The  Good  Man's  Weapons  . .     226 

CHAPTER  XHL 

The  Great  Antagonism     . .  . .    230 

Representative  Temptations  . .    281 

The  Ramifications  of  Evil . .  . .    234 

The  Trumpet  Sounded      ..  ..335 

The  First  Wrong  Step       . .  . .     287 

A  Man  after  God's  own  Heart  . .     289 

Under  the  Heel  of  the  Oppressor  . .    340 

Tried  and  Found  Wanting  . .     241 

CHAPTER  XrV. 

Inspiration  in  Christian  Enterprise    246 

God's  Faithfulness  to  His  own  . .    249 
Unwise  Zeal  and  Moral  Obtnseness    260 

The  Heroism  of  Jonathan  ..  ..     269 

Rashness      '        . .            . .  . .     264 

Seeking  Counsel  of  God  and  Keeping 

One's  Word      ..            ..  ..257 

Gradation  in  Service          . .  . .     359 

Drawing  Near  to  God        . .  . .     361 

Remonstrance  with  Rulers  . .     263 

Co-operation  with  God      . .  . .     263 

Saul's   Sovereignty   and  Wars,  his 

Army  and  Family          . .  . .     269 

The  Restless  King             . .  . .     268 

CHAPTER  XV. 

God's  Terrible  Acts            ..  ..269 

The  Limits  of  Patience      ..  ..973 

The  Sin  of  Rebellion          . .  . .     278 
Conviction  of  Sin  not  Repentance   . .     275 


INDEX. 


iii 


Painful  Duties     . .            . .  . .  277 

A  Probationary  CommiBsion  . .  278 

Come  out  from  among  them  . .  280 

Samuel's  Intercession  for  Saul  . .  280 

Excuses  for  Disobedience  . .  . .  282 

The  Sentence  of  Rejection  . .  ..  288 

Insincere  Confession  of  Sin  . .  285 

The  Unchangeable  One  of  Israel  . .  287 

The  Execution  of  Agag     . .  . .  288 

A  Melancholy  Parting       . .  . .  289 

Recalled  to  the  Path  of  Duty  . .  290 

Samuel  a  Man  of  Sorrows  . .  . .  292 

Tried  again  and  Rejected  . .  . .  292 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

The  Progression  of  Providence  . .  298 
Human  and  Divine  Judgments  Con- 

traated  ..  ..  ..299 

The  Coming  King  ..  ..801 

Disquietude  Caused  by  Sin  . .  808 
David's  Parentage  and  Education  . .  805 
David  Chosen  and  Anointed  . .  807 
God's  Regard  to  the  Heart  . .  808 
Mental  and  Moral  Effects  of  Trans- 
gression           . .            . .  . .  809 

Setting  out  in  Life             . .  . .  810 

The  Soothing  Influence  of  Music  . .  311 

The  Chosen  One  . .            . .  . .  312 

The  King  and  the  Minstrel  . .  314 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

Aggression  not  Defence     . .  . .  818 

Co-operation  in  Spiritual  Warfare  . .  819 

Israel  Smitten  with  Fear  . .  . .  821 

Parental  Solicitude            . .  . .  822 

A  Religious  Man's  View  of  Things  . .  826 

Reasonable  Confidence  in  God  . .  837 

Naturalness          . .            . .  . .  829 

The  Governing  Principle  of  Life  . .  830 

Unknown  and  yet  Well  Known  . .  832 

Self-Conquest       ..  ..  ..332 

Faith's  Argument  from  Experience  834 

David's  Conflict  with  Goliath  . .  835 

The  Battle  is  the  Lord's    . .  . .  337 

Three  Victories  in  One  Day  . .  887 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

rieligiouB  Friendship         . .  . .  342 

Some  Dangers  of  Persistent  Sin  . .  344 

The  Disturbing -Power  of  Goodness  345 

The  Plot  and  its  Lessons  . .  . .  347 

David's  Life  at  Court         . .  849 


TUEUB  rxei 

True  Friendship  . .  . .  . .  850 

Divine  Friendship  . .  . .  853 

Envy      . .  . .  . .  . .  858 

Simplicity  ..  ..  ..854 

Love  and  Jealousy  . .  . .  86S 

David  Proved  and  Tried    . .  . .  857 

CHAPTER  XIX. 
Open  Enmity  and  Open  Friendship  863 
Revived  Sins  and  Troubles              . .  364 
Saintly   Refuge  and   Spiritual  Re- 
straint             . .            . .            . .  860 

The  Proof  of  True  Friendship         . .  868 

David's  Escape  from  Court  .'.  860 

Michal 870 

Samuel  the  President        . .  . .  871 

The  Meeting  of  Three  Remarkable 
Men    ..  ..  ..  ..873 

Religious  Consolation  and  Religions 
Excitement      ..  ..  ..374 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Endangered  Life  and  Reputation    . .  378 

The  Spring  of  Self.Sacriflce  . .  881 

The  Intercourse  of  Friends  . .  388 

Only  a  Step         883 

A  Covenant  of  Friendship  . .  . .  884 

Mortal  Peril         885 

Wasted  Influences,  Muffled  Thoughts, 

and  Conflicting  Interests  . .  388 

Warning  in  Danger  . .  . .  390 

Anger     . .  . .  . .  .  ■  393 

An  Obedient  Lad..  ..  ..393 

The  Parting  of  Friends     ..  ..898 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

Weakness  in  Embarrassment  . .  897 

Uncertain  Light  . .  . .  . .  899 

Deceit 401 

The  Sins  of  Good  Men       . .  . .  403 

The  Letter  and  the  Spirit  . .  . .  403 

The  Sword  of  Goliath        . .  . .  405 

The  Fear  of  Man  . .  . .  . .  406 

The  Letter  of  the  Law  Violated      . .  407 
The  Hero  Unheroic           ..            ..409 

CHAPTER  XXn. 

Difficult  Circumstances      . .  . .  413 

Resistance  to  God's  Purposes  . .  416 

The  Tragedy  at  Nob  . .  . .  418 

David's  Refuge  and  Following        . .  420 

Filial  Kindness    . .  . .  433 

Awaiting  the  Future  .  . .  438 


INDKX. 


THBKB  rAOB 

A  Summons  to  Duty         . .            . .  433 

Tbe  Tyranny  of  Saul         ..  ..434 

Doeg  the  Edomite  . .  ..420 

Ckinscience            . .            . .            . .  437 

Tbe  DefendeT  of  the  Persecuted      . .  427 

Tbe  Cave  of  Adullam        . .            . .  428 

Massacre  and  Safeguard    . .            . .  430 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Deference  to  the  Divine  Will           . .  433 

Misinterpretation  and  Miscalculation  437 

Undeveloped  Tendencies   . .             . .  439 

Public  Spirit        ..  ..  ..442 

Answers  to  Prayer                             . .  443 
Deepening   Sorrows   and   New  En- 

couragement     . .             . .             . .  446 

The  TTnobserved  Side  of  Life           . .  449 

David's  Wanderingsin  the  Wilderness  453 

Tbe  Benefit  of  True  Friendship      . .  453 

Treachery             . .            . .            . .  465 

A  Marvellous  Escape         . .            . .  456 

Sweet  Counsel  in  Time  of  Need      . .  457 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Instruction  in  Caves          . .            . .  461 
Discrimination  in  Relation  to  Men, 

Truth,  and  Vocation      . .            . .  465 
Tenderness    Transitory    and    Truth 

Suppressed       . .            . .            . .  467 

David's  Forbearance  toward  Saul   . .  469 

Calumny              . .            . .            . .  470 

A  Proverb  of  the  Ancients  . .             . .  471 

The  Goodness  of  Bad  Men..             ,.  473 

Evil  Overcome  by  Good     . .            . .  473 

CHAPTER  XXV. 
Honour  to  tbe  Dead  and  Insult  to  the 
Living  ..  ..  ..479 

Creed  and  Practice             . .            . .  4&3 

Wise  Persuasiveness         . .            , .  484 

Restraining  Mercy              . .             . .  435 

Contrast,  Patience,  and  Domestic  Ties  468 

Samuel's  Death  and  Burial              . .  488 

David's  Activity  and  Advancement  490 

The  Prosperous  Fool         . .            . .  491 

Masters  and  Servants        . .            , .  493 
Abigail  . .            . .            . .            .493 

The  Bundle  of  Life            . .            . .  494 

Moral  Restraints  . .            . ,            . .  494 

The  Bundle  of  Life  and  the  Sling   ..  496 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

The  Mora]  Use  of  Biblical  Difficulties  500 


THEMB 

rAoi 

Afflictions  and  Righteousness 

..     503 

The  Man  Worthy  of  the  Sceptre 

.     504 

Manliness 

..     506 

David's  Last  Meeting  with  Saul 

..     506 

Playing  the  Fool  . . 

..     609 

A  Fool  Returns  to  his  Folly 

..     509 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

Loss  of  Faith 

..     513 

The  Perils  of  Expediency  . . 

.     614 

Unbelief  and  its  Unworthy  Device 

.     515 

Despondency 

.     517 

David's  Residence  among  the  Philis- 

tines  . . 

.     619 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

The  Operation  of  Moral  Causes 

.     534 

Man's  Appeal  from  God  to  Man 

.     526 

The  Last  Fruitless  Effort  . . 

.     528 

Darkening  Shadows  of  Retribution    531 

Resorting  to  Superstitious  Practices    533 

Samuel's  Counsel  Vainly  Desired 

.     534 

The  Sentence  of  Rejection  Confirmed    635 

The  Witch  of  Endor 

.     537 

A  God.forsaken  Man 

.     533 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

The  Counteractions  of  Providence  . 

.     541 

Escape  from  Danger 

.     543 

A  Good  Man  in  Bad  Company 

.     544 

Achish 

.     546 

A  False  Position  . . 

.     546 

CHAPTER  XXX. 

The  Spiritual  Uses  of  Calamity 

.     550 

The  Consequences  of  Kindness 

.     553 

The  Law  of  Service 

.     654 

Confidence  in  God 

.     556 

An  Egyptian  Slave 

.     558 

The  Fruits  of  Victory 

.    659 

Faith  Reviving  in  Distress 

.    660 

CHAPTER  XXXL 

Judgment  at  Last  . .  . .  663 

The  Final  Issues  of  Life  a  Criterion 

of  Worth  . .  . .  . .  664 

The  Death  of  Saul  . .  . .  666 

The  Chastisement  of  Israel  . .  568 

Gratitude  . .  . .  . .  570 

Saul  of  Gibeah  and  Saul  of  TarsM  . .  671 

The  Bitter  End    . .  . .  . .  673 


.*'  *"f 4,0  ■^'  ■^f'.'^'-w 


