TONG Be 
LIBRARY OF THE THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY 


PRINCETON. N. J. 


PRESENTED BY Herbert Adame eg ree ms. 


Bide 2 WS5.6 1855 | 
Wanslows Octavius. 4. 1878.4) 
The glory of the Redeemer in 
his person and work | 


‘ My ma) 
Hi, 


\) é 
hee wa a of 


ean 


De ae 
wn tke 


oe es | ts 


THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


IN 


HIS PERSON AND WORK. 


THE 


His Person and Work. 


diay Be 
REY, OCTAVIUS WINSLOW, D.D., 
AUTHOR OF 


MIDNIGHT HARMONIES, PRACTICAL VIEWS OF THE ATONEMENT, 
ETC. ETC. 


PHILADELPHIA: 
LINDSAY & BLAKISTON. 
1855. 


« 


TO 


My Mother, 
WHO FIRST DIRECTED MY EYE TO THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER, 


THIS VOLUME, 


WITH THE DEEPEST FILIAL AFFECTION AND GRATITUDE, 
Is 


INSCRIBED. 


L* (Vv) 


hi 


/ 


*, Ce | wl | Cha is i ar Se wT on rey 
PRET Ear ARs: Git Wieria oat meee Re Bee 
Smet Tg cal" vat ve eee ee 


a 


Py fin. f b < RG ‘ 


PREFACE. 


THE author has redeemed his promise of placing in 
the hands of the church of God, a treatise, presenting 
in an experimental and practical light, a view of the 
personal and official glory of the Redeemer. It ill be- 
comes him to speak of his own work ; yet if he may be 
permitted an allusion to the feelings with which he in- 
troduces it to the Christian public, he can with truth 
say they are such as lay him in the dust with unfeigned 
self-abasement. ‘That his own blood has not in ven- 
geance been made to mingle with his sacrifice thus laid 
upon the altar of a holy and righteous God, is alone be- 
cause the atoning blood of Him whose glory it dimly 
shadows forth, ‘cleanses from all sin,’ even the ‘iniquity 
of the holy things which the children of Israel shall hal- 
low in all their holy gifts.’ * It is a deeply humbling 
truth — would that it were more present to the mind! 
—that there is enough of pollution in the character, 
motive, and aim of the most spiritual performance which 
the most holy believer can present, to awaken the 
severest expressions of God’s spotless purity and utter 
hatred of sin. But Jesus is the true Aaron: he is the 
great High Priest ; and by his ‘ one offering,’ and con- 
tinual presence before the throne in ceaseless and 
prevalent intercession, our poor, defective, polluted 

* Hxodus xxviii. 38. 


(vii) 


Vill PREFACE. 


services are an ‘odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice ac- 
ceptable, well-pleasing to God.’ 

All who peruse these pages, will sympathise with the 
author in his painful consciousness of having, in his 
perhaps too presumptuous attempt to unfold it, fallen 
greatly below his theme. Its comprehensiveness has 
embarrassed, its magnitude has overpowered him. The 
glory of the incarnate God! who can set it forth? 
What pen of man, what tongue of angel, can describe 
it? We must dve—live the renewed life, the life hid- 
den with Christ in God, to see it even partially below. 
We must die—die as the righteous die, to behold it 
fully above. Faith, the eye of the regenerate soul, sees 
it now, though through a glass darkly: that faith 
changed into sight, will behold it perfectly hereafter. 
‘“‘ Now we see through a glass darkly,—then face to 
face.”’ Our beloved ‘‘ standeth behind the wall, he look- 
eth forth at the window, showing himself through the 
lattice.”’* Our glimpses of him are dim, imperfect, 
transient; though sometimes, blessed be his name! 
ravishing, sanctifying, and heaven-attracting. But the 
full, the perfect, the unclouded vision, yet awaits us. 
O the magnitude of the spectacle! O the magnificence 
of the scene! O the exceeding and eternal weight of 
glory! To drop the glass, and be in a moment ushered 
into the presence of the glorified Son of God! To see 
him as he is! To be with, to be near, to be like him! . 
Why, then, wish to detain the soul poised on its wings 
for heaven ? Why indulge in excessive grief the absence 
of the departed saint, now with, and beholding the 
-glory of Jesus? and why shrink ourselves from dying, 
with such a prospect, so certain and so full in view? 
Oh! one view of the glorified Saviour were worth ten 


* Song of Solomon ii. 9. 


PREFACE. 1X 


thousand deaths, though a martyr’s flames were our 
chariot to heaven ! 

To aid the spiritual mind in its endeavours to obtain 
an occasional sight of the Redeemer’s glory, in this 
vale of darkness and of tears, is the simple design of 
this work. Defectively as his task is performed, the 
author does not regret his having written on the subject. 
He entered upon its discussion with an irresistible 
and solemn conviction, that the present state of the 
professing church demanded some hand to point its eye 
more directly and simply to Christ, the fountain of life, 
light, and love—the three great and essential elements 
of a true, healthy, and influential Christianity. In this 
age of polemical divinity,—the author is far from speak- 
ing lightly of it, for if the truth is worth possessing, 
it is worth defending ; and it now, if ever, behoves the 
saints of God to heed the apostle’s exhortation to 
‘contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the 
saints,’’—yet in this age of much and sharp contro- 
versy, the eye is liable to be drawn off from Jesus ; and 
thus the spirit with which his truth is defended, and 
his kingdom is advanced, may be such as would, were 
he personally on earth, call for his tender yet solemn 
rebuke, as not partaking sufficiently of that meek, 
lowly, and self-annihilating element, which only is im- 
bibed in a close study and profound contemplation of 
his character and glory. 

If this publication be instrumental in the smallest 
degree of imparting a higher tone to the spirituality of 
the church of God—of refreshing the spirits of any 
who are labouring upon the outworks of Christianity— 
of promoting a more visible union among the members 
of the one family—of correcting and leading to a re- 
linquishment of any views that may be held contrary 


ity PREFACE. 


to Divine truth— of stimulating to a more vigorous 
action in the cause of God, showing its connection with 
high Christian principle — of shedding light upon the 
path of any who may be perplexed in their way — of 
comforting any who are cast down—of sweetening the 
bitter waters of which many may be deeply drinking—of 
preparing the way of the comming King—in a word, of 
increasing the knowledge of the Father, of rendering 
Jesus more precious, and of seeking more earnestly 
the anointing of the Holy Spirit,—then, the exhausting 
toil of its preparation — the trembling solicitude with 
which it is laid at the feet of the church, and the numer- 
ous blemishes which, even to his partial eye, appear on 
every page, will all be lost sight of and forgotten,—ab- 
sorbed and swallowed up in the thought of the glory 
and praise that will thus accrue, and which solely and 
for ever shall be ascribed to the TRIUNE JEHOVAH. 
And should his lowly service be accepted by the saints, 
all that the author desires and asks in return, are their 
prayers, that the great, holy, and precious truths em- 
bodied in this work, may prove the sanctification of 
his own heart, his comfort in life, his support in death, 
and his glory through eternity. The Lord Jesus Christ 
be with the spirit of the reader. Amen! 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER I. 
The Pre-existent Glory of the Redeemer..........sseeeees 18 


OA PT HR: BE 
The Redeemer, the Revelation of the Father’s Glory... 41 


COAPT ER. LEE: 
The Typical Glory of the: Redeemer............csseseseess 82 


Clee Per ey 
The Prophetical Glory of the Redeemer. .............0000 98 


CHAPTER V. 
The Glory of the Redeemer in his Humiliation .......... 183 


CHAPT ES V.I. 
The Glory of the Redeemer in his Resurrection......... 191 


X11 CONTENTS. 


' CHAPTER VII. 


The Glory of the Redeemer in bis Ascension and Ex- 
RESTO. Woh Ps ialeetls's vv cin s'ais «hia dale MMOH agli eda dip wk 263 


CHAPTER Viilt. 
The Glory of the Redeemer in bis People..............66 508 


UHeUP PE Ry. ix. 
The Holy Spirit glorifying the Redeemer...............4 336 


OF & Bi. Oe aad Ns) se. 
The Glory of the Redeemer in his Second Coming...... 369 


THE 


GLORY OF THE REDEEMER. 


CHAPTERL 


THE PRE-EXISTENT GLORY OF THE REDEEMER. 


“And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with the 
glory which I had with thee before the world was.” 
John xvii. 5. 


Iv is an opinion common to the whole church of God, 
and involving a truth as essential to the unity of the 
faith, as to its great end, that the personal and official 
glory of the Redeemer stand or fall together. So united 
are they in the grand scheme of covenant mercy, so 
closely interwoven in all their interests, and so neces- 
sary are both to the perfection of salvation, that the 
one cannot be exalted or depressed, without deeply 
and seriously affecting the other. Different, and even 
opposite, as the points of light may be, in which some 
of the external parts of the towering edifice are viewed, 
yet regarding the one foundation on which Christ has 
built his church, there is,— there can be,—no discord- 
ance of opinion amongst those who are taught by God: 
here the true saints are one, and undivided. This, as 
a uniting principle, holds them together, and which no 

2 (13) 


vi ee THE PRE-EXISTENT GLORY 


power can destroy. All, as with harmonious voice, 
whether uttered by councils, or by individuals, concur 
in maintaining the doctrine of the GoDHEAD of our 
Lord as the basis of the Atonement; and the ATONEMENT 
as the one medium of reconciliation with a holy God. 
In the present humble attempt to set forth the glory 
of our Divine and adorable Redeemer, we think it 
proper to commence with a scriptural defence and 
spiritual exposition of his essential dignity, as forming 
the basis of every other view of this vast and compre- 
hensive subject. The personal glory of the Lord Jesus 
is to the Bible, what the sun is to our planet. In the 
deep and dark recesses of nature, as well as scattered 
upon its broad surface, there are many objects of great 
intrinsic value, whose beauty and fitness remain un- 
discovered and unnoticed until, placed in a proper posi- 
tion, the sun’s rays are made to fall upon them, as 
with focal power, thus revealing both their nature and 
properties. It is so with the word of God. In itself 
of infinite worth and transcendent value,— containing 
no type, revealing no doctrine, enjoying no precept, 
unfolding no promise, and recording no fact, which 
does not occupy a position of importance and beauty 
of surpassing magnitude; yet, until the Sun of right- 
eousness shines upon it,— until seen in the relation 
which it sustains to Jesus, it remains a ‘‘hidden 
mystery,” its worth and beauty shaded from the eye. 
The doctrine of the incarnate God invests with light 
and radiance every essential difficulty and truth of the 
inspired word. Infinitely mysterious itself, it yet ex- 
plains every other mystery. It solves what is inex- 


OF THE REDEEMER. HL) 


plicable, fathoms what is profound, illuminates what is 
obscure, and reconciles what is discrepant. And yet, 
while thus irradiating every other doctrine, and elu- 
cidating every other mystery, it remains, as it ever 
will, enshrined in its own unapproachable light, the 
most wonderful, incomprehensible, and sublime of all — 
the great mystery of godliness. With the Psalmist, we 
may truly exclaim, ‘In thy light we shall see light.” 
May the Eternal Spirit of truth give a personal and 
sanctifying perception of the glory and sweetness of 
this great subject! 

There are those, as the reader is aware, who deny to 
Christ a Divine personal existence anterior to his ap- 
pearing among men. They maintain that he professed 
and asserted no claim to a pre-eternal state of being; 
that he never existed before the world, in essential 
union with the Father; and that all the passages in the 
sacred Scriptures adduced in proof of a Divine and 
primitive state of being and glory, are to be interpreted 
of the foreknowledge and purpose of God, and not as 
affirming the doctrine of a superior, pre-existent, and 
Divine nature. Of course this false and untenable 
creed involves a total denial of Christ’s deity, which in 
its turn leads to an utter rejection of his atonement. 

In opposition to this dangerous and fatal hypothesis, 
we maintain that the Lord Jesus Christ existed from 
eternity, as a distinct Person in the Godhead; that 
previously to his assumption of our nature, he dwelt 
in a state of Divine and ineffable glory, the fountain of 
life, light, and happiness to all celestial intelligences ; 
receiving in return, the tribute of their adoring homage 


16 THE PRE-EXISTENT GLORY 


and supreme affection. This is the all-important 
doctrine we are now to establish, not by an appeal to 
the traditions and writings of men, but by an exclusive 
reference to the revealed word of God. 

The first passages cited in proof of the pre-existence 
of Christ, are found in Prov. viii. That the eternal 
Son of God, as the personification of wisdom, is the 
speaker throughout this chapter, is clear from the 15th 
and 16th verses: “By me kings reign, and princes de- 
cree justice. By me princes rule, and nobles, even ali 
the judges of the earth.”” It were absurd to predicate 
this of a mere attribute speaking, and it were blas- 
phemous to suppose that he who thus speaks is less 
than Divine. Now mark the unfolding of Christ’s 
eternal existence in the 22nd and 28rd verses: ‘‘ The 
Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before 
his works of old. I was set up from everlasting, from 
the beginning, or ever the earth was.’’ Let the reader 
open his Bible, and continue the chapter to its close; 
with the teachings of the Holy Spirit, the result of his 
examination must inevitably be, a deep and solemn 
conviction of the truth of our doctrine — that He “ by 
whom kings reign and princes decree justice,’’ 1s no 
other than the ‘Prince of the kings of the earth,”’ 
Rev. 1. 5,— that ‘‘ the Wisdom” who speaks, is “‘ Christ 
the wisdom of God,’ 1 Cor. 1. 24,—that he whom 
Jehovah ‘possessed in the beginning of his way, 
before his works of old,’’ was the same of whom 
it is said, ‘“‘in the beginning was the Word, and 
the Word was with God,” John i. 1, 2,—that He 
who was “daily God’s delight, rejoicing always before 


OF THE REDEEMER. 7 


him,”’ is the same concerning whom the Father thrice 
testified, ‘‘ This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well 
pleased.” 

The prophesy of Micah v. 2, presents a lucid de- 
monstration of the doctrine under examination: “ But 
thou, Bethlehem Ephratah, though thou art little 
among the thousands of Judah, yet out of thee shall 
he come forth unto me that is to be ruler in Israel, | 
whose goings forth have been from of old, from ever- 
lasting.”’ In this remarkable prophecy, supposed by 
some writers to be the most important single prophecy 
in the Old Testament, and the most comprehensive 
respecting the personal character of the Messiah and 
his manifestation to the world, the pre-existent God- 
head and the assumed manhood of Christ are set forth 
as written with a beam of light from the eternal 
throne. Itis here declared that a great King would 
appear on the earth, and that he should be born of 
the nation of Israel in Bethlehem. With regard to 
his dignity, it is affirmed that “his goings forth have 
been from of old, from everlasting,’ (marg. from the 
days of eternity). It is then announced that, respect- 
ing his human nature, he should be born in Bethlehem, 
“the city of David.’ Jor the exact fulfilment of these 
predictions the reader is referred to Matt. i. 5, 6 ; 
John i. 46. 

We now turn to a few of the more prominent attest- 
ations to this doctrine, scattered through the writings 
of the New Testament. We commence with the 
evangelist John: in many respects, his testimony is of 


peculiar weight and importance. It would seem (so 
2% . 


“2 a?) Bee 


18 THE PRE-EXISTENT GLORY 


minute and clear is his personal description of Christ 
placed in the foreground of his Gospel) as though he 
had been selected to fill the same office as a historian 
which the Baptist had done, as the harbinger of our 
Lord —to proclaim the dignity and pronounce the 
titles of the Sovereign whom he heralded, and so to 
elicit on his behalf those expressions of homage and 
respect which properly belong to royalty. We may 
suppose, then, that this evangelical writer would be 
careful to advance no doctrine, to utter no expression, 
to record no fact, to lay down no proposition, and to 
employ no term, which had not first been carefully 
pondered, and which would not bear the most search- 
ing and critical examination. He introduces his in- 
spired book with the stately and majestic air of a man 
conscious of the sublime and momentous truth he was 
about to record. 

‘In the beginning was the Word, and the Word 
was with God, and the Word was God. The same 
was in the beginning with God. All things were 
made by him; and without him was not anything 
made that was made.” i. 1-38. Here is the precise 
truth for which we contend, resplendent in its own | 
Divine light and glory. It may appear remarkable 
that the evangelist should employ a term so important, 
the explanation of which he pauses not 3, moment to 
give. But it may not be difficult to assign a reason 
for this: the term Locos, or Worp, would in all pro- 
bability be familiar to most of the Jews, and to many 
of the Gentile Christians, as an appellation conveying 
the idea of the Mediatorial Messiah. Indeed, with 


OF THE REDEEMER. 19 


regard to the native Jews of Judea, it amounts to 
more than a bare conjecture, that their frequent use 
of the phrase Zhe Word of the Lord, was employed 
with a personal reference, and was intended to desig- 
nate an intelligent agent, invested with personal attri- 
butes; or, in other words, that the figure so readily 
and emphatically introduced by John, was a recognized 
appellation of the Messiah, and directs the eye at 
once to Christ, the great MEDIUM of communicating 
the mind of Jehovah to men, the ‘‘ one Mediator 
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.” The 
slightest examination of the subsequent portions of 
this chapter, must convince a mind sincerely in search 
of truth and yielding to its conviction, that the opera- 
tions ascribed to the “Word” cannot be predicated 
of a quality, an attribute, or an action; but find their 
solution in their application to a real and personal 
subsistence, even to the ETERNAL SON oF Gop. But 
let us, in a few words, deduce the doctrine from the text. 
“In the beginning was the Word.’ The ETERNITY 
of Christ is here emphatically declared. In the begin- 
ning of the creation of all things was the essential 
Word, existing, not in the purpose and decree of God, 
but as a distinct and Divine Person, even the eternal 
Son ; set up in office from everlasting as the Mediator 
of the covenant, in whom all the children of the cove- 
nant are chosen, blessed, sanctified, and glorified. 
“The Word was with God.” Not with angels, not 
with men; but before men and angels were created— 
with God essentially— with him from all eternity — 
with him in the covenant of redemption, and in the 


20 THE PRE-EXISTENT GLORY 


covenant of grace—with Him when He laid the 
foundation of the earth, and from its dust created man 
upon it; was with Him as his essential Son, when as 
man he dwelt and suffered on earth—and with Him 
now as the exalted Son, the enthroned and glorified 
Messiah. 

‘“‘And the Word was God.” Not as a created or 
a delegated God, both of these senses being equally 
absurd and contradictory; but “was God” truly, 
essentially, absolutely, and in the highest sense, 
Jehovah ; “‘ God over all, blessed for evermore.”’ 

“‘ All things were made by him.” Clearly defining 
his creative power, and so demonstrating his Godhead. 
‘“‘All things,” all worlds, all creatures, “created by 
him, and for him; for without him was not anything 
made, that was made.’ If, therefore, he made all 
things, he must have existed ‘before all things ;”’ 
consequently, the doctrine of his pre-eternal being is 
placed beyond a doubt. 

In the 14th verse, the Divine nature and pre-exist- 
ent state of Christ, if not positively asserted, are yet 
distinctly recognized and clearly deduced. ‘‘ And the 
Word was made flesh and dwelt among us.’’ Here 
was evidently the assumption of a nature inferior to:a 
pre-existing and more elevated one. What was that 
superior nature but the Godhead of Christ, and what 
the pre-existent state, but his eternity? The essential 
Word was ‘‘made’”’ or became flesh, and ‘dwelt,’ or 
tabernacled among us, “full of grace and truth.” 

Again, John vi. 60-62, the whole of the context is 
an argument employed by Jesus to convince the Jews, 


OF THE REDEEMER. 21 


not of the Divine character of his doctrine, as some 
have supposed, but of the Divine nature of his person. 
This, our Lord declared, ‘‘came down from heaven,”’ 
and was laid as a voluntary sacrifice upon the altar of 
an ignominious death, ‘for the life of the world.” 
The assurance that the Messiah, whom he had an- 
nounced and proved himself to be, was to pass through 
so humiliating a life, and to close it by so painful a 
death, shocked the carnal prejudices, and blasted the 
earthly hopes of many of his disciples; which error 
being perceived by Jesus, he immediately sought to 
remove, by carrying forward their thoughts to his re- 
instatement amidst the glory, and to the exercise of 
all the power and dignity, which he had previously 
possessed, and had voluntarily relinquished. ‘‘ Many 
therefore of his disciples when they had heard this, 
said, This is a hard saying; who can hear it? When 
Jesus knew in himself that his disciples murmured at 
it, he said unto them, Doth this offend you? What 
and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he 
was before ?” 

John vil. 58: “Jesus said unto them, Verily, 
verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, I am.” 
Here is a passage that would seem to place the doc- 
trine we plead for, beyond the region of doubt. No 
ingenuity of criticism, no evasion of sophistry, no 
effort of reasoning, can make it other than what it is 
—an honest and clear declaration of the pre-existence 
of Jesus, at least two thousand years before his incar- 
nation. In order that the full force of this passage 
may be felt, let us take a rapid glance at the context. 


yi) THE PRE-EXISTENT GLORY 


The occasion which drew forth this remarkable as- 
sertion of our Lord, appears to have been two charges 
alleged against him by the Jews, founded upon the 
following words that he had uttered: ‘ Verily, verily, 
I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he shall 
never see death,” ver. 51. To which the Jews replied 
“‘ Now we know that thou hast a devil. Abraham is 
dead, and the prophets; and thou sayest, If a man 
keep my saying, he shall never taste of death. Art 
thou greater than our father Abraham, who is dead? 
and the prophets are dead: who makest thou thy- 
self?’ The two charges thus brought against Christ, 
are self-exaltation, and an assumption of superiority 
to Abraham their father. Both of these accusations, 
Jesus condescendingly but promptly met. The first he 
positively and solemnly denied ; he declared that with 
the honour which he possessed he had been invested 
by the Father, whom they acknowledged as their God. 
“‘ Jesus answered, If I honour myself, my honour is 
nothing; it is my Father that honoreth me; of whom 
ye say, that he is your God,” ver. 54. To the second, 
with all the calm dignity of conscious truth, he replied, 
that Abraham, guided by a supernatural light, had ac- 
knowledged his Divine superiority: and though he 
beheld the promise of his coming through a long period 
of time, yet in the exercise of a strong and far-reach- 
ing faith, he saw his day of incarnate glory, and in the 
prospect of his mediatorial reign was filled with holy 
exultation and joy. ‘‘ Your father Abraham rejoiced 
to see my day: and he saw it and was glad.” ver. 56. 
The Jews not perceiving that he spake of an anticipa- 


OF THE REDEEMER. 28 


tive vision, and eager to impeach his veracity, grounded 
upon the apparent impossibility of what he had asserted, 
exclaimed, ‘‘ Thou art not yet fifty years old, and hast 
thou seen Abraham ?” ver. 57. This question brought 
the matter to an issue. No alternative was left our 
Lord, but either to admit or deny the doctrine in dis- 
pute. At their bar he was standing as a witness either 
for or against himself. His pre-existence had been 
arraigned, his Godhead questioned; both of which it 
was necessary for him either to deny or affirm. Not 
a moment does he hesitate; ‘“‘ Jesus said unto them, 
Verily, verily, I say unto you, Before Abraham was, 
J AM.” The Jews regarding his words as a solemn 
declaration of his eternity and Godhead, kindled with 
indignation and wrath, ‘took up stones to cast at 
him,” ver. 59, ‘‘because he said that God was his 
Father, making himself equal with God.” John v. 18. 

Dear reader, what a wondrous declaration is this! 
what a glorious and precious truth does it involve! 
Are you a believer in Jesus? Is he all your salvation, 
your acceptance, your hope and desire? Then cast the 
anchor of your faith deeply, firmly here; thou shalt 
find it an eternal rock. Weak faith you may have, 
and ‘doubtful faith numbers have; but here is the 
ground of faith, respecting which there can be neither 
weakness nor doubt. Is it an Almighty Saviour that 
you want? Behold him! ‘Before Abraham was, I 
AM.” Oh, what a foundation for a poor sinful worm 
of the dust to build upon! What a stable truth for 
faith in its weakest form to deal with,— to have a glo- 
rious incarnate I AM for an atoning sacrifice — the 


o4 THE PRE-EXISTENT GLORY 


I AM for a Redeemer —the I AM for a Surety — the 
I AM asa Day’s-man between God and the soul — the 
I AM as an Advocate, and unceasing intercessor at the 
court of heaven, pleading each moment his own aton- 
ing merits —the I AM as the centre in whom all the 
promises are “ yea and amen”— the I AM asa “ Bro- 
ther born for adversity’’—the I AM as “a very pre- 
sent help in every time of trouble!” This is the answer 
which faith receives to its trembling and anxious inter- 
rogatories. ‘To each and all, touching his faithfulness, 
his tenderness, his long-suffering, his fulness, and 
his all-sufficiency, Jesus answers, “I AM.” “ Enough, 
Lord,’’ replies the believer, ‘on this I can live, on 
this I can die.” 

The following passages, either asserting or implying 
the doctrine of Christ’s pre-existence, are quoted with- 
out comment, the reader being left to form his own 
prayerful judgment of the definite and obvious mean- 
ing. I came forth from the father, and am come into 
the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the 
Father.” John xvi. 28. “ He is before all things, and 
by him all things consist.’ Coloss. i. 17. “ That 
which was from the beginning, which we have heard, 
which we have seen with our eyes, which we have 
looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word 
of life; for the life was manifested, and we have seen it 
and bear witness, and show unto you that eternal life 
which was with the Father, and was manifested unto 
“us.” 1 John i. 1, 2. Thus clearly has the Holy 
Spirit testified to the foundation-truth of all experi- 
mental Christianity. If any doubt yet lingers on the 


\ 


OF THE REDEEMER. 25> 


mind of the reader, touching the truth of this doctrine, 
then should the existence of that doubt lay him in the 
dust, causing him to tremble lest he should be found 
to reject the counsel of God against himself, and 
constraining him to seek—and to seek until it is im- 
parted and experienced — the teaching of that blessed 
Spirit whose office it is to take of the things of Jesus, 
and show them unto us. 

We now proceed to inquire into the nature of that 
glory, which, in connexion with his pre-existent state. 
Christ possessed. 

The remarkable words of our Lord placed at the 
head of this chapter, are as clearly decisive of a pre- 
eternal state of dignity and glory as of being. “And 
now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self with 
the glory which I had with thee before the world was.” 
The import of that glory which he had with the Father 
in his primeval state, and with which he prays he may 
be re-invested, is now to form the subject of our inquiry. 
May the Eternal Spirit enable us to behold, through 
the glass of faith, the glory of this glorious truth ! 

That the glory to which Jesus here alludes, and for 
the manifestation of which he pleads, is the glory of 
his human nature, cannot possibly be; the human na- 
ture of Christ never existed in any form in a pre-eternal 
state, consequently it could possess no glory with the 
Father before the world was. It is most true, that in 
the purpose of the Divine mind it did exist; that from 
eternity the tabernacle that was to enshrine the divinity 
of our Lord was planned and anticipated. “A body,” 


says Christ, “hast thou prepared me;” but its actual 
5) 


26 THE PRE-EXISTENT GLORY 


existence did not transpire, until in the fulness of 
time, he appeared a babe in Bethlehem. All the refer- 
ences to Christ’s humanity found in the Old Testament 
writings are in the future tense, and all the appearances 
of it were typical and anticipative. 

Nor are we to confine the import of this glory to his 
mediatorial character. It is equally true, that in the 
eternal covenant of grace, Jesus was designated to the 
office of Mediator of his people, set up from ever- 
lasting, to be their Surety and Redeemer; but the 
glory which appertained to him as such, was a sepa- 
rate and distinct glory from the Father’s. Whereas, 
in the passage we are now considering, he speaks of a 
glory possessed in conjunction with his Father,—‘ the 
glory which I had wth thee.” It would not be proper 
to speak of the Father as invested with a mediatorial 
glory. This, therefore, cannot be the true interpreta- 
tion of the text ;— we must look for another solution 
of its meaning. May we not find it in the following 
view ?— 

Our Lord here prays as the God-Man Mediator. 
In this character he approaches his Father. The 
‘mercy for which he prays is, a manifestation of that 
Divine glory which, as essentially one with the Father, 
he possessed before the world was. The connexion in 
which the words stand, suggest, and would seem to 
sustain this solution. In the 4th verse Christ thus 
addresses his Father: “I have glorified thee on the 
earth.” In the 6th verse he explains in what way he 
had glorified his Father, namely, by the manifestation 
by his Divine name. ‘“T have manifested thy name 


OF THE REDEEMER. oT 


unto the men whom thou gavest me out of the world.” 
The manifestation of God’s name was the glorifying 
of him as Jehovah. And now he asks at his Father’s 
hands a reciprocation of the same honour, a like 
manifestation of the same glory. “I have glorified 
thee on the earth by a manifestation of thy Godhead 
—now, Father, glorify thou me, with the glory which 
I had with thee before the world was. And seeing that 
I am no more in the world, but come to thee, part thou 
the veil, and let my Divine majesty shine forth; mani- 
fest to angels and to men the long-concealed glory of 
my Deity.” 

And how would this manifestation of Christ’s pre- 
existent glory be effected? or, in what way did the 
Father answer the prayer, and glorify him with that 
glory which was essentially his own! We answer — 

By publicly reinstating him in the honour, dignity, 
and glory which he voluntarily laid aside, when he 
assumed human nature. Let it be borne in mind, that 
the Divine glory of the Son of God was but veiled, or, 
as it were, eclipsed, for a little moment, by his investi- 
ture with the human form. That he ceased to be God 
when he became man, he did not, and could not. 
There was no cessation of the Godhead, in the stooping 
to the manhood. The human did not become Divine, 
nor did the Divine become human. ‘There was no 
coalescing, no blending together of these two extremes 
of being. Mysteriously, closely, and indissolubly one, 
they yet were separate and distinct, the peculiar pro- 
perties of each unaffected and unchanged by its union 
with the other. This constituted one of the essential 


298 ' THE PRE-EXISTENT GLORY 


wonders in the “great mystery of godliness, God 
manifest in the flesh.” The deity of Christ was in- 
capable of change, else deity it could not be. It was 
incapable, too, of any sympathy or participation in 
the humiliation and suffering through which the 
humanity passed. Upholding and strengthening the 
manhood, it yet remained free from all the pains 
which it endured. ‘Towering far above the storms 
which swept over the human soul of Christ — above 
the sea of suffering and blood through which he 
waded — above the infirmities, weaknesses, and tears 
which pressed upon the ‘incarnate mystery,” the 
Godhead of Jesus rose untouched, unaffected, and 
unmoved. The shock which convulsed to its centre 
his human frame, agitated not for an instant his 
essential deity. Here all was calm, serene, and tran- 
quil. The dark clouds which gathered around his 
inferior nature threw not a shadow athwart the sun 
of his superior nature. Deep veiled beneath was the 
divinity, even like the calm under-current of the ocean 
which not a breath moves, while the hurricane lashes 
in foaming billows its storm-tossed surface. Though 
a mournful dweller upon earth, moving amidst, and 
identified with, forms of sorrow, suffering, and pollu- 
tion, Jesus could yet speak of himself as the “Son of 
man, which 7s in heaven.” Like the tall pyramid 
whose base is wreathed with thunder-clouds, while its 
summit is bathed in serene sunlight, the manhood 
and the Godhead of Jesus appeared before men and 
angels—despised on earth—adored in heaven. All 
humiliation below—all glory above. 


OF THE REDEEMER. 29 


This remarkable petition of the Redeemer will now 
perhaps be better understood. That for which he so 
fervently pleads is the entire uncovering of his God- 
head, and the manifestation of its unclouded glory to 
all created intelligence. While yet enshrined in the 
flesh, scintillations of his glory did occasionally break 
forth. There were moments when Jesus stood forth, 
his Godhead seen, acknowledged, and adored. The 
indwelling glory seemed too intense even for the pure 
and perfect humanity entirely to conceal; the veil of 
flesh too transparent to obscure the Divine majesty 
which it sought to cover. Jesus was so truly God, it 
would seem impossible not to betray the truth, ob- 
scured though it was by the dark veil of humilia- 
tion. Men and devils were compelled to confess, 
“truly this is the Son of God!” 

The prayer of our Lord was heard, and his request 
was granted. ‘The Father glorified him with the glory 
he had with him before the world was. He was “ de- 
clared to be the Son of God with power, according to 
the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the 
dead.’ His ascension into heaven yet more fully 
glorified him. Then the long-concealed Deity burst 
forth in its strongest effulgence. He came down to 
earth as man, he went up to heaven as God. He 
descended in humiliation and sorrow, he ascended in 
glory and triumph. The celestial convoy who attended 
him back to his kingdom,—perhaps the same holy 
embassy who, in such lofty strains, announced his 
advent to the earth,—demanded a triumphal and 


royal entrance for their glorified King. “ Lift up 
3% 


30 THE PRE-EXISTENT GLORY 


your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lifted up, ye ever- 
lasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in. 
Who is this King of glory? The Lord, strong and 
mighty, the Lord, mighty in battle. Lift up your 
heads, O ye gates, even lift them up, ye everlasting 
doors; and the King of glory shall come in. Who 
is this King of glory? The Lord of hosts, he is the 
King of glory.” O what glory encircled the incar- 
nate God, at this moment, in the eyes of all celestial 
intelligences ! 

But the manifestation of Christ’s pre-existent glory 
would not be confined to the spirits in heaven. On 
earth there would be such a visible unfolding of it, as 
would confirm all his previous claims to infinite dignity 
and power. This was accomplished by the descent of 
the Holy Spirtt upon the day of Pentecost. On that 
day was Christ glorified with the glory he had from all 
eternity with the Father. The Holy Spirit in his 
especial and enlarged influence had not yet proceeded 
from God, being enshrined within the heavenly temple, 
during the period of our Lord’s humiliation. ‘ The 
Holy Ghost,” says the evangelist, ‘‘ was not yet given, 
because that Jesus was not yet glorified.” As he was 
to descend an evidence of Christ’s enthronement, he 
would consequently remain until that august event 
had transpired. This was in strict accordance with 
Christ’s repeated declaration : ‘‘ Nevertheless I tell you 
the truth; it is expedient for you that I go away: for 
if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto 
you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you.” 

Our Lord’s triumphant entrance into glory was now 


OF THE REDEEMER. 31 


the signal of the Holy Spirit’s descent. For this great 
blessing he bade his disciples wait. ‘And being 
assembled together with them, commanded them that 
they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for 
the promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye have 
heard of me. For John truly baptized with water ; 
but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many 
days hence.” Acts i.4, 5. Scarcely had he crossed 
the threshold of the heavenly temple, the august 
ceremonies of his enthronment, amid the songs of 
adoring millions, had but just ceased, when the pro- 
mise of the Father was fulfilled, and the orphan 
church of Jerusalem was baptized with the Spirit from 
on high. Oh! how soon was that promise fulfilled! 
How soon did Jesus make good the pledges of his 
love! The outpouring of the Holy Spirit on the day 
of Pentecost transpired fifty days after Christ’s resur- 
rection. Forty days he was seen by the disciples, ‘to 
whom he showed himself alive after his passion by 
many infallible proofs ;’’ consequently but ten days 
elapsed from the period of his return to his kingdom, 
before the Spirit came down in all the plentitude of 
his glorifiing, witnessing, awakening, and sanctifying 
power ! 

And why were even ten days allowed to intervene 
between the glorification of Jesus and the descent of 
the Spirit? Doubtless to place the church in a state 
of preparedness to receive so vast, so holy, and so rich 
a blessing. The Lord would have them found in a pos- 
ture suited to the mercy. It was that of prayer, of all 
postures on this side of glory the most blessed and holy. 


Bo THE PRE-EXISTENT GLORY 


Thus did the Spirit find them on the day of Pentecost. 
Returning from the mount of Olivet, whence they 
had caught the last glimpse of the receding form of 
their ascending Lord, they came to Jerusalem, and 
‘went up into an upper room,’ where abode the rest 
of the disciples. ‘‘ These all continued with one accord 
in prayer and supplication.’ And while “they were 
all with one accord in one place,” breathing forth their 
souls in fervent petition, ‘‘suddenly there came a 
sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and 
it filled all: the house where they were sitting. And 
there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as of 
fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were 
all filled with the Holy Ghost.” 

And now how manifestly and illustriously was 
Jesus glorified —with what overpowering effulgence did 
his Godhead shine forth—how gloriously did he appear 
in the eyes of the awe-stricken multitude, wearing the 
crown, not of painful thorns — and invested with the 
robe, not of mock-majesty, but of his real divinity! 
With what majestic mien and stately step would: he 
now walk amidst the assembled throng, the Gop 
confessed! And all this Divine glory would be seen 
arrayed on the side of REDEMPTION! its conquests 
would be those of GRACE—its manifestations those of 
LOVE — its signals those of MERCY. Was it not so? 
See how they crowd the temple! Some, their hands 
scarcely cleansed from the blood they had been ‘shed- 
ding on Calvary; others with the dark scowl of malig- 
nity yet lingering on their brows. Mark how intently 
they gaze! how breathlessly they listen! how fearfully 


OF THE REDEEMER. 33 


they tremble! and with what anguish they smite upon 
their breasts, and cry, “‘ Men and brethren, what shall 
we do?” Nor did the Spirit rest its triumph here; it 
paused not until it led three thousand heart-broken 
sinners to the Fountain which some of them had been 
instrumental in opening for “sin and uncleanness,” 
there to plunge, and from thence to emerge washed, 
sanctified, and saved; the heirs of God, the joint heirg 
with Christ Jesus. Now was Jesus glorified —now was 
a crown of pure gold placed upon his head —- and now | 
were fulfilled his own prophetic words, “At that day 
ye shall know that I am in my Fatker, and ye in me, 
and I in you.” 

There are many vast spiritual blessings resulting te 
the church of God from the reinstatement of Christ. 
in his pre-existent glory ; with a rapid glance at some 
of the more prominent of which, we will close this 
chapter. 

The first that accrues to the believer from this grand 
truth, is the confirmation it affords to his faith in the 
supreme Godhead of Christ. Apart from this doctrine, 
upon what mere sand do men build their hope of 
heaven; what dream, what shadows are all their ex- 
pectations of eternal life! The divinity of Jesus 
denied and rejected, all that is precious and valuable 
in his death is reduced to a mere negation. What 
would be his obedience to the law, if reduced to a 
mere finite obedience? What his endurance of its 
penalty upon the cross, if a creature only were suffer- 
ing? How could either meet the claims of God’s 
moral government, sustain his holiness, satisfy his 


34 THE PRE-EXISTENT GLORY 


justice, and present Him to our view,—just to Him- 
self and yet the Justifier of him that believeth? 
Never! If your acceptance as a sinner with this holy 
Lord God is based on any other righteousness than 
the ‘righteousness of God,’”’ you are lost, and that 
to all eternity! A created Saviour! O wretched 
fantasy! A finite Redeemer! O awful and malig- 
nant scheme of Satan to drown men’s souls in perdi- 
tion ! 

But to the true believer how glorious, invaluable, 
and precious is this truth! What a rock does he 
stand upon, whose faith rests upon the Godhead of 
Christ! He sees in his blood and righteousness the 
infinite dignity and worth of the God-Man Mediator. 
All that he needs as a poor, guilty, undone sinner he 
finds here. ‘The righteousness that fully acquits him 
from all the charges of law; the fountain that 
cleanses him from all the pollution of sin; the Saviour, 
not mighty only, but Almighty, to carry his sorrows, 
bear his burdens, and strengthen him for the conflicts 
and the difficulties of his pilgrimage. Look up, 
then, O believer! and fasten the eye of your faith 
upon the eternal glory of your covenant Head. Your 
salvation is secured by the Almighty Redeemer, who 
is able to keep that which you have committed unto 
him against the day when he will make up his peculiar 
treasure. 

Secondly, The eternal love, grace, and fulness of 
Christ to his church spring from this glorious truth. 
Is the eternity of Christ's being a doctrine of re- 
vealed truth? equally so is the doctrine of the 


OF THE REDEEMER. ah 


eternity of his love, with all the streams of blessing 
of which it is the spring-head. ‘The love of Jesus runs 
parallel with his being ; and as that is from all eternity 
to all eternity, so is his love towards the church 
which he hath purchased with his own blood. ‘“TI' 
have loved thee,” says the Lord, “with an everlasting 
love.” “Blessed be the God and Father of our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiri- 
tual blessings in heavenly places in Christ; according 
as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation 
of the world, that we should be holy and without 
blame before him in love.”’ Hard though this truth 
is to be believed by some, yet in the clear hght of 
heaven will every child of God see that electing love 
brought him there, and but for which he had been lost 
for ever. 

Thirdly, The. doctrine of Christ’s pre-existence 
affords a most exalted and satisfactory view of the 
nature, glory, and stability of that covenant of grace 
entered upon by the infinitely glorious persons of the 
triune God in behalf of the church. This covenant 
must be rich in its promises of mercy, seeing that it 
is made by Jehovah himself, the Fountain of all holi- 
ness, goodness, mercy, and truth, whose very essence 
is ‘‘ Love’ It must be glorious, because the second 
Person in the blessed Trinity became its surety. It 
must be stable, because it is eternal. It must meet 
all the circumstances of a necessitous and tried 
church, because it is “‘ ordered in all things.’’ It must 
be sure, secing its administration is in the hands of 
an infinitely glorious Mediator, who died to secure 


36 THE PRE-EXISTENT GLORY 
it, rose again to confirm it, and ‘ever liveth” to dis- 
pense its blessings as the circumstances of his saints 
require. How animating are the words which direct the 
believer to the fulness of this precious covenant! ‘ In- 
cline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul 
shall live; and I will make an everlasting covenant 
with you, even, the sure mercies of David.” Isa. lv. 8. 
And when the children of the covenant are brought by 
the converting grace of the Holy Spirit into this visible 
relation, what says God concerning them? ‘TI will 
make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will 
not turn away from them, to do them good; but I will 
put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart 
from me.” Jer. xxxil. 40. This’ covenant was the 
ground of David’s joy in the house of his pilgrimage. 
*‘ Although my house be not so with God; yet he hath 
made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all 
things, and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my 
desire.”’ 2 Sam. xxiii. 5. And what is the precious 
blood of Jesus but the “‘ blood of the new testament,”’ 
the “blood of the everlasting covenant,’’ deriving all 
its value, efficacy, and preciousness from the personal 
dignity and pre-eternal glory of Him who shed it? 
With a solemn caution, we close this chapter. 
Let no reader deem this truth a speculative point, a 
dry, abstract doctrine. The practical influence of 
this subject will depend in a great measure upon the 
view in which it is held. It cannot be lightly con- 
sidered, without involving the most serious conse- 
quences. It is not a matter of calm indifference 
whether you receive it or not. It is one of infinite 


OF THE REDEEMER. 37 


moment! The consequences of its rejection are tre- 
mendous. Hear what Christ himself said to the Jews, 
and what now he says to you. “I said therefore unto 
you, that ye shall die in your sins: for if you believe 
not that I AM, ye shall die in your sins.” John vii. 24. 
These are words of solemn import, coming from the 
lips of Him who is the self-existent Jehovah-Jesus, in. 
whose girdle are the keys of hades and of death. The 
sin of denying Christ’s Godhead is second to none ; 
yea, it is the sin of sins. It uncrowns him as King, 
and consequently divests him of all his regal power 
and glory; it degrades him to a level with a fallen 
creature, and it tramples him under foot as the dust 
of the earth! If this be the sin, what are its conse- 
quences? Certainly a sin so fearful must involve 
results corresponding to its character. They are thus 
stated :—‘‘ If ye believe not that I AM, ye shall die in 
your sins.” Eternal condemnation ; the unquenchable 
fire; the undying worm; the wrath of a holy and a 
great God poured out for ever, are the awful results 
of persisted unbelief in the Godhead of Christ! And 
why? Clearly because a rejection of the deity dis- 
places the atonement of Christ; and the rejection of 
the atonement, in its turn, annihilates all hope of final 
salvation, and abandons the soul to the tremendous 
horrors of the second death. To die in sin, then, 
must be truly awful. It is to die in all the pollution 
of uncancelled guilt; it is to lie down in the grave in 
sin ; itis to rise again w s¢n; it is to stand before the 
judgment seat in sin ; it is to be examined and judged, 


sentenced and condemned in sin; and at last to go in 
+ 


58 THE PRE-EXISTENT GLORY 


sin to meet its wages of eternal death: for ‘“ without 
the shedding of blood there is no remission.”’ ‘Who 
among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who 
among us shall dwell with the everlasting burnings ?”’ 
Unquestionably, he who first cavils at, then learns to 
ridicule, and at last rejects, the most stupendous, 
glorious, and benevolent expedient for the recovery of 
lost man that infinite wisdom and love could devise. 
Reader, you must die in your sins, if you believe 
not in the self-existence of Jesus Christ. Marvel not 
that our subject still holds us in its powerful grasp; 
that we cannot break away from it. O that the ear- 
nestness with which we write, and the solemnity which 
breathes from these pages, may arouse your conscience, 
affect your heart, and awaken in your mind an imme- 
diate, serious, and prayerful investigation of the subject! 
To argue the matter with you, is not our aim. To 
meet and repel the infidel objections which have been 
alleged against this doctrine, is not our purpose. We 
have established the truth upon the word of God; we 
have proved it from Scripture to be a doctrine of 
Divine revelation; and here we rest the argument. 
It is at the peril of your dearest and most precious in- 
terests for time and eternity that you reject its 
authority. Tell us not that the unity of the Divine 
Essence necessarily excludes personality. How do 
you know this? Can you demonstrate it? No, 
you cannot; simply because you know nothing of the 
mode of the existence of any spiritual being, and 
therefore it is impossible for you to disprove the 
Scripture record of the three Persons in the one God. 


OF THE REDEEMER. 39 


Oh, how are you fighting in the dark! How im- 
potent and absurd are your weapons, and how in- 
consistent and infatuated is your hostility! You are 
opposing yourself against Jehovah ; are rushing upon 
the thick bosses of his buckler. Your are contending 
against the “sword of the Spirit, which is the word 
of God.” Attempt not to break its point or blunt 
its edge by your own carnal reasoning. Remember 
by this very word you shall be judged at the last 
day ! 

Do you stumble at the doctrine of a pre-existent, 
self-existent Lord Jesus, because its deep mystery 
transcends the power of human reason? Then reject 
all the mysteries in nature and in providence, the 
existence of which you have been wont to believe on 
the testimony of men, and yet the modes of which 
you cannot comprehend. Yea, deny your very being, 
the greatest mystery in nature, since you can neither 
comprehend nor demonstrate how spirit and matter 
are so united as to constitute an intelligent immortal. 
If, then, your own existence is a mystery to you, and 
that yet you are willing to believe the fact that you 
actually do exist, cavil not at the infinitely profounder 
mystery, ‘‘ God manifest in the flesh.” 

Call you this doctrine a dry, speculative, and un- 
influential article of faith? Ohno! It is manna 
and fatness to him that believes it with his heart, 
while it supplies him with the most powerful and 
persuasive motive to a holy, godly life. On this 
truth, experimentally and practically received, he 
can live; and on it, in the simple exercise of faith, 


40 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER. 


he can die. More precious is it to him than gold; 
yea than much fine gold, since it endears to his soul 
the incarnate God, sustains him in his conflicts, com- 
forts him in his trials, strengthens his aspirations for 
Divine conformity, and will, in the final hour, and 
amidst the swellings of Jordan, enable him to ex- 
claim, in a holy transport of triumph and of praise, 
‘THANKS BE TO GOD FOR HIS UNSPEAKABLE GIFT !” 


CHAPTER II. 


THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION OF THE 
FATHER’S GLORY. 


“The glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.”—-2 Cor. iv. 6. 


‘Tuat God was under any obligation or necessity to 
reveal himself to man, is an idea that cannot for a 
moment be seriously entertained. It will follow, then, 
that such a revelation of himself, of his mind and will 
to fallen creatures, having been made, it must be 
regarded as an astounding act of his sovereign mercy, 
irrespective of any claim whatever arising from the 
creature man. ‘The source whence it originates must 
be entirely within God himself. 

The great point which now lies before us bears upon 
the mode of the Divine revelation; and resolves itself 
into the single and important inquiry,— What forms 
the most perfect revelation of the glory of God to man? 
It is the design of this chapter, in humbly attempting 
an answer to this question, to show that the only full 
and perfect revelation of the glory of God is seen in 
the Lord Jesus; that apart from.a spiritual and experi- 
. mental knowledge of the Son there can be no true, 
adequate, and saying knowledge of the Father. To 

£* (41) 


42 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


clear up this momentous matter the more thoroughly, 
it will be proper that we first demonstrate the utter 
impossibility of a correct knowledge of God out of 
Christ ; this will have prepared us for a more full con- 
sideration of our main subject. 

The most palpable evidence and fearful result of 
man’s fall from original holiness is the deep and awful 
ignorance of God, of his character, perfections, and 
moral government, in which that apostasy has in- 
volved him. It was the glory, and the happiness of 
Adam that, before his revolt, not a cloud rested upon 
his mind tending to obscure the most clear and per- 
fect views of the Divine character which it was pos- 
sible for a finite creature to possess. He knew God 
sufficiently for all the purposes of a life wholly con- 
formed to his will, and supremely devoted to his 
glory. There was no intellectual darkness in his un- 
derstanding, no moral obliquity of his will nor of his 
affections. The whole soul constituted as it were an 
orb of the most beauteous light, kindled by God him- 
self, and reflecting its beams of beauty on every object 
in nature. It is true, that regarding his knowledge of 
God, nature was his teacher, or rather the medium 
through which he was taught; that impressions and 
perceptions of the Divine existence and glory were 
received mainly through the imagery of sensible ob- 
jects; that the “invisible things of God were clearly 
seen, being understood by the things that are made, 
even his eternal power and Godhead.” Yet this” 
affords no solid argument in favour of a perfect know- 
ledge of God in nature; for let it be remembered 


oe * 
e 
ia 
& 


OF THE FATHERS GLORY, 43 


that nature, as a mirror of the Divine glory, was 
framed for man as innocent, and not for man as guilty ; 
that when by his own act this mirror was defaced and 
destroyed, with it was destroyed all true natural know- 
ledge of Jehovah. Had the creature continued in his 
state of perfect rectitude, then no other revelation of 
God had been needed; but throwing around him the 
pall of guilt, he necessarily threw around him the pall 
of ignorance. And ere there can be clear and perfect 
light in the soul of the character and perfections of 
God, there must be a removal of that sin which else 
must eternally separate God and man. Hence the 
absolute necessity of just such a revelation of the 
Father as Jesus, the “true Light, which enlighteneth 
every man that cometh into the world.”’ 

The most difficult, perhaps, because the most hum- 
bling lesson which the world has ever had to learn, has 
been the nothingness of its own wisdom, and the folly 
of its unaided endeavours to find out God to perfec- 
tion. Harnest as have been its desires, ardent as have 
been its aspirations, and laborious as have been its 
endeavours, the “unknown God” is the only inscrip- 
tion written upon its altars. The ancient philosophers 
prided themselves on their superior attainments in this 
study ; but to what did their knowledge of God, unde- 
rived from revelation, amount? What was the actual 
result of their profound researches, patient inquiries, 
acute reasonings, and subtle distributions? Let the 
apostle reply ; ‘ Professing themselves to be wise men, 
they became fools.’’ Even worse than this. Not only 
“by wisdom the world knew not God,” but the im- 


44 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


perfect knowledge it did gather of Him in nature, so 
far from expanding their mental conceptions of the 
Divine character, and elevating their lives to a con- 
formity to the Divine will, seemed but to lead them into 
the deepest and grossest idolatry! ‘‘ Professing them- 
selves to be wise men, they became fools, and changed 
the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image 
made like to corruptible man, and to birds and four-' 
footed beasts, and creeping things.’ What an affect- 
ing picture! Oh that the proud eulogist of the 
dignity of human nature would study it! What an 
instructive lesson! Oh that the vain seeker of God 
out of Christ would learn it! Here was the world, 
at an age when civilisation and philosophy, poetry and 
the arts, flourished in a pre-eminent degree, and were 
exerting a softening and ameliorating influence upon 
society, yet utterly abandoned to superstition and 
idolatry. Idolatry in its darkest clouds was settling 
upon its moral landscape; idolatry in its gloomiest 
attributes was entwined with its history; idolatry in 
its grossest features was blended with its literature ; 
idolatry in its most insinuating forms was advanced 
with the creations of its poetic genius; idolatry the 
most degrading and sensual was enthroned in the seats 
of its philosophers, was dignified by their approval, 
inculcated in their lectures, and sanctioned by their 
example. The histories of Egypt, of Greece, and of 
Rome, testify that “the world by its wisdom knew not 
God,’— that after every expedient had been adopted, 
and every experiment had been tried,—after the 
triumphs of war, and the arts of peace, and the wis- 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 45 


dom of legislation, and the lessons of philosophy, and 
the inculcations of religion, had done their utmost, 
man was still left ignorant of God, and consequently 
steeped in guilt, and bowed in grief, the slave of every 
vice, and the sport of every sorrow. Thus did God 
“destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to no- 
thing the understanding of the prudent.’’ And thus, 
too, will he ever confound the wisdom and abase the 
pride of that man, who towering on the Babel of his 
own unassisted research, would find Him out to per- 
fection who is the “blessed and only Potentate, the 
King of kings, and Lord of lords; who “only hath 
immortality, dwelling in the light which no man can 
approach unto; whom no man hath seen, nor can 
sees” 

But we proceed to the main subject of this chapter, 
which is to set forth the Lord Jesus in his person and 
work as constituting the only true and perfect revela- 
tion of God to man. The great and precious truth 
we are now to contemplate is introduced to us in these 
words of the inspired evangelist: ‘‘ No man hath seen 
God at any time; the only begotten Son, who is in the 
bosom of the Father, he hath declared him,”’ John i. 18. 
Of the vast émportance of a correct knowledge of God, 
need we speak at length? It is truth which finds an 
assent in well-nigh every judgment. Every awakened 
conscience desires it; every believing mind admits it; 
every tried soul feels it. It lies at the basis of 
salvation; it forms the material of happiness; it 
supplies the true motive to holiness; it is the ground- 
work and the prelude of future and eternal glory. May 


46 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


the eye of faith be now so anointed by the Spirit as to 
behold with a clear and unclouded vision the “light of 
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus 
Christ !”’ 

There are three different mediums through which 
God is seen, ‘The first, to which we have already in 
general terms referred, is creation. Now, while we 
are far from underrating any sources of evidence 
which the wisdom and goodness of God had given 
to guide our research, we must yet maintain in strong 
language that the knowledge of God gleaned from 
this source is imperfect, and meets not the cravings 
of our nature. It is true, that it demonstrates the 
fact of God’s existence, but here it stops. It tells 
us that God zs, but it tells us not perfectly what God 
is. It proves to us clearly, undeniably, God’s being ; 
but it unfolds not the relation in which that Being 
stands to us. It gives, so to speak, a glimpse into 
the essential properties of God, but it reveals nothing 
of his moral perfections. Creation, even in its fallen 
state, 1s a beautiful piece of workmanship, in which 
we see, not only that there is a God, but that he is 
infinite in wisdom, omnipotent in power, great in 
goodness; but as a fallen creature, I want more than 
this. And what, as a guilty creature, I pant to know 
of God I find not, though I go in search of it through 
the length and breadth, the height and depth of this 
beautiful territory of God’s handiwork. Let me 
simply illustrate the thought. I take in my hands 
an exquisite piece of mechanism; I examine its 
various parts, ponder its exact movements, and lay- 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 47 


ing it down, admire the wisdom and applaud the 
skill displayed in its construction; and this is all 
that I can discover of the maker. For aught that 
I know, the moral elements which compose his 
character may be of the lowest order. Yea, the 
very individual whose workmanship has awakened 
my wonder and called forth my praise, may be my 
sworn, my deadly foe, cherishing in his bosom the 
elements of hatred, and ruminating in his mind the 
plan of my destruction! Now that we have a partial 
discovery of God, of his wisdom, and power, and 
goodness, in creation, is not enough to satisfy the 
mind convinced that God is holy, to quiet the con- 
science convicted of sin, and to soothe a heart bowed 
down with godly grief. The grand inquiries with 
such a soul are, ‘How can I be just with God? 
How can I satisfy his justice, appease his wrath, and 
propitiate his regard? How may I know that he 
is my God, my reconciled Father? How may I be 
assured that he loves, has pardoned and accepted me, 
and that I shall be with him for ever?’ ‘Traverse in 
imagination the extent of creation, wander over the 
most beautiful landscape, pluck the most fragrant 
flower, select the most costly gem, glide upon the 
surface of the fairest lake, scale the highest mountain, 
soar to the farthermost star, still the momentous question 
rushes back upon the mind, ‘‘ How may I stand with 
acceptance before this holy Lord God ?’”’ Poor anxious 
searcher for peace, all nature unites in testifying, 
‘Tt is notin me! It is notin me!” 

The second medium through which God has seen fit 


48 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


to discover himself to man is his law. But here again 
are we compelled to acknowledge the defectiveness of 
the revelation, as far as its degree extends. The know- 
ledge of God derived from this source must necessarily 
be partial and shadowy. It is true, the holiness of God 
is discovered in its precepts, and the justice of God is 
inferred from its threatenings; but the law can never ** 
be more nor less than what the Holy Spirit has declared 
it to be, the “‘ ministration of condemnation.” As a 
fallen creature, revolving the great matter of the soul’s 
salvation, it can afford no satisfactory reply to the great 
question, ‘‘ What must I do to be saved?’’ It breathes 
not a sound of mercy to a poor sinner; not one kind, 
soothing, saving accent falls from his lips. It speaks 
of death, but not of life; of condemnation, but not of 
salvation. It asserts the authority, reflects the holi- 
ness, and denounces the vengeance of God; but not one 
beam of hope springing from his mercy, his grace, or 
his love, does it throw upon the gloomy path of the 
soul passing on to judgment bowed down beneath the 
‘‘terrors of the Lord.’’ Reader are you seeking salva- 
tion by the law? Alas for thee! How can that save 
which but condemns? How can that give life which 
in its nature and design is but the minister of death ? 
Mount Sinai is no refuge for thy soul, poor guilty, 
condemned, heart-broken sinner. Allis thunder and 
lightning, tempest and darkness. Come you down 
from the mount ere you are consumed. Abandon as 
utterly futile and deceptive all your legal expectations 
of acceptance, and betake yourself to the one only refuge 
of thy guilty soul—the cross of the incarnate God. 


a 


OF THE FATHERS GLORY. 49 


We are now conducted to the consideration of the 
great point. We have seen that upon an extensive 
scale a great and fatal experiment had been made by 
man to know God and happiness. That God existed, 
he had every demonstrative proof. The same evidence 
which authenticated his being, proved him to possess 
great and glorious attributes ; and the manner in which 
these attributes were displayed gave some insight into 
his character, “so that they are without excuse.” 
Wearied as the creature was with a laborious, and 
dispirited with a fruitless research, God, in the depths 
of infinite mercy and wisdom, takes the work of salva- 
tion into his own hands. He sends his only begotten 
and well-beloved Son into the world, and declares him 
to be the perfect revelation of himself toman. On 
this important truth Jesus himself laid great stress. 
Let the following declaration suffice. Toa question 
of difficulty raised by Thomas, ‘‘ Jesus saith unto him, 
I am the way, the truth, and the life: no man cometh 
unto the I'ather but by me. If ye had known me, ye 
should have known my Father also: and from hence- 
forth (from the moment that he had thus revealed him- 
self more fully as the great revelation of God) ye know 
him and have seen him. Philip saith unto him, Lord, 
show us the Father, and it sufficeth us. Jesus saith 
unto him, Have I been so long time with you, and yet 
hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me 
hath seen the Father ; and how sayest thou then, Show 
us the Father? Believest thou not that I am in the 
Father, and the Father in me? The words that I 


speak unto you I speak not from myself: but the 
5) 


50 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works. Be- 
lieve me that Iam in the Father, and the Father in 
me: or else believe me for the very works’ sake.”’ 
John xiv. 6-11. 

Let us, in a few particulars, unfold the glorious and 
all-important truth contained in these words. And in 
the first place, we find, on examination of the sacred 
word, that the Lord Jesus embodies the glory of the 
Godhead. In other words, we behold the light of the 
knowledge of the glory of Gop in the face of Jesus. 
Having devoted an entire chapter of this work to a 
scriptural exposition of the Deity of Christ, it will not 
be deemed necessary that we enlarge upon the doctrine 
in the present connexion. And yet we are here presented 
with a further confirmation of this cardinal truth, de- 
manding more than a mere cursory glance. Of the 
spirituality of the Divine nature, we can form no just 
nor definite conception. All our ideas of it must 
necessarily be unintelligible, vague, and shadowy. Re- 
ferring to this impossibility, and, in language of con- 
descending adaptation to our sensible view of objects, 
Jesus says of his Father, “Ye have neither heard his 
voice at any time, nor seen his shape.”’ Ignorant of 
this inspired truth, and yet with a quenchless thirst 
ever desiring such a conception of the Infinite Spirit 
as would afford a resting-place for the mind, an object 
on which faith could repose, and round which the affec- 
tions could entwine, man has been beguiled into atheism 
and idolatry of the most debasing and fearful character. 
Framing his conceptions of spirit after his own low and 
depraved idea of matter, he has “changed the glory 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 51 


of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to 
corruptible man, and to birds, and four-footed beasts, 
and creeping things.” 

But God has revealed himself. He has stooped to 
our nature, and, in the person of his incarnate Son, 
has embodied the spirituality of his being, with all its 
Divine and glorious attributes. Behold with what 
clearness and power this truthis set forth. ‘* Christ, 
who is the image of God.” 2 Cor. iv. 4. “Who, being 
the brightness of his glory, and the express image of 
his person.” Heb. i. 8. ‘ Who is the image of the 
invisible God.’’ Coloss. 1. 15. Could any single point 
be more distinctly stated, and more conclusively proved 
than this, that our Divine and adorable Redeemer con- 
stitutes, in his person, a perfect revelation of the 
essential glory of the Godhead? All that we clearly, 
savingly know of God, is just the measure of our 
acquaintance with this truth. Jesus brings God near. 
‘Thou art near, O Lord,” Oh, how near! “They 
shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted 
is, God with us.” The most stupendous, glorious 
truth which created mind ever grasped is involved 
in this wondrous declaration, “‘ Emmanuel, God with 
us.” With what glory does it invest the Bible! 
what a foundation does it lay for faith! what sub- 
stance does it impart to salvation! and what a good 
hope does it place before the believing soul! God is 
with us in Christ, with us in the character of our 
reconciled Father, with ws in every step of our journey 
to heaven, with us to guide in perplexity, to soothe in 
sorrow, to comfort in bereavement, to rescue in danger, 


62 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


to shield in temptation, to provide in want, to support 
in death, and to conduct us safely to glory. My soul! 
fall prostrate in the dust before the majesty of 
this amazing, this precious truth; adore the wisdom 
that has revealed it, and admire the grace that makes 
it thine! 

The great revelation of the Godhead, Jesus, is equally 
the revelation of all the penFections of the Godhead. 
Is ‘‘ God the only wise?” Jesus is the glory of that 
wisdom —‘‘ Christ the wisdom of God,’ He is the 
master-piece of Divine wisdom; its highest manifesta- 
tion; its most perfect, finished production. We trace 
the lesser forms of wisdom in nature; we ascend a 
scale higher in providence ; we reach the summit in 
grace. Here we launch into a boundless immensity, 
and overwhelmed with its greatness, can but exclaim, 
““O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom and 
knowledge of God !” 

Behold this wisdom, as it shines in the recovery of 
lost and ruined man, by Christ. Here is a manifesta- 
tion infinitely transcending in greatness and glory, the 
first creation of man in holiness. In the first creation 
God had nothing to undo,—no dilapidated temple to 
take down, no occupant to dispossess, no ruin to repair, 
no rubbish to remove, no enemy to oppose. ‘‘ He spake 
and it was done.” ‘The materials which composed the 
first human temple were ready to his hands, unfallen 
and pure. The very dust that He took to frame 
it with was holy.— The life He breathed into it was 
holy.—The air with which He surrounded it was holy. 
The paradise in which He placed it was holy. The 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 53 


breezes that played upon it, the sunbeam that gilded 
it, the fountains that watered it, all, all were in 
harmony with the spotless purity of God, and his 
glorious creature, man. 

But in the re-creation of man, how vastly different ! 
This beautiful temple is a ruin,— dilapidated and fallen. 
God is ejected; another and an antagonist occupant 
dwells in it, and enmity to its Creator is written in 
letters of darkness upon every part, and over every 
inlet. In rebuilding this structure, all things were to 
be created anew. ‘‘ Behold,” says God, “I create a 
new thing in the earth.” It was a new and profounder 
thought of infinite wisdom, unheard, unseen before. 
Fallen man was to be raised,— lost man was to be re- 
covered,— sin was to be pardoned,— the sinner saved, 
and God eternally glorified. Mow were the treasures 
of wisdom, which for ages had been hidden in Christ, 
brought forth. Resources that had never been drawn 
upon were now revealed. Infinite wisdom had never 
developed such vast wealth, had never appear clothed 
in such glory, had never shone forth so majestic, so 
peerless, and Divine. Oh, how must angels and arch- 
angels have wondered, admired, and loved, as this 
brighter discovery of God burst in glory upon their 
astonished vision,—as this new temple of man rose in 
loveliness before their view ! 

The first and greatest display of infinite wisdom was 
in the construction of the model upon which the new 
temple — regenerated man — was to be formed. This 
model was nothing less than the mysteriously consti- 


tuted person of the Son of God. In this, its highest 
5 * 


54 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


sense, is ‘‘ Christ the wisdom of God.” “A body 
hast thou prepared me.” ‘This was the great taber- 
nacle of God which was with men.’ The inhabi- 
tation of Deity in that prepared temple of clay 
formed the masterpiece of Divine wisdom. Here it 
shone forth in full-orbed majesty.. Gaze upon the 
living picture! Look at Emmanuel, God with us,— 
God in our nature, God in our accursed nature,— God 
in our tried nature,— God in our sorrowful nature,— 
God in our suffering nature,— God in our tempted 
nature,— yet untouched, untainted by sin. Is not 
this a fathomless depth of Divine wisdom? ‘To have 
transcended it, would seem to have transcended Deity 
itself. 

The next step in the unfolding of this Divine wis- 
dom, is the spiritual restoration of man to a state 
corresponding in its moral lineaments to this Divine 
and perfect model. ‘This is accomplished solely by 
‘“‘ Christ crucified, the wisdom of God.’ And _ here 
again, does the glory of God’s wisdom shine in the 
person and work of Jesus. Every step in the develop- 
ment of this grand expedient establishes his character 
as the “only wise God,’ whose ‘understanding is 
infinite ;”’ while itaugments our knowledge, and exalts 
our views of the Lord Jesus, as making known the 
Father. Here was a way of salvation for perishing 
sinners, harmonizing with every perfection of Jehovah, 
sustaining the highest honour of His government, 
bringing to Him the richest glory, and securing to its 
subjects, as the rich bequest of grace, happiness eternal 
and inconceivably great. It was a thought, O how like 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 55 


God—a scheme, O how worthy of Him! We can 
scarcely imagine him to have gone farther,—that in 
thus fathoming the depth of infinite wisdom, a lower 
deep could be found. Redemption by the obedience 
and death of the incarnate God, was so honouring 
to the Divine law, and satisfactory to Divine justice ; 
was so harmonizing to the attributes, and so illus- 
trative of every glorious perfection of the Divine 
nature, and in its results so suited to the highest ends 
of human happiness, that it was the interest of the 
Divine government, without demur to accept it. Oh, 
how truly did God here ‘“‘work all things after the 
counsel of his own will!’ How has he “ abounded 
towards us in all wisdom and prudence!” In Jesus’ 
sacrificial obedience and death, we see sin fully 
punished, and the sinner fully saved; we see the law 
perfectly honoured, and the transgressor completely 
justified ; we see justice entirely satisfied, and mercy 
glorified to its highest extent ;—we see death inflicted 
according to the extreme tenor of the curse, and so 
vindicating to the utmost the truth and holiness of 
God, and yet life—present and eternal life—given to 
all whom it is the purpose and grace of the Father to 
save. Tell us, is not Jesus the great glory of the 
Divine wisdom. 

Were we to survey the effects of this manifold 
wisdom on individual character, it would still further 
,exalt our vicws of Christ as the wisdom of God. To 
see a man “‘becoming a fool that he may be wise,’— 
his reason bowing to revelation, his knowledge and 
attainments laid beneath the cross,—his own righteous- 


56 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


ness surrendered,—“ counting ‘all things but loss for 
the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus the 
Lord;” and as a little child receiving the kingdom 
of God, oh, how glorious does appear in this, the 
wisdom of God, the light of which shines in Jesus’ 
face! Behold how determined is the Father, in every 
step of his grace, to humble the creature, and to exalt, 
magnify, and crown his coequal Son, Lord of all! 

One step more. We see Jesus the mediatorial Head 
of all wisdom and counsel to the church. “It pleased 
the Father that in Him should all fulness dwell.’ 
‘“In whom,” says the same apostle, ‘are hidden 
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.” He is 
the ‘“‘ Wonderful Counsellor,’ of whom it was thus 
prophesied: “The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon 
him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit 
of counsel and might, the Spirit of knowledge and 
of the fear of the Lord.’’ O Divine and precious 
truth! unutterably precious to the soul having no 
resources adequate to the great purposes of knowing 
self, Christ, and God; of salvation, sanctification, and 
guidance. 

Reader, are you earnestly desiring the “‘ wisdom that 
is profitable to direct” you at this moment? Acquaint 
now yourself with Jesus, in whom all the treasures of 
this wisdom are hidden. What is his language to you? 
The same which Moses, the great legislator, spake to 
the people of Israel: ‘‘The cause that is too hard 
for you, bring 1t unto me, and I will hear it.’’ Deut. 
i. 17. What a cheering invitation is this! A greater 
than Moses speaks it; and speaks it to you. You find 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 57 


your case baflling to human wishes, too difficult for 
the acutest skill of man,—take it, then, to Jesus. How 
sweetly he speaks,—“‘ bring it unto me!” One simple 
exercise of faith upon his word, will remove all that is 
difficult, make simple all that is complex, and lucid all 
that is dark in your case. With him nothing is im- 
possible. To him all is transparent. Knowing the 
end from the beginning, there can be nothing unfore- 
seen in it to his mind,— by his prescience all is known, 
and by his wisdom all is provided for. His precious 
promise is, ‘‘ I will bring the blind by a way that they 
knew not: I will lead them in paths that they have not 
known: I will make darkness light before them, and 
crooked things straight. These things will I do unto 
them, and not forsake them.’’ ‘Thus is Jesus “‘ made 
of God unto us wisdom,” that all our perplexities may 
be guided, and all our doubts may be solved, and all 
our steps may be directed, by one on whom the anoint- 
ing of the “spirit of wisdom and understanding”’ rests 
“without measure ;”’ and who, from experience, is able 
to lead, having trodden every step before us. ‘And 
when he putteth forth his own sheep, he goeth before 
them, and the sheep follow him.” ‘If any man lack 
wisdom let him ask it from God, who giveth liberally :” 
let him repair to Christ, whom God has set up from 
everlasting, “‘to the intent that now unto the princi- 
palities and powers in heavenly places might be known 
by the church the manifold wisdom of God.” 

In the person and work of Christ, the HoLINEss of 
God is revealed with equal power and lustre. It is 
only through this medium that we possess the most 


58 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


clear and perfect demonstration of this Divine and 
awful perfection. From nature and from providence 
the evidence of its existence, and the illustration of its 
nature, come to us more in the form of inference than 
of positive declaration. Sin has obliterated all traces 
of holiness which once existed; not a foot of this vast 
domain, not a shrub, nor flower, nor creature remains, 
to tell what the “beauties of holiness’ once were. 
Not a link binds the present with the world’s primeval 
history. Sin has severed the chain, has created a vast 
and fearful chasm, engulfing all that was ever holy 
and beautiful in this now fallen and defaced creation. 
And yet, even from its present condition, we form 
some faint idea of what it once was. ‘The near ap- 
proximation to a perfect state which we find in some 
departments of nature, the constant ascending towards 
that state which we find in others, together with the 
retributions of Divine justice which sometimes appal 
the mind in the providential dealings of God with _ 
men, afford sufficient data from which to infer that 
God is holy. 

In the study of the Divine low, we ascend a step 
higher in a more clear discovery of this great truth. 
Here we have God’s own solemn asseveration that he 
is holy. The evidence is not inferential, but positive ; 
nothing is left to conjecture, nothing to foster doubt. 
Jehovah declares that he is of “purer eyes than to 
behold iniquity.”” The law which was given to man 
as the rule of his obedience, which, after his fall, was 
more permanently renewed upon tables of stone, su- 
peradded to the ceremonial law, to which were ap- 


« OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 59 


pended numerous sacrifices importing God’s holy 
indignation against sin, and the necessity of a more 
perfect sacrifice for its expiation, must have produced 
upon the mind deep and solemn convictions of God’s 
spotless purity. 

But the truth of his essential holiness needed a 
more clear and impressive discovery and illustration ; 
and God has given it. Where was there ever such a 
demonstration of God’s infinite hatred of sin, and‘ his 
fixed and solemn determination to punish it, as is 
seen in the cross of Christ? Put thy shoes from off 
thy feet; draw near and contemplate this “great sight.”’ 
Who was the sufferer ? God’s only begotten and well- 
beloved Son! Ais own Son! In addition to the 
infinitely tender love of the Father, there was the 
clear knowledge of the truth, that He who was endur- 
ing the severest inflictions of his wrath was innocent, 
guiltless, righteous—that he, himself, had never broken 
his law, had never opposed his authority, had never run 
counter to his will; but had always done those things 
which pleased him. At whose hands did he suffer ? 
From demons, from men? They were but the agents ; 
the moving cause was God himself. ‘It pleased the 
Lord to bruise him: he hath put him to grief.” His 
own Father unsheathed the sword: he inflicted the 
blow: he kindled the fierce flame: he prepared the 
bitter cup. “Awake, O sword, against my Shepherd, 
and against the man that is my fellow, saith the Lord 
of hosts: smite the Shepherd.” ‘The cup which my 
Father hath given me, shall I not drink it?” “My 
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” And 


60 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


what were the nature and degree of his sufferings ? 
Imagine, if we can, what must have been the outpour- 
ing of God’s wrath upon the whole church for all the 
sins of that church through eternity! Can you com- 
pute the amount of her transgressions? Can you 
conceive the degree of her punishment? Can you 
measure the duration of her woe? Impossible! Then 
who can tell what Jesus endured, when standing in the 
place and as the Surety of his church, in the solemn 
hour of atonement, and in the day of God’s fierce 
anger? Never had God so manifested before, and 
never will he so manifest again, his essential holiness, 
—his spotless purity,— the inconceivable heinousness 
of sin,— His utter hatred of it, and His solemn pur- 
pose to punish it with the severest inflictions of His 
wrath. Never did this glorious perfection of his 
being blaze out in such overwhelming glory, as on 
that dark day, and in the cross of the incarnate God. 
Had he emptied the full vials of His wrath upon the 
world, sweeping it before the fury of His anger, and 
consigning it to condign and eternal punishment, it 
would not have presented to the universe so vivid, so 
impressive, and so awful a demonstration of the nature 
and glory of His holiness, of His infinite abhorrence 
of sin, and the necessity wherefore He should punish 
it, as He has presented in the humiliation, sufferings, 
and death of His beloved Son. What new and in- 
effably transcendant views of infinite purity must have 
sprung up in the pure minds even of the spirits in 
glory, as bending from their thrones they fixed their 


_OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 61 


astonished gaze upon the cross of the suffering Son of 
God! 

In Jesus shines the awful glory of Divine Justics. 
Justice is but another term for holiness. It is holiness 
in strict and awful exercise; and yet itis a distinct 
perfection of Jehovah, in the revelation and acknow- 
ledgment of which He will be glorified. The basis 
of the atonement is righteousness, or justice. So the 
apostle argues: ‘Whom God hath set forth to be a 
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his 
righteousness for the remission of sins.” Anterior to 
the apostasy of man, the only revelation of God’s 
justice was the threatening annexed to the law: ‘In 
the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely 
die.”’ Subsequently to the fall, the appointment of a 
sanguinary ritual — the institution of expiatory sacri- 
fices, not only recognized the existence, but illustrated 
the nature of this awful attribute. There are those 
who madly dream of acceptance with the holy God, 
at the expense of this perfection of his nature. In 
vain do they acknowledge him in some of his per- 
fections if they deny him in others, trampling them 
with indifference beneath their feet. Such was Cain 
in the offering which he presented to the Lord; there 
was an acknowledgment of his dominion and good- 
ness, but no distinct recognition of his holiness, no 
solemn apprehension of his justice, no acknowledg- 
ment of guilt, no confession of sin. The claims of 
God’s moral government were entirely set aside, and 
by consequence, the necessity of a mediator totally 


denied. Not so Abel; Ads offering honoured God in 
6 


S 


62 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


that in which he most delights to be honoured, viz., 
in his spotless purity, his inflexible justice, and his 
infinite grace in the appointment of the Saviour for 
the pardon of iniquity, transgression, and sin. There- 
fore it is recorded, and we do well deeply to ponder it, 
that “he offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice 
than Cain.” | 

But this was only the prefigurement of God’s justice 
— the mere type and shadow. The great antitype and 
embodiment are seen in Jesus offering himself up a 
whole burnt-offering to God amidst the fearful blaze 
which was beheld ascending from the summit of 
Mount Calvary. hen did this perfection appear in 
its most fearful form— Jesus bearing sin — Jesus 
enduring the curse of the law — Jesus sustaining the 
wrath of his Father — Jesus surrendering his holy 
soul a sacrifice for man’s transgression. Oh, never, 
never did Divine justice so imperatively assert its 
claims, and so loudly demand its rights,— never did it 
so strictly exact its penalty, and so fearfully grapple 
with its victim as now; and never before nor since 
had such a sacrifice been bound to its altar — never 
did Jehovah appear so just, as at the moment the fire 
descended and consumed his only-begotten and well- 
beloved Son! 

The glory of God’s TRUTH is reflected with equal 
lustre in the person and work of Christ. It is the 
perfection of a perfect being that he does not, yea that 
he cannot change. God is the perfect being. It is 
His perfection that He is true, essentially and immu- 
tably true. He can as soon cease to be, as cease to 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 63 


be true. His truth is the golden thread which unites 
all his perfections; it is the glory and perfection of 
all, that all are based upon and held together in per- 
fect and eternal harmony by truth. “ It is cmpossible 
for God to lie;” “He cannot deny himself,” are 
among the strongest asseverations which the Holy 
Spirit has made of his veracity. To deviate the shadow 
of a shade from his word,— from his oath,— from his 
promise,— from his covenant,— would be to undeify 
himself. Now as God cannot cease to be,— that 
being an impossibility,— it is equally impossible that 
he should deny himself. Consider, too, what the con- 
verse of this proposition would be in its consequences 
to the child of God. How disastrous to all the blessed 
and glorious hopes of the believer! For, what repose 
could the soul find in his love, what confidence in his 
power, if truth, the basis and the security of all, were 
wanting? What a cloud would overshadow every per- 
fection of his being, and how soon would he cease to 
be what he is so beautifully declared to be, ‘‘a God of 
truth, and without iniquity; just and right is he!” 
Deut. xxxii. 4. 

Of the glory of this Divine perfection, the Lord 
Jesus is the grand revelation. Nowhere does it shine 
forth with such unveiled majesty as in Jesus. No- 
where does God appear so true, so gloriously true, as 
in Christ.” “Iam,” says he, “the truth ;” not merely 
true, but the truth. ‘The law was given by Moses, 
but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ.” The same 
inspired evangelist represents him as dwelling among 
us in the flesh, full of grace and truth.” 


64 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


It pleased the gracious and sin-pardoning God, to 
meet our guilty and conscience-stricken parents, imme- 
diately after the fall, with the comforting and gracious 
promise that “the seed of the woman’’— His eternal 
Son, the everlasting Mediator—should “bruise the 
serpent’s head.”” On this Divine assurance of recover- 
ing and saving mercy they rested. Believing in this, 
as they doubtless did, they were saved, “‘ the first-fruits 
unto God and the Lamb.” They rested, let it be em- 
phatically spoken, not upon the bare letter of the pro- 
mise, but upon its substance ; not merely upon the grace 
promised, but upon the truth of God in the promise. 
The bare letter of a promise is no resting-place for a 
believing soul; it can convey no solid consolation and 
support. Thus far, and no father, did the Jews get, 
to whom pertained the promises. This is all that they 
saw in the types and promises, which set forth “ God’s 
unspeakable gift.”’ They rested in the mere letter. 
They saw not Christ in them; and seeing not Christ to 
be their substance and glory, to them “the promises 
of God were made of none effect.” Now God has 
fulfilled his ancient promise. The word He spake to 
Adam, He has made good to the letter to us his 
posterity. It is true, the vision of grace and glory 
seemed for a while to tarry, but it tarried only for its 
appointed time. It is true, the vista was long and 
dreary, through which patriarchs, seers, and prophets 
beheld it. The star of hope was often scarcely seen in 
the dim distance, and frequently seemed for a moment 
entirely quenched in darkness. Time rolled heavily 
along,—a period of four thousand years elapsed,—but 


OF THE FATHERS GLORY. 65 


true to his word, faithful to his promise, ‘‘when the 
fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, 
made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them 
that were under the law, that we might receive the 
adoption of sons.’”” O how gloriously did the truth of 
Jehovah shine in the person of the babe of Bethlehem ! 
How did it gather brightness as the holy child Jesus 
increased in stature and in favour with God and man! 
And to what meridian splendour did it blaze forth, 
when on Calvary it united with holiness and justice, in 
finishing the great work of the church’s redemption ! 
—Then was it that “mercy and truth met together, 
righteousness and peace kissed each other.”’ 

Jesus is the grand evidence that God is true. Faith 
needs, faith asks no more. Here as on a stable founda- 
tion it rests. Its eye ever “looking unto Jesus,” it 
can thread its way—often sunless and starless—through 
a dreary and an intricate wilderness. It can travel 
through trials, endure temptations, bow meekly to 
disappointments, bear up under cross providences, and 
sustain the shock of fearful conflicts, trusting in the 
God of the covenant, resting on his promise and oath, 
and implicitly believing his word, because it sees in 
Jesus the ever-living witness that God is true. 

O ye of doubting and fearful heart! looking at the 
waves rolling at your feet, and well-nigh sinking 
beneath their swellings, exclaiming, “ Will the Lord 
cast off for ever? and will he be favourable no more? 
Is his mercy clean gone for ever? doth his promise 
fail for evermore ? Hath God forgotten to be gracious? 


hath he in anger shut up his tender mercies?” behold 
6 * 


66 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


the glory of God’s truth beaming in the face of Jesus 
Christ, and doubt no more! So long as Jesus lives,— 
lives as your Advocate, as your High Priest, as your 
Representative in the court of heaven, all is yours which 
the covenant promises, and which his mediation secures. 
The ‘‘ promises of God are all yea and amen in Christ 
Jesus.” Never will he break his oath, nor falsify his 
word, nor alter the thing that has gone out of his 
mouth. ‘* Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my 
word shall not pass away.’ God says it, and let faith 
believe it, because He says it. So essential is it to 
your comfort, that I would repeat the caution,—in all 
your dealings with the Divine promises, avoid a Jewish 
faith. Do not so much look at the grace of the pro- 
mise, or at the thing promised,— precious as both are, 
—as at God inthe promise. ‘The promise is the heart 
of your Father speaking; it is the faithfulness of your 
Father performing. Rest, then, not in the blessing 
promised, but in the veracity of Him who promises 
it, and then shall your faith have confidence towards 
God. 

But we must not close this imperfect glance at some 
of the more prominent perfections of God as revealed 
in Christ, without for a moment including in the 
classification that glorious one of Lovr. It is a self- 
evident truth, that as God only knows, so He only can 
reveal His own love. It is a hidden love, veiled deep 
within the recesses of His infinite heart, yea, it scems 
to compose His very essence, for “ God is love,”— not 
merely lovly and loving, but love itself, essential love. 
Who, then, can reveal it but himself? How dim are 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 67 


the brightest views, and how low the loftiest concep- 
tions of the love of God, as possessed by men of mere 
natural and speculative knowledge of Divine things! 
They read God’s goodness even in nature, with a half- 
closed eye, and spell it in providence with a stammer- 
ing tongue. Of His essential love,—His redeeming love, 
—of His great and glorious manifestation of His love 
in Jesus, they knownothing. The eyes of their under- 
standing have not been opened; and ‘‘ God, who com- 
manded the light to shine out of darkness,” hath not 
yet “‘shined into their hearts, to give the light of the 
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus 
Christ.” 

But God has declared His own love. Jesus is its 
glorious revelation. ‘In this was manifested the love 
of God towards us, because that God sent his only 
begotten Son into the world, that we might live through 
him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that 
he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation 
for our sins.” 1 John iv. 9,10. Oh what an infinite 
sea of love now broke upon our guilty and rebellious 
world, wafting in upon its rolling tide God’s only 
begotten Son! That must have been great love,— love 
infinite, love unsearchable, love surpassing all thought, 
—which could constrain the Father to give Jesus to 
die for us, ‘‘ while we were yet sinners.” It is the great 
loss of the believer, that faith eyes with so dim a vision 
this amazing love of God in the gift of Jesus. I marvel 
not that dealing so little with the Father’s love in the 
greater gift, faith should stagger at His promise of the 
less. We have transactions so seldom, and so un- 


68 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


believingly with the cross, that we have need perpetually 
to recur to the apostle’s cheering words, written as if 
kindly and condescendingly, to meet this infirmity of 
our faith, ‘“‘He that spared not his own Son, but 
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him 
also freely give us all things ?”’ 

But, behold God’s love! See how He has inscribed | 
this glorious perfection of His nature in letters of blood 
drawn from the heart of Jesus. His love was so great, 
that nothing short of the surrender to the death of His 
beloved Son could give an adequate expression of its 
immensity. ‘For God so loved the world that he gave 
his only begotten Son.” Here was the greatest miracle 
of love. Here was its most stupendous achievement, 
—here its most brilliant victory,—and here its most 
costly and precious offering. Seeing us fallen, obnox- 
ious to the curse of the law, exposed to its dreadful 
penalty, guilty of innumerable sins, and deserving of as 
many deaths, yet how did it yearn to save us! How 
did it heave, and pant, and strive, and pause not, until 
it revealed a way infinitely safe for God and man; 
securing glory to every Divine attribute in the highest 
degree, and happiness to the creature, immense, un- 
speakable, and eternal. ‘Herein is love !’’ as though 
Paul would say, ‘“‘and nowhere else but here!’ That 
God should punish the innocent for the guilty,—that 
He should exact the blood of his Son to cancel the 
guilt of His rebels,—that He should lay an infinite 
weight of wrath on His soul, iu order to lay an infinite 
weight of love on ours,—that He should sacrifice his 
life of priceless value for ours, worthless, forfeited, and 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. | 69 


doomed,— that He should not only give His Son, but 
should bruzse him, put him to grief, afflict him, should 
make his soul an offering for sin—that the Lord of 
glory should become a man of sorrows,—the Lord of 
life should die,—and the Heir of all things should be 
- “ag he thatserveth.”’ O depth of love unfathomable! 
O height of love unsearchable! O length and breadth 
of love unmeasurable! O love of God which sur- 
passeth knowledge ! 

And how shail we set forth the love of the Redeemer 
—the deep and precious love of Christ? We can only 
say, 1t is equal in its eternity, its immensity, its free- 
ness, and its unchangeableness, with the Father’s love. 
Persuasion did not induce him to undertake redemp- 
tion. Compulsion did not bring him to the cross. 
His own love constrained him. Love for his church, 
his bride, bore him on its soft wings, from the highest 
throne in glory to the deepest abasement on earth. 
How forcibly and touchingly was his love depicted in 
his carriage, when on the eve of suffering,—‘ Jesus, 
therefore, knowiny all things that should come upon him, 
went forth.” He not only knew that death awaited 
him, but with equal prescience he knew all the cir- 
cumstances of ignominy with which that death would 
be attended. The storm, the outskirts of which had 
already touched him, was now thickening and darken- 
ing, each moment concentrating its elements of de- 
struction, and preparing for the tremendous outburst. 
Yet he went forth, as if eager to meet its central horrors, 
not with the fame-panting spirit of Achilles, when he 
hastened to the Trojan war, knowing that he should 


70 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


fall there, but with the irresistible power and constraint 
of his own love which would have nerved him for a 
thousand deaths, had his Father’s law demanded, and 
the salvation of his church required it. “Christ also 
hath loved us, and hath given himself for us an offering 
and a sacrifice to God, for a sweet-smelling savour.”’ 

And now, beloved, with this ocean of mercy rolling 
its swelling waves at your feet, each billowas it breaks 
murmuring in the sweetest cadence, ‘ God is love,” can 
you for a moment question the wise, gracious, tender 
conduct towards you, of that Father from whose heart 
this ocean flows? Look at the cross; behold His pre- 
cious Gift transfixed to it, and that by His own hand, 
and for your sins; then look at your present circwm- 
stances, survey your wants, your trials, your chastise- 
ments, your bereavements, your heart-sickening, heart- 
breaking tribulations, and know that God still is love. 
If He had love strong enough, deep enough, to give 
you Jesus, to release him from His bosom, and to per- 
mit him to be affixed to yonder accursed tree for your 
iniquities, has He not love enough to bow His ear to 
your cry, and His heart to your sorrow? Will he not 
rescue you from this difficulty, deliver you out of this 
trouble, shield you in this temptation, supply this want, 
and support, succour, and comfort you in this grief? 
O yes, He will! doubt it not! The cross of Calvary is 
a standing pledge,— standing until sin and guilt, want 
and woe, shall be known no more,—that God, who 
‘spared not His own Son, but delivered him up for us 
all, will with him freely give us all things’ necessary 
to our good, and promotive of His glory. 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 71 


In conducting the chapter to a close, we remark, 
first, how defective and fallacious ws all knowledge of 
God out of Christ. Examine closely, and in the light 
of the revealed word, the source and character of your 
professed acquaintance with the nature, character, and 
perfections of God. Ponder seriously this solemn 
declaration of Christ himself, ‘‘No man knoweth the 
Son, but the Father; nor knoweth any man the 
Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son 
will reveal him.” Has your knowledge of God over- 
whelmed you with a sense of your sinfulness? Have 
you caught such a view of the spotless purity, the 
immaculate holiness of His nature, as to compel you to 
exclaim, ‘‘ Woe isme! for I am undone, because I am 
aman of unclean lips,. .. . for mine eyes have seen 
the King, the Lord of hosts; wherefore [ abhor myself, 
and repent in dust and ashes?” Has your study of 
His law forced upon your mind the deep and solemn 
conviction that you are a fallen, ruined, lost, guilty, 
condemned sinner, at this moment lying under the 
wrath of God, and exposed to future and everlasting 
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and the 
glory of his power? Has it laid you beneath the cross 
of Christ? Has it brought you to his blood and 
righteousness for pardon and acceptance? Has it led 
you utterly to renounce all self-trust, self-confidence, 
self-boasting, and to accept of Jesus as “‘ made of God 
unto you wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, 
and redemption?” If it has not wrought this for you, 
your knowledge of God is but ‘‘as sounding brass or a 
tinkling cymbal.” “ This,” says Christ, ‘is life eternal, 


72 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


that they might know thee, the only true God, and- 
Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent.’ If you know not 
the Son, you know not the Father. ‘No man know- 
eth the Father, but he to whom the Son shall reveal 
Him,’’—Jesus, himself, has declared. 

Consider well the mercy of having transactions with 
such a Godin such a Christ. A God so holy and just, 
so good and wise, in a Christ so truly human, so spot- 
less, so near, so dear, and precious! God in Christ! 
O the immensity of the truth! O the glory of the 
revelation ! That God reconciled one with the believer ; 
all His feelings love, all His thoughts peace, and all 
His dealings parental; each perfection harmonizing in 
the most perfect agreement with all the others, to secure 
the highest amount of good here, and of happiness 
unspeakable and eternal hereafter. 

“To know the glory of God in the face of Jesus 
Christ, is both a fruitful and a comfortable knowledge. 
We know the pattern we must walk by; we know the 
life we must live by ; we know the treasure we must be 
supplied by; we know whom we have believed; we 
know whom we may be bold with in all straits and 
distresses ; we know God in Christ, full of love, full of 
compassion, full of ears to hear us, full of*eyes to watch 
over us, full of hands to fight for us, full of tongues to 
commune with us, full of power to preserve us, full of 
grace to transform us, full of fidelity to keep covenant 
with us, full of wisdom to conduct us, full of redemp- 
tion to save us, and full of glory to reward us.” 

How precious to us should the Gospel be which reveals 
this great truth! These are days in which it behoves 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 13 


the true saints to set a high value on the Gospel. More 
precious should it be to them than their dearest earthly 
interest ; nothing can compensate for its loss. And 
that there is a danger of its waning glory, if not of its 
being entirely lost to this country, who does not see? 
The prediction of Dr. Owen seems fast hastening to its 
fulfilment. ‘‘ The time will come,’’ says that holy and 
eminent divine of a former century, ‘‘ when a faithful 
minister of the Gospel will be more scarce and precious 
than a bar of gold.”’ Already has this famine of the 
true word of God commenced! How few there are 
who preach the undiluted Gospel, who set forth the full 
Christ—who proclaim the finished and free salvation ? 
How few, forming their ministry upon the apostolic 
model, can affirm with Paul, “My speech and my 
preaching are not with enticing words of man’s 
wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of 
power!” How few, disdaining artificial embellish- 
ment, and scorning the applause of men won by a 
vain show of intellect and eloquence, preach that 
simple truth of which Jesus is the Author, the Sub- 
stance, the Glory, the Power, and the End,—purely, 
boldly, faithfully, affectionately, uncompromisingly ! 
How sadly, how painfully, is the Lord Jesus Christ 
kept in the back-ground! How is His glory ob- 
scured, His beauty veiled, His honour withheld! 
And yet there are those,—(honoured men! would 
that your number were greater !)—who honestly and 
heartily desire to lift up their Lord and Master, them- 
selves lost behind the glory of his person, and the 
splendours of his cross. De we rejoice in this? Can 
7 


74 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


we with the apostle say, ‘‘ Christ is preached: and I 
therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice?’ By whom- 
soever he is exalted,—in whatever sanctuary his 
Gospel is proclaimed, however feeble the talent, and 
limited the attainment, and defective the announce- 
ment, and humble the manner in which Jesus is set 
forth, do our hearts rejoice that glory is thus brought 
to him? Dear reader, if the image of Christ is ad- 
mired by you, you will recognize it when you see it. 
If his name is fragrant to you, you will rejoice where- 
ever it is poured forth. If his Gospel is prized by you, 
you will be glad by whomsoever it is preached. If his 
person is precious to you, you will love him most who 
most fully exhibits Christ’s glory, and who most suc- 
cessfully draws souls to adore and worship at His feet. 
Oh, let us, as before God, search and try our hearts, 
touching this matter ! 

But the Gospel is greatly assailed. Never, perhaps, 
was it more resolutely opposed on every hand; never 
did there seem to be a stronger combination formed to 
neutralize its power, and sap its very foundation, than 
at the present moment. Infidelity, popery, and semi- 
popery, in close and powerful alliance, are confederate 
against the Divine word of God. Low views of inspi- 
ration; the exalting of tradition above Scripture, of 
reason above revelation, of human talent above the 
teaching of the Spirit, of forms and ceremonies above 
the vital power of godliness, are significant and fearful 
signs of our times. We need, then, every view of the 
Gospel, tending to illustrate its value and endear its 
preciousness. Here is truth calculated to produce this 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 75 


holy effect. Nature does not teach it; the law does 
not reveal it; philosophy does not inculcate it; tradi- 
tion does not contain it; the Gospel only makes it 
known. How God is revealed in Jesus Christ; how 
that “‘two should become one, and yet remain two 
still, as God and man do in Christ; that He who 
maketh should be one with the thing which himself 
hath made; that He who is above all should humble 
himself; that He who filled all should empty himself; 
that He who blesseth all should be himself a curse; 
that He who ruleth all should be himself a servant; 
that He who was the Prince of Life, and by whom all 
things in the world do consist, should himself be dis- 
solved and die; that mercy and justice should meet 
together, and kiss each other; that the debt should 
be paid, and yet pardoned; that the fault should be 
punished, and yet remitted ; that death, like Samson’s 
lion, should have life and sweetness in it, and be used 
as an instrument to destroy itself,” are evangelical 
truths and mysteries revealed alone in the “ glorious 
Gospel of the blessed God.” ‘In nature we see him 
the God of power, in providence the God of wisdom, in 
the law the God of vengeance, but in the Gospel the 
God full of compassion, of overflowing love, ‘ready to 
pardon ;’ humbling himself that He might be merci- 
ful unto his enemies — that He might himself bear the 
punishment of those injuries which had been done unto 
himself; that He might beseech His own prisoners to 
be pardoned and reconciled again. In the creature He 
is the God above us; in the law He is the God against 


76 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


us; but in the Gospel He is Immanuel, the God with 
us, the God like us, God for us.” 

What strong encouragement does this subject afford 
to every truly humbled, sin-burdened, Christ-seeking 
soul! God in Christ is no longer a“ consuming fire,”’ 
but a God of love, of peace; a reconciled God. God 
in Christ holds out His hand all the day long to poor 
sinners. He receives all, He welcomes all; He rejects, 
He refuses, He casts out none. Jt ts His glory to 
pardon asinner. Itis the glory of His power, it is the 
glory of His love, it is the glory of His wisdom, it is 
the glory of His grace, to take the prey from the 
_ mighty, to deliver the lawful captive, to pluck the brand 
from the burning, to lower the golden chain of His 
mercy to the greatest depth of human wretchedness 
and guilt, and lift the needy and place him among the 
princes. Behold Christ upon the cross! Every pang 
that He endures, every stroke that He receives, every 
groan that He utters, every drop of blood that He sheds, 
proclaims that God is love, and that He stands pledged 
and is ready to pardon the vilest of the vile. Justice, 
sheathing its sword, and retiring satisfied from the 
scene, leaves Mercy gloriously triumphant. And 
““God delighteth in mercy.” Having at such an infinite 
cost opened a channel—even through the smitten heart 
of his beloved Son—through which His merey may 
flow boundless and free, venture near, nothing doubt- 
ing. No feature of your case is discouraging, nor can 
possibly arrest the pardon. Your age, your protracted 
rebellion against God, your long life of indifference to 
the concerns of your soul, the turpitude and number of 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. TA 


your sins, your want of deep convictions or of stronger 
faith, or of worth or worthiness to recommend you to 
His favour, are no true impediments to your approach, 
are no pleas wherefore you should not draw nigh and 
touch the outstretched sceptre, bathe in the opened 
fountain, put on the spotless robe, welcome the gracious 
pardon, and press it with gratitude and transport to 
your adoring heart. ; 
— In the light of this truth, cultivate loving and kindly 
views of God. Ever view Him, ever approach Him, 
and ever transact your soul’s affairs with Him, zn and 
through Jesus. He is the one Mediator between God 
and thy soul. God thy Father may now be leading © 
you through deep and dark waters. His voice may 
sound roughly to you. His dim outline is, perhaps, 
all that you can see of Him. His face seems veiled 
and averted ; yet deal with Him now in Christ, and all 
your hard thoughts, and trembling fears, and unbeliev- 
ing doubts, shall vanish. In Jesus every perfection 
dissolves into grace and love. With your eye upon 
the cross, and looking at God through that cross, all 
the dark letters of His providence will in a moment 
become radiant with light and glory. That God who 
has so revealed Himself in Jesus must be love, all love, 
and nothing but love, even in the most dark, painful, 
and afilictive dealings with His beloved people. 
Especially in the matter of prayer, cultivate and 
cherish this kindly, soothing view of God in Christ. 
Without it, in this most solemn and holy of all trans- 
actions, your mental conceptions of His nature will be 


vague, your attempts to concentrate your thoughts on 
7%* 


78 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


this one object will be baffled, and the spiritual charac- 
ter of the engagement will lessen in tone and vigour. 
But meeting God in Christ, with every perfection of 
His nature revealed and blended, you may venture 
near, and in this posture, and through this medium, 
may negotiate with Him the most momentous matters. 
You may reason, may adduce your strong arguments, 
and throwing wide open the door of the most hidden 
chamber of your heart, may confess its deepest 
iniquity ; you may place your “ secret sins in the light 
of his countenance ;”’ God still can meet you in the 
mildest lustre of his love. Drawing near, placing your 
tremulous hand of faith on the head of the atoning 
sacrifice, there is no sin that you may not confess, no 
want that you may not make known, no mercy that you 
may not ask, no blessing that you may not crave, for 
yourself, for others, for the whole church. See! the 
atoning Lord is upon the mercy-seat, the golden censer 
waves, the fragrant cloud of the much incense ascends, 
and with it are ‘‘ offered the prayers of ail saints upon 
the golden altar which is before the throne.” Jesus 
is in the midst, 
“Looks like a lamb that has been slain, 
And wears his priesthood still.” 

‘“‘ Having, therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into 
the holiest by the blood of Jesus, and having a High 
Priest over the house of God, let us draw near.” Open 
all your heart to God through Christ, who has opened 
all his heart to you in Christ. Remember that to 
bring Himself in a position to converse with you, 
as no angel could, in the matter that now burdens and 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 79 


depresses you, He assumed your nature on earth with 
that very sorrow and infirmity affixed to it; took 
it back to glory, and at this moment appears in it 
before the throne, your Advocate with the Father.— 
Then hesitate not, whatever be the nature of your 
petition, whatever the character of your need, to 
‘“‘make known your requests unto God.’’ Coming by 
simple faith in the name of Jesus, it cannot be that 
He should refuse you. With His eye of justice ever 
on the blood, and his eye of complacency ever on His 
Son, Himself loving you, too, with a love ineffably 
great, it would seem z¢mpossible that you should meet 
with a denial. Yield your ear to the sweet harmony 
of the Redeemer’s voice, ‘ Verily, verily, I say unto 
you, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my name, 
he will give it you. Hitherto have ye asked nothing 
inmy name: ask, and ye shall receive, that your joy 
may be full.” ‘‘ Whatsoever ye shall ask in my name, 
that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the 
Son.” 

The subject ts in the highest degree soothing, com- 
forting, and encouraging. It seems to introduce us 
into the very pavilion of God’s heart. There, curtained 
and shut in, we may repose in perfect peace. Nota 
single perfection can a believing mind view in Christ 
but it smiles upon him. Oh! to see holiness and 
justice, truth and love bending their glance of sweetest 
and softest benignity upon a poor, trembling soul, 
approaching to hide itself beneath the shadow of 
the cross! What a truth is this! All is sunshine 
here. The clouds are scattered, the darkness is gone, 


80 THE REDEEMER, THE REVELATION 


the tempest is hushed, the sea is calm. Justice has 
lost its sting, the law its terror, and sin its power: 
the heart of God is open, the bosom of Jesus bleeds, 
the Holy Spirit draws, the Gospel invites, and now the 
‘“‘weary and the heavily laden” may draw nigh and 
rush into the bosom of God reconciled in Christ. Oh, 
were ever words sweeter than these !—‘ God was in 
Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not im- 
- puting their trespasses unto them.” ‘Whom God has 
set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his 
blood.” ‘“‘He is able to save to the uttermost them 
that come unto God by him” 2? 

God in Christ is the covenant God of his people. 
He is their God; their tender, loving, condescending 
Father. They may lose for a while the sight and 
the enjoyment of this truth, but this contravenes it 
not; it still remains the same, unchangeable, precious, 
and glorious. Nothing can rob them of it. In the 
tempest, let it be the anchorage of your faith ; in dark- 
ness, the pole-star of your hope. Let every circum- 
stance,—the prosperity that ensnares and the adversity 
that depresses, the temptation that assails and the 
slight that wounds, endear to your believing soul this 
precious thought,—“ God reconciled, God at peace, God 
our Father in Christ, is my God for ever and ever, and 
he will be my guide even unto death.” 

If to view God in Christ is a comforting truth, it 
is also a sanctifying truth. Why has God revealed 
himself in Jesus? To evince the exceeding hatefulness 
of sin, and to show that nothing short of such a 
stupendous sacrifice could remove it consistently with 


OF THE FATHER’S GLORY. 81 


the glory of the Divine nature, and the honour of the 
Divine government. Hach sin, then, is a blow struck 
at this transcendent truth. The eye averted from it, 
sin appears a trifle; it can be looked at without indig- 
nation, tampered with without fear, committed without 
hesitation, persisted in without remorse, gloried in 
without shame, confessed without sorrow. But when 
Divine justice is seen drinking the very heart’s blood 
of God’s only Son in order to quench its infinite thirst 
for satisfaction; when God in Christ is seen in his 
humiliation, suffering, and death, all with the design 
of pardoning iniquity, transgression, and sin, how fear- 
ful a thing does it seem to sin against this holy Lord 
God! How base, how ungrateful, appears the act 
in view of love so amazing, of grace so rich, and of 
glory so great! Cultivate a constant, an ardent thirst 
for holiness. Be not discouraged, if the more intensely 
the desire for sanctification rises, the deeper and darker 
the revelation of the heart’s hidden evil. The one is 
often a consequent of the other; but persevere. The 
struggle may be painful, the battle may be strong, but 
the result is certain, and will be a glorious victory, 
victory, through the blood of the Lamb ! 


“THANKS BE UNTO GOD FOR HIS UNSPEAKABLE 
GIFT !”’ 


CHAPTER IIL. 


THE TYPICAL GLORY OF THE REDEEMER. 


“ And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame of fire out of 
the midst of a bush: and he looked, and behold, the bush burned 
with fire, and the bush was not consumed. 

; Fixod. iii. 2. 


THE entire theocracy of the Israelites was interwoven 
with a system of symbols and types of the most signi- 
ficant and instructive character. It was thus the 
wisdom and the will of God that the revelation of 
Jesus to the church should assume a consecutive and 
progressive form. Not a sudden but a gradual descent 
to the world, marked the advent of our adorable 
Redeemer. The same principle of progressiveness is 
frequently seen in a saving discovery of Christ to the 
soul. Not by an immediate and instantaneous reve- 
lation; not by a single glance of the mind, is Jesus 
always made known and seen. Long and slow is often 
the process. ‘‘ Unto you that fear my name, shall the 
Sun of righteousness arise.”’ Observe, it is a gradation 
of light. The Sun rises,—beam follows beam, light 
expands, Christ is more known; more known, he is 
more admired; more admired, he is more loved; and 
more loved, he is more implicitly obeyed and devotedly 


served. ‘Thus, the ‘ path of the just is as the shining 
(82) 


OF THE REDEEMER. 83 


light, which shineth more and more unto the perfect 
day.” 

Thus has been the revelation of Christ’s glory to the 
church of God. In her infancy—her nonage—she was 
placed ‘under tutors and governors, until the time 
appointed by the Father.” Not prepared to sustain 
the sudden and full revelation, God disciplined and 
trained her by various types and ceremonies; thus, 
wisely, and it must be admitted, graciously, shadowing 
forth His dear Son by gradual but increasingly clear 
and luminous discoveries, until the ‘‘fulness of time 
was come,” when He appeared the great Antitype of 
all the types, the glowing substance of all the shadows, 
the full signification of all the symbols, the “ bright- 
ness of the Father’s glory, the express image of his 
person.” 

With the glory of Jesus, the typical part of the old 
dispensation is replete. And although this economy 
was composed principally of mere types, they never- 
theless were God’s appointed means of transmitting 
a gradual revelation of his mind and purpose to His 
church and the world, and of developing by a series 
of the most expressive symbols, His stupendous plan 
of redemption ; nor can they be passed by in the study 
of revealed truth, without rendering unintelligible and 
obscure a very extensive portion of the sacred word. 

In considering the typical glory of Christ, it would 
be impossible in the compass of a single chapter to 
present an adequate view of all the types of the Old 
Testament, which set forth the Lord Jesus in his per- 
son and work. We have, therefore, selected from the 


84 THE TYPICAL GLORY 


many a single one,—the burning bush,—as embodying 
a mass of truth relating to our adorable Immanuel. 
On the history with which it stands connected, it is 
not necessary to enlarge. It will be sufficient to our 
purpose to remark, that Moses, to whom the wondrous 
spectacle appeared, was now preparing for a post of 
signal labour, responsibility, and honour. Brought up 
in the palace and educated in the court of Pharaoh, 
king of Egypt, he was but imperfectly qualified to take 
his place in the front of a suffering and tried people, 
delivering them from their oppression, sympathizing 
with their sufferings, establishing their economy, fram- 
ing their laws, and conducting them through a rough, 
intricate, and dangerous desert, to a land of promised 
rest. From this school of luxury and repose, God 
transfered him to one more calculated to train him for 
the toils, the hardships, and the perils of the wilder- 
ness; and to qualify him for the office of legislating 
for a church, whose God was Jehovah, and whose 
history was at that moment written in “letters of 
mourning, lamentation, and woe.’’ He sent him into 
the land of Midian, and for forty years was he em- 
ployed in pastoral servitude for Jethro, his father-in- 
law. Engaged in this lowly calling, by the side of 
Mount Horeb, ‘ the angel of the Lord appeared unto 
him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush: and 
he looked, and behold, the bush burned with fire, and 
the bush was not consumed. And Moses said, I will 
now turn aside, and see this great sight, why the bush 
is not burned. And when the Lord saw that he turned 
aside to see, God called unto him out of the midst of 


OF THE REDEEMER. 85 


the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here 
am I. And he said, Draw not nigh hither: put off 
thy shoes from thy feet, for the place whereon thou 
standest is holy ground. Moreover he said, I am the 
God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of 
Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his 
face; for he was afraid to look upon God.” 

Now this type—a type it doubtless is—is radiant 
with the glory of Christ. Who but the Holy Spirit, 
the Glorifier of Jesus, can unfold it? It shadows forth 
Christ in the mysterious constitution of his complex 
person, and in the great work for the accomplishment 
of which he became so constituted. In these two 
points of view, in connexion with the import of the 
solemn admonition annexed to it, let us proceed to 
consider this expressive symbol. 

The first point demanding our attention is, the 
Divine manifestation. That Jehovah was here revealed 
the evidence is most conclusive. When Moses turned 
aside to see the great sight, “‘ God called unto him out 
of the midst of the bush.” It was not a mere vision 
that he saw, no hallucination of the mind had come 
over him; he could not be deceived as to the Divine 
Being in whose immediate and solemn presence he 
then stood. How awe-struck must have been his 
mind! how solemn his impressions, and how sacred 
his thoughts! But if further proof were needed, the 
declaration of God himself sets the question of the 
Divine appearance at rest: I am the God of thy 
father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and 

8 


86 THE TYPICAL GLORY 


the God of Jacob.”’ No truth could be more clearly 
established. 

But in which person of the sacred and adorable 
Three, it may be asked, did God thus appear? We 
have every scriptural reason to believe that it was 
JEHOVAH JESUS; that it was a’manifestation; antici- 
pative of his future appearance in the flesh, of the 
Godhead of Christ. ‘Thus, then, the type sets forth 
the glory of the Divine person of our dear Lord. How 
solemn, and yet how delightful to the mind, and esta- 
blishing to our faith, is the truth, that the same God 
who under the old dispensation, on so many occasions, 
in SO many gracious and glorious ways, and in so many 
remarkable and undoubted instances, appeared to the 
ancient believers, is He who was born in Bethlehem, 
who lived a life of obedience to the law, and died an 
atoning death upon the cross; the Saviour, the Surety 
of his people! What reality does it give to the salva- 
tion of the saints! Beloved, remember as you hang 
over this page, the same Jehovah who spake from the 
midst of the flaming bush, and said, “‘ I am the God 
of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,”’ 
speaks to you from the cross, and in the Gospel, and 
says, ‘“‘Come unto me, all ye that labour and are 
heavily laden, and I will give you rest.”” ‘O glorious 
Gospel of the blessed God !”’ ; 

The second point of consideration in this remarkable 
type, as setting forth the glory of Immanuel, is the 
symbol in which he appeared. It is full of instruc- 
tion. And what symbol did our Lord select in which 
to embody his deity? Did he choose some tall cedar 


OF THE REDEEMER. 87 


of Lebanon, or some majestic oak of the forest? Nay; 
but a dush—the most mean and insignificant, the most 
lowly and unsightly of all trees—was to enshrine the 
Godhead of Him whom the heaven of heavens cannot 
contain. And what is the truth it conveys? Oh, 
most glorious and precious! It points to the incarnate 
glory of the Son of God—the lowliness and meanness 
of his nature. Referring again to the type, it. will 
instantly appear that the unveiled, unclouded, and 
unembodied glory of Jehovah would have appalled 
and overwhelmed with its ineffable brightness the awe- 
stricken and astonished man of God. He could not 
have looked upon God and lived. ‘ There shall no 
man see me, and live,’ says the Lord. It was there- 
fore proper, yea, it was merciful, that all the manifest- 
ations of God to His people in the old dispensation, 
should be through the medium of objects on which the 
eye could look without pain, and on which the mind 
could repose without fear. Veiled in a cloud, or em- 
bodied in a bush, God could approach the creature 
with condescending grace, and revealed his mind—the 
creature could approach God with humble confidence, 
and open his heart. How kind and condescending in 
Jehovah to subdue and soften the splendour of His 
majesty, thus attempering it ye the weak vision of 
mortal and sinful man! 

But this was typical of that more wondrous and 
stupendous stoop of God in the new dispensation. All 
the subdued and obscure manifestations of the God- 
head in the former economy, were but the forecasting 
shadows of the great mystery of godliness then ap- 


88 THE TYPICAL GLORY 


proaching; and possessed no glory by reason of the 
glory that excelleth. But mark the condescending 
grace, the deep abasement, the infinite lowliness of 
the Son of God. When he purposed to appear in 
an inferior nature, what form of manifestation did he 
assume? Did he embody his Godhead in some tall 
archangel? Did he enshrine it in some glowing 
seraph? No! “For verily he took not on him the 
nature of angels; but he took on him the seed of 
Abraham.” He lowered himself to our mean and 
degraded nature — He selected our fallen, suffering, 
sorrowing, tempted humanity — He takes into union 
with Deity a creature, not of the highest rank and 
beauty, but a spirit dwelling in a temple of flesh; yea, 
not merely the inhabitant of the temple, but he unites 
himself with the temple himself, for “the Word was 
made flesh, and dwelt among us;”’ and even this flesh 
not connected with its state of primeval glory, but 
associated with all the humbling though sinless in- 
firmities of its fallen condition. Behold, too, the 
meanness of Christ in the world’s eye. In him it sees 
no glory and traces no beauty; his outward form of 
humiliation veils it from their view. He is to them 
but as a “root out of the dry ground, having no form 
nor comeliness.”” Onthis point we shall more fully 
enlarge when we come to consider the humiliation of 
the Son of God. 

There is yet another part of this significant type 
to be considered, equally important and rich in the 
view it conveys of the Glory of Jesus in his work. 
“The angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame 


OF THE REDEEMER. 89 


of fire out of the midst of a bush; and he looked, and, 
behold, the bush burned with fire and the bush was 
not consumed.” ‘The symbol of fire was expressive of 
the holiness and justice of God It is thus frequently 
employed: “‘The Lord thy God is a consuming fire.” 
—Deut.iv. 24. “And the sight of the glory of the 
Lord was like devouring fire.” —Exod. xxiv. 17. “Our 
God is a consuming fire.”— Heb. xii. 29. But that 
which formed the greatest wonder,— which riveted the 
eye, and attracted and enchained the feet of Moses to 
the spot, was the dusk unconsumed. ‘And Moses 
said, I will now turn aside, and see this great sight, 
why the bush is not burned.”’ 

But a more marvellous and stupendous spectacle 
meets us in the cross of Christ — Jesus enduring the 
fire of his Father’s wrath: wrapped in the flame of his 
justice, and yet unconsumed! Let us turn aside from 
all inferior objects, and for a while contemplate this 
“oreat sight.” It is ¢ndeed a great sight! The Son 
of God is laid upon the altar as a ‘burnt offering,” 
—a sacrifice for sin. The fire of Divine justice 
descends to consume him — holiness in fearful exercise. 
heaps on its fuel, and the flame and the smoke ascend 
in one vast column before the throne of the Eternal, 
‘Can offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smell- 
ing savour.” But behold the astonishment! Jesus 
suffering, and yet rejoicing! dying, and yet living! 
consuming and yet unconsumed. These prodigies 
marked the offering up of our Great High Priest 
upon Calvary. The dark billows of sorrow rolled over 


the human soul of Christ, but the Godhead remained 
& * 


90 THE TYPICAL GLORY 


calm and peaceful, its tranquillity unruffled by a wave 
of grief, its sunshine undimmed by a cloud of dark- 
ness. He thus passed through all these throbs, and 
throes, and agonies of death, descended into the grave, 
rose again, lived, and still lives, the fountain of life to 
the created universe. Behold the Gop! Say you 
he is a mere creature! Preposterous thought! Mad 
conception! Soul-destructive belief! Had he been 
less than divine, suffering as he did for sin, the devour- 
ing fire would have consumed him in its unquenchable 
flame. 

To the heart-broken sinner, how attractive and 
glorious is this spectacle of the Almighty Redeemer 
sustaining the wrath, and suffering the justice of God 
for transgression! Mourning soul! turn asside, and 
behold yet again this “great sight.’ ‘‘ Put off thy 
shoes from thy feet, for the place whereon thou stand- 
est is holy ground.” Lay aside thy fleshly reasoning, 
thy carnal views of self-justification, self-salvation, and 
human power — put off all thy fleshly ideas of God, of 
His grace, and of His goodness; divest thyself of all 
thy unbelieving and hard thoughts of His power, will- 
ingness, and readiness to save thee. Thus prepared, 
approach — gaze, wonder, and adore! No one can 
stand on this holy ground, but he who stands in his 
own nothingness—none are welcome here but the poor, 
the empty, the bankrupt, and the vile. Art thou all 
this? is this thy case? Then draw nigh! God will 
speak from amid the flame of the sacrifice, and say to 
thee, “‘ Fear not!” 

One feature more in this beautiful and instructive 


OF THE REDEEMER. Ol 


type remains to be considered, viz., the especial design 
of God in this miraculous appearance. After calming 
the troubled mind of Moses by revealing to him who 
He was, ver. 6, He then proceeds to explain the gra- 
cious intentions of His advent. ‘‘And the Lord said, 
I have surely seen the afflictions of my people who 
are in Egypt, and have heard their cry by reason of 
their task-masters ; for I know their sorrows. And I 
am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the 
Egyptians, and to bring them out of that land into a 
good land and a large, into a land flowing with milk 
and honey.’’—ver. 7, 8. 

But a greater work, a mightier and more glorious 
deliverance, did our Almighty Redeemer come down 
to effect. To this the Spirit of Christ which was in 
the prophet Isaiah testified. ‘‘The spirit of the Lord 
God is upon me; because the Lord hath anointed me 
to preach good tidings unto the meek; he hath sent 
me to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty 
to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them 
that are bound. The Lord saw from heaven the 
affliction of his chosen people who were in Egypt — 
the land of spiritual darkness, bondage, and oppres- 
sion: he heard their cry by reason of their hard task- 
masters—he knew their sorrows, and he came down to 
deliver and to bring them out of that land into a good 
land—a large place—a land truly flowing with milk 
and honey. Oh, from what a land of gloom, from 
what an iron furnace, and from what a hard oppressor, 
has Jesus delivered his people! He has rescued them 
from a state of nature, and brought them into a state 


92, THE TYPICAL GLORY 


of grace—from ignorance of God, of Christ, and of 
themselves, in which the fall had involved them—from 
the guilt of sin, and the condemnation of the law— 
from the captivity and tyranny of Satan, and from 
their hard and oppressive servitude. And, oh, into 
what a land of rest, blessedness, and plenty, has he 
brought them! Into covenant relationship with God, 
as His adopted children—ainto a state of pardon and 
acceptance—into the enjoyment of His love and pre- 
sence; to know God as their reconciled Father—to 
know their oneness with Jesus their exalted Head, 
and their union with the body as its members—to a 
state of most holy and blessed liberty, as chosen, 
called, and adopted saints. Into the experience of all 
these blessings has a greater than Moses brought us. 
‘¢ When the fullness of the time was come, God sent 
forth his Son made of a woman, made under the law, 
to redeem them that were under the law, that we might 
receive the adoption of sons.’’ Let us, then, ‘give 
thanks unto the Father, who hath made us meet 
to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in 
light: who hath delivered us from the power of dark- 
ness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of his 
dear Son,’ ‘even Jesus, who delivered us from the 
wrath to come.” Truly is Jesus, our Great Deliverer, 
‘¢ counted worthy of more glory than Moses.” 

This remarkable incident in the history of God’s 
ancient Israel, which we have thus far been consider: 
ing, as setting forth the typical glory of our Immanuel, 
is perhaps as equally illustrative of most important 
truth, bearing upon the experimental and practical 


OF THE REDEEMER. 93 


experience of each believer in Jesus. It presents a 
true and beautiful outline of the church of God. 
We are reminded of the two opposite natures of the 
believer —the fallen and the restored, the fleshly 
and the spiritual. The one low, sinful, uncomely, 
and of the earth—earthy; the other, elevated, holy, 
glorious, and of heaven—-heavenly. ‘‘ That which is 
born of the flesh is flesh, that which is born of the 
Spirit is spre.” 

The conflict between these opposite and antagonist 
natures in the child of God, is also presented to view. 
As the bush in which the Divinity dwelt was surrounded 
by flame, so the regenerated man, in whom the eternal 
God deigns to dwell by his Spirit, is perpetually en- 
circled by the fire of conflict, trial, and suffering. 
Nature and grace, sin and holiness, are as contrary the 
one to the other as any two principles can be. They 
can no more agree, commingle, nor coalesce, than can 
the opposite and antagonist elements in the natural 
world. Nor can there ever be a truce between them. 
They must necessarily and perpetually be at variance, 
hostile to, and at war with each other. The contest 
is for supremacy. The great question at issue is 
“‘ which shall reign in the believer —sin or holiness, 
nature or grace, Satan or God?” Oh, what a fiery 
conflict is this! Hear the confession of an inspired 
apostle, drawn from his own painful experience: “I 
am carnal, sold under sin. For that which I do I 
allow not, for what I would, that do I not; but whatI 
hate, that doI. If then I do that which I would not, 
I consent to the law that it is good. Now then it is 


94. THE TYPICAL GLORY 


no more I that do it, but sin that dwelleth in me. 
For I know that in me, (that is, in my flesh,) dwelleth 
no good thing.” Rom. vii. 14—18. Who cannot trace 
the conflict here? Sin, he deeply, inveterately ab- 
horred. The prevailing tendency, the habitual and 
fixed inclination of his renewed mind, was to holiness 
— the bent of his desires was towards God. And yet 
in consequence of the native depravity of his heart, 
the influence of sinful propensities, corrupt inclina- 
tions and desires, he felt like one chained to a body of 
death, from which he longed to be delivered. Here 
was that which defined the two natures, marked the 
perpetual conflict between both, and which distinguished 
the holy man from the sinner. 

In addition to this spiritual conflict, there are the 
flames of suffering and trial which often encircle a 
dear child of God. This is the baptism of fire, con- 
nected with, and ever following, the baptism of the 
Holy Ghost. ‘He shall baptize you,” says John, 
‘‘with the Holy Spirit, and with fire.” God hath his 
‘‘fire in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem.” ‘The 
Lord trieth the righteous.”’ ‘‘ He shall sit as a refiner 
and purifier of silver.”” But it is not the furnace of 
justice nor the fire of wrath. Jesus, the Surety,. has 
passed through and sustained all this; He has 
quenched its flame, and extinguished its embers. But 
it is the discipline of everlasting love and mercy. And 
though persecution may be permitted to rage, and the 
confessor of Christ may ascend to glory in a chariot 
of flame — though trials of various kinds may overtake 
the child of God, his grace and his graces “tried with 
fire,” yet both the persecution of the church and the 


OF THE REDEEMER. 95 


trial of the believer are but the fruit of eternal and 
unchangeable love, and will prove purifying, sanctify- 
ing, and saving. Nothing will be consumed but the 
tinsel of the world, and the dross of sin, the alloy 
so much and so frequently found mixed with the pure 
gold. | 

But contemplate one more surpassing and precious 
truth —the church is unconsumed! And why? 
Because He who dwelt in the bush dwells in the 
church. The believer is the temple of the Holy Spirit. 
The High and the Lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, 
whose name is Holy, dwells in him. Christ is in him 
the hope of glory. It is impossible that he can 
perish. Why has not the poor, feeble bush been 
consumed? why has not grace declined, and faith 
failed, and love become totally extinguished? why 
has not “‘the fiery dart’’ of Satan prevailed, and the 
fierce and hot flame of persecution and of trial 
utterly consumed? Because greater is He that is 
in the believer than he that is in the world. Believer 
in Jesus! tell me not only of the sin that dwelleth 
in you, often bringing your soul into bondage and 
distress ; tell me also of the grace that dwelleth in 
you, which as often gives you the victory, and sends 
you rejoicing on your way. Tell not only of the 
burning fiery furnace seven times heated; tell also of 
Him whose form is like the Son of God, who is with 
you in the furnace, and who has brought, and who 
will yet bring you through with not a hair of your 
head singed, nor the smell of fire passed upon your 
garments. Tell not only of the “trial of your faith,” 
“though it be tried with fire,” but that also, through 


96 THE TYPICAL GLORY 


the ceaseless intercession of Jesus within the veil, 
that faith never yet has failed. Tell not only of 
the burden that has oppressed: tell also of the grace 
that has sustained—not only of the sorrow that has_ 
wounded, but also of the Divine sympathy, tenderness, 
and gentleness that have soothed and comforted, 
bound up and healed that wound. O to hear more 
frequently the shout of victory and the song of praise 
breaking in sweet music from the lips of the redeemed ! 
How much more would Jesus be glorified ! 
Unconverted reader! there is a fire—what if it be 
already kindled—that will never go out; a flame 
now burning that will never be quenched. Have 
you not read of it in God’s word? ‘Behold, the 
day cometh that shall burn as an oven; and all the 
proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall be as 
stubble: and the day that cometh shall burn them 
up, saith the Lord of hosts, that it shall leave them 
neither root nor branch.”’ Mal. iv. 1. Then shall 
he also say unto them on the left hand, Depart from 
me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the 
devil and his angels.’’ Matt. xxv. 41 “If thy hand 
offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter 
into life maimed, than having two hands to go into 
hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched: 
where their worm dieth not, aud their fire is not 
quenched.’ Matt. ix. 43, 44. “Who among us shall 
dwell with the devouring fire? who among us shall 
dwell with everlasting burnings?” Isaiah xxxiu. 14. 
Flee, then, from the wrath to come! This moment 
flee! Linger not upon the confines of a world “kept 
in store, reserved unto fire against the day of judg- 


OF THE REDEEMER. OT 


ment and perdition of ungodly men,” but hasten 
from all below to Christ. ‘Escape for thy life; 
look not behind thee, nor stay thou in all the 
plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou be con- 
sumed.” Jesus is your only hiding-place, your refuge, 
your covert from the tempest. Away from a world 
doomed to woe; away from all refuge in your own 
obedience to the law, in works of human merit; 
away from self, from sin, from all, to Jesus. Until 
him you have reached, you are suspended by a hair 
over the bottomless pit: mone moment, and at any 
moment, it may break, and you are gone; and once 
lost, lost for ever ! 

Dear tried and suffering reader, dost thou resemble 
this burning bush? art thou in the fire, passing 
through the furnace? does some strong temptation 
assail thee—some sore trial oppress thee — some deep 
sorrow wound thee? He who dwelt in the bush dwells 
in thee! and he who kept the bush unconsumed 
amidst the flame, will keep thee! Let thy greatest 
care and deepest solicitude be to “glorify God in 
the fires.”” Be more prayerful for sustaining and 
sanctifying grace, than for the removal of thy trial. 
This will bring richer glory to God. Beseech thy 
Father that the flame may not be extinguished until 
the alloy is consumed, and the tried gold has come 
forth reflecting more vividly from its surface the 
image of Jesus —thy soul partaking more deeply of 
the Divine HOLINESS. " 

“THANKS BE UNTO GOD FOR HIS UNSPEAKABLE 
Girt !” 

9 


CHAPTER IV. 


THE PROPHETICAL GLORY OF THE REDEEMER. 


“These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spake of 
him.” — John xii. 41. 


How true is it that ‘the testimony of Jesus is the 
spirit of prophecy!” ‘To Him give all the prophets 
witness.” Of Him, as of one only glorious person, 
they delighted to testify—of Him, as of one only pre- 
cious subject, they delighted to speak. Never did the 
Divine afflatus rest uponthem with greater power— 
never did they strike their prophetic harps to strains 
so high, so rich, so sweet, as when IMMANUEL was 
their theme. And is it too much to say, that mag- 
nificent as is the drapery in which their writings are 
clothed — gorgeous as is the imagery, and sublime the 
doctrines in which these announcements are invested, 
they would possess no beauty, glory, or sweetness, but 
for — Jesus ? | 

The confidence and the joy of the church has ever 
been the prospective view she has had of the coming 
Messiah. Through the long vista of ages she saw Him 
advancing ; and though the vision was distant and dim, 
yet, persuaded of the promise, she embraced it, and 


rested in it, believing that God was able as he was 
(98) 


THE PROPHETICAL GLORY, ETC. 99 


willing to make good all that He had in covenant 
mercy pledged to do. The incarnate God was her 
hope, her joy, her trust; and living or dying, the 
‘“‘ Consolation of Israel”? was the pole-star on which 
the eye of her faith was ever and immovably fixed. 
It pleased God to raise up a school of prophets, whom 
He endowed with extraordinary powers of inspiration, 
filling them with the Holy Spirit, whose especial office 
it was to feed this desire, to animate this hope, and 
to strengthen this expectation of faith, by keeping the 
glorious truth of the approaching Saviour constantly 
and prominently before the eye of the church. “ Of 
which salvation the prophets have inquired and searched 
diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should 
come unto you: searching what (person), or what period 
of time the Spirit of Christ who was in them did signify, 
when he testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, 
and the glory that should follow.” 1 Pet. i. 10, 11. 
That we are justified in looking into the prophetical 
Scriptures for peculiar revelations of the glory of Christ, 
will appear clear from a reference to a few passages 
bearing upon this subject. Our Lord’s conversation 
with the two disciples journeying to Emmaus is strik- 
ingly in point. In the first place, Jesus gently chides 
them for their want of faith in the prophetical writings 
relating to himself. ‘O fools, and slow of heart to 
believe all that the prophets have spoken.” Luke 
xxiv. 25, He then passes to the great subject before 
him, “‘ And beginning at Moses, and all the prophets, 
he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the 
things concerning himself.” ver. 27. The same day, 


100 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


and on another occasion, appearing in their assembled 
midst, ‘He said unto them, These are the words 
which [I spake unto you while I was yet with you, that 
all things must be fulfilled, which were written zn the 
law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the Psalms 
concerning me. ‘Then opened he their understand- 
ing that they might understand the Scriptures.” ver. 
44, 45. 

In a conversation he held with the Jews, how point- 
edly did he refer to his glory as beaming from beneath 
the veil of the Mosaic writings! ‘Do not think that 
I will accuse you to the Father: there is one that 
accuseth you, even Moses, in whom ye trust. For had 
ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he 
wrote of me.” And well did he exhort them to search 
the Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal 
life: and they are they which testify of me.” Thus 
invited and encouraged, let us address ourselves to the 
pleasing task of drawing aside the prophetical veil, thus 
revealing the hidden glories of our Immanuel. The 
unfolding of this subject will be found to present a 
brief exposition of those striking words of the evange- 
list : ‘‘ These things said Hsaias, when he saw his glory 
and spake of him.” 

We commence with the testimony which the pro- 
phetical Scriptures bring to the doctrine of our Lord’s 
deity. Clearer intimations of the divinity of Christ are 
nowhere found than in the Old Testament writings. 
Look at Isaiah vi. 1, &.: ‘In the year that king 
Uzziah died, I saw also the Lord sitting upon a throne, 
high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. 


™~ 
OF THE REDEEMER. 101 


Above it stood the seraphim: each one had six wings ; 
with twain he covered his face, and with twain he 
covered his feet, and with twain he did fly. And one 
cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the 
Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory. 
And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him 
that cried, and the house was filled with smoke. Then 
said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am 
aman of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a 
people of unclean lips: for mine eyes have seen the 
King, the Lord of hosts.” What an august revelation 
of the glory of Christ’s Godhead was this which broke 
upon the view of the lowly prophet! How instructive 
is each particular of his beatific vision! Mark the pro- 
found humility of the seraphim,—they veiled with their 
wings, their faces and their feet. They were in the 
presence of Jesus. They saw the King in his beauty, 
and covered themselves. 

But the effect of this view of our Lord’s Divine 
glory upon the mind of the prophet, is still more 
impressive: ‘‘Then said I, Woe is me! for I am 
undone; because I am a man of unclean lips . . . for 
mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of hosts.” 
What prostrated his soul thus low in the dust? What 
filled him with this self-abasement? What over- 
whelmed him with this keen sense of his vileness ? 
Oh, it was the unclouded view he had of the essential 
glory of the Son of God! And thus will it ever be. 
The beaming forth of Christ’s glory in the soul, reveals 
its hidden evil; the knowledge of this evil lays the 


believer low before God with the confession, ‘I abhor 
9 * 


102 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


myself. Woe is me, for lam undone!” Beloved, let 
this truth be ever present to your mind, that as we 
increasingly see glory in Jesus, we shall increasingly 
see that there is no glory in ourselves. Jesus is the 
Sun which reveals the pollutions and defilements that 
are within. The chambers of abomination are all closed 
until Christ shines in upon the soul. Oh, then it is 
these deep-seated and long-veiled deformities are 
revealed ; and we, no longer gazing with a complaisant 
eye upon self, sink in the dust before God, over- 
whelmed with shame, and covered with confusion of 
face. Holy posture! Blessed spectacle! —a soul 
prostrate before the glory of the incarnate God! All 
high and lofty views of its own false glory, annihilated 
by clear and close views of the true glory of Jesus. As 
when the sun appears, all the less lights vanish into 
darkness, so when Jesus rises in noontide glory upon 
the soul, all other glory retires, and he alone fixes 
the eye, and fills the mind. “With twain they 
covered their faces, and with twain they covered their 
feet.’ Their own perfections and beauty were not to 
be seen in the presence of the glory of the Lord. How 
much more profound should be the humility and self- 
abasement of man! Have we covered ourselves,— not 
with the pure wings of the holy cherubim,— but with 
sackcloth and ashes, before the Lord! Have we sought 
to veil—not our beauties, for beauties we have none— 
but our innumerable and flagrant deformities, even the 
‘“‘spots upon our feasts of love,” the sins of our best 
and holiest things; and, renouncing all self-glory, 
have we sunk, as into nothing, before God? Oh, we 


\ 


OF THE REDEEMER. 103 


are yet strangers to the vision of Christ’s glory, if we 
have not! If the consolations of human gifts and 
attainments, distinctions and usefulness, on which 
unsanctified and unmortified self so delights to gaze, 
have not retired into oblivion, the Sun of Righteous- 
ness has yet to rise upon our souls with healing in his 
wings. 

His glory as the God-man is reflected with equal 
clearness from the prophetical page. Thus was it pre- 
dicted that the eternal Son of God should assume an 
inferior and a human form. “Behold, a virgin shall 
conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name 
Immanuel.” Isa. vi. 14. ‘ Unto us a child is born, 
unto us a son is given: and the government shall be 
upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called, 
Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The ever- 
lasting Father, the Prince of Peace.” ix. 6. Could any 
truth be more emphatically or distinctly stated? Oh, 
what love in the Father does it unfold, that not only 
He should have promised His dear Son, but that He 
should have held out that promise at so distant a 
period, and in such terms, as would lay an unequivocal 
foundation for the faith, hope, and joy of the saints, in 
all ages of the world! 

His Divine anointing, constituting an important 
feature of his official glory, and opening a channel of 
the most costly blessing to the church, forms a distinct 
and sacred theme of the prophetical writings. ‘‘ The 
‘Spirit of the Lord God is upon me; because the Lord 
hath anointed me.” Isa. Ixi. 1. ‘And there shall 
come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a 


104 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


Branch shall grow out of his roots: and the Spirit of 
the Lord shall rest upon him.” xi. 1, 2. This anoint- 
ing was upon the Redeemer, in infinite richness and 
fragrance. ‘God giveth not the Spirit by measure 
unto him.” As essentially Jehovah, he needed it not; 
but as the great High Priest, and the mediatorial Head 
of his “church, which is his body, the fulness of Him 
that filleth allin all,” it was necessary that the anoint- 
ing oil should be upon him in its utmost plenitude. 
As one with him, all the members alike participate. 
‘¢ Tt is like the precious ointment upon the head, that 
ran down upon the beard, even Aaron’s beard: that 
went to the skirts of his garment ;”’ even to the lowest 
believer, — Ah! and he that Meth the lowest, obtains 
the most of this ‘precious ointment,” as it descends 
from Jesus; the hand of faith that touches but the 
hem of his garment, receives from Him who was 
‘‘ anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows.” 
Dear reader, are you professedly one with Jesus and 
his saints? then seek, oh diligently seek, a large and 
still larger degree of this holy and fragrant anointing. 
Rest not short of it. Be not satisfied to proceed 
another step without it. Be not content with a mere 
profession, having a name to live, yet lacking all the 
essential evidences of real life, while discovering many 
of the fearful attributes of actual death. 

The possession of this anointing of the Holy Spirit 
will decide the momentous, and perhaps with you, 
doubtful question, of your union with Christ. Men 


> 


will take knowledge of you, that you have been with 
Jesus, and learned from Him. Your life will be a reflec- 


OF THE REDEEMER. 105 


tion, faint at best, yet a reflection of His holy life. 
You will bear some resemblance to the ‘‘ altogether 
lovely’ one; your spirit will breathe His meekness ; 
your demeanour will be stamped with his gentleness ; 
your whole conversation will be seasoned with His 
grace; all your “ garments will smell of myrrh, and 
aloes, and cassia, out of the ivory palaces ;” an unction 
will pervade your prayers, a power irresistible will 
accompany your labours, and in every place you will 
be a sweet savour of Christ, blessed and a blessing. 
Christ, the foundation of the church, was a truth, 
the great glory of which the evangelical prophet also 
saw and spake of. ‘‘ Thus saith the Lord God, Behold, 
I lay in Zion for a foundation a stone, a tried stone, a 
precious corner-stone, a sure foundation.” Isa. xxviil. 
16. How identical of the Redeemer is this splendid 
prophecy! Every word in the passage, and every 
quality of the figure, is expressive of some essential 
part of His character and work. Jesus is fitly com- 
pared to a “stone” for strength and durability. He 
is a “Saviour, and a great one’’-—“‘ mighty to save.” 
“I have laid help upon one that is mighty.” If it 
were probable that the fact of His Deity should be 
announced in a voice of thunder from the eternal 
throne, can we suppose it would be uttered in terms 
more decided and explicit than those which fell upon 
the ear of the exiled evangelist from the lips of Christ 
himself? ‘Iam the Alpha and the Omega, the be- 
ginning and the ending, saith the Lord, who is, and 
who was, and who is to come, the ALmienty.” Rev. 
i.8 And what a needed truth is this! None but 


106 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


an Almighty ransom could have saved from going 
down to the pit. Jesus is our ransom, and Jesus is 
the Almighty. 

The Redeemer is not only a stone, but a“ tried 
stone.” The grand experiment has been made—the 
great test has been applied, and to answer all the ends 
for which the Lord God laid it in Zion, it has proved 
completely adequate. Never was a foundation tried as 
this.. In the eternal purpose of Redemption, Omni- 
potence tried it. In the Divine mind there existed no 
lurking suspicion, no embarrassing uncertainty as to 
the result. The Father knew all that this foundation 
was to sustain, and well He knew, too, that it was 
capable of sustaining all. Stupendous were the con- 
sequences. His own glory and the honour of His 
goverment were involved; the salvation of His elect 
was to be secured; death, with all its horrors, was to 
be abolished ; life, with all its immortal, untold glories, 
was to be revealed,—hell was to be closed, and heaven 
opened to all believers. With such momentous reali- 
ties pending,—with such mighty and glorious results 
at stake, the Eternal mind, in its purpose of grace and 
glory, would lay for a foundation a “tried stone.” 
Blessed Immanuel! how effulgently does thy glory 
beam from beneath thy prophetical veil! Thou art 
that ‘tried stone,’’—tried by the Father when he laid 
upon thee all His people’s sins and transgressions, 
bruised thee and put thee to grief. Tried by the law, 
when it exacted and received from thee the utmost 
obedience to its precepts. ‘Tried by Divine justice, 
when it kindled around thee its fiercest flame, yet con- 


OF THE REDEEMER. 107 


sumed thee not. Tried by the church, built upon thee 
so securely that the gates of hell shall never prevail 
against her. Tried by poor sinners, who have brought 
their burdens of guilt to thy blood, and have found 
pardon and peace. Tried by believers, who have taken 
their trials to thy sympathy, their sorrows to thy love, 
their wounds to thy healing, their weakness to thy 
strength, their emptiness to thy fulness, their petitions 
to thine ear, and have never, never been disappointed. 
Oh yes, thou art that “tried stone,” to whom I would 
come moment by moment. 

‘‘A precious corner stone.’”’ Of whom does the 
prophet speak this, but of Jesus, compared with whom 
nothing is precious? THe alone is worthy of the term, 
who alone can smooth life’s rugged path, sweeten life’s 
bitter trials, lighten life’s heavy burdens, and this by 
daily and hourly emanations of his own life, grace, and 
preciousness. Oh, how precious — what language can 
express it ?—Jis this precious stone to him who, con- 
scious of his vileness, poverty, and nothingness, or with 
a spirit oppressed with deep trial, or bleeding from 
painful bereavement, wades to it through the billows, 
exclaiming, ‘“‘ When my heart is overwhelmed, lead me 
to the Rock that is higher than I.’ Precious in his 
all-atoning blood,—precious in His all-justifying right- 
eousness,— precious in His infinite fulness,— precious 
in every office that He fills, in every work that He 
performs, in every promise that He makes, is Christ to 
him who, finding all other foundations but as sliding 
sand, builds.his hope of glory upon the incarnate God. 
“To you, therefore, that believe, he is precious.” 


108 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


A “corner stone,’ too, is our glorious Redeemer. 
The important position which this occupies in the 
spiritual building,— its essential relation to the com- 
pactness, strength, and durability of the whole fabric, 
we fear, is not duly considered by many who are 
professedly ‘“‘living stones in the spiritual house.” 
And yet how momentous and how holy is the instruc- 
tion it conveys! The corner stone is that which 
unites the parts of the edifice: it is to the building 
what the key stone is to the arch; it imparts unity, 
symmetry, and strength. The Lord Jesus has been 
the uniteng stone of the church in all ages. The 
saints of the Patriarchal, Levitical, and Christian 
Churches, all meet and form, in Him, one glorious 
temple of the living God. ‘No more strangers and 
foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of 
the household of God:” they are ‘built upon the 
foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ 
himself being the chief CORNER STONE; in whom all 
the building, fitly framed together, groweth unto an 
holy temple in the Lord,” and thus becomes “a habi- 
tation of God through the Spirit.” To allude to 
another figure employed by the Holy Spirit to illus- 
trate and enforce the same blessed truth,—the unity 
of the church,—the Lord Jesus is declared to be the 
one spiritual Hnap of his ‘‘ church, who is His body, 
the fulness of Him that filleth all in all.” Thus in 
itself one by its oneness with Him, it is represented 
as ‘‘erowing up into Him in all things, which is the 
Head, even Christ: from whom the whole body, fitly 
joined together, and compacted by that which every 


OF THE REDEEMER. 109 


joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in 
the measure of every part, maketh increase of the 
body unto the edifying of itself in love.” ‘‘ There”’— 
in Christ—‘“is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither 
bond nor free, there is neither male nor female, for ye 
are all one in Christ Jesus,” and “ Christ is all and in 
all.’’ To the consideration of this holy and precious, 
theme —the unity of the church —let us for a few 
moments turn our attention. 

That there are divistons in the church of God, 
visible and painful; that the one body is sadly dis- 
membered, the seamless robe rudely torn and dis- 
figured, is a truth too glaring to conceal, and almost 
too painful and humiliating to acknowledge. Alas that 
it should be so! Oh, how much is the unity of the 
church lost sight of in the din of religious contro- 
versy, and in the heat of party zeal! How does 
brother look coldly upon brother, and minister glance 
suspiciously at minister, and church stand aloof from 
church! Ought this so to be? 

And to what may it in a great degree be traced? 
We believe to a forgetfulness of the truth, that all 
true believers are ‘“‘one in Christ Jesus; that the 
blood of the Lamb is the bond of union of the saints ; 
that he is the ‘‘corner stone,” uniting all the parts of 
the one edifice ; and that, if built upon Him, we are one 
with that church, and that church is one with Christ. 

The unity of the mystical church of God consists 
not in a unity of creed. A higher, a diviner, and a 
more endearing principle unites her than this. Ar- 


dently as it should be desired, and fervently as it 
10 


™— 


110 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


should be prayed for, that the promised day of mil- 
lennial blessedness may speedily come, when the 
‘watchman shall see eye to eye,’ when from every 
battlement in Zion the silver trumpets shall emit one 
sweet harmonious sound; yet, even then, not more es- 
sentially will the church of God be one than she is now. 
True, her unity will be more visible, her divisions will 
be healed, her bleeding wounds will be stanched, her 
intestine conflicts will have ceased; ‘‘ Ephraim ‘shall 
not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim any 
more;’’ and the harsh sounds of strife, now so loud and _ 
discordant, be lost in the sweet strains of peace and 
love floating from every lip; yet is the church at this 
moment essentially one and indivisible. Not, then, in 
a unity of creed, or of ecclesiastical polity, does the real 
unity of the church consist, but in the “ unity of the 
Spirit,’ that unity sustained by the “ bond of peace.” 
She has been baptized, not into one form of church 
government, or into one system of doctrinal truth, but 
“by one Spirit we are all baptized into one body, 
whether we are Jews or Gentiles, whether we are bond 
or free; and have all been made to drink into the 
same Spirit.”—The “one Spirit’ regenerating all the 
children of God, fashioning their hearts alike, uniting 
them by a living faith to the Head, equally dwelling 
in, teaching and guiding, comforting and sanctifying 
them, demonstrates the perfect oneness of Christ’s 
body. And thus, then, when an individual crosses our 
path in whom the spirit of Jesus breathes, who manifests 
a union to the Head, and who speaks the language and 
bears the image of the Father, and a resemblance to 


OF THE REDEEMER. 111 


the one family, be his clime and colour, be his name 
and minor points of creed what they may, it becomes 
our solemn duty, as it is our great privilege, to extend 
to him the recognition, and to greet him with the 
tender and holy affection of the one brotherhood. In 
the Lord’s eye he is a member of His body, and he 
should be so in ours. And if, refusing to own the 
relationship, we withdraw the hand of Christian love, 
we render our own generation doubtful, we wound 
and grieve and deny the Spirit in him. It is written 
—yes, it is written by the pen of the Holy Spirit, 
‘¢ Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is born 
of God; and every one that loveth Him that begat, 
loveth him also that is begotten by Him.” 

I would recur to what may be considered one of 
the most fruitful and painful causes of the defective 
Christian union which so much mars the beauty and 
impairs the moral power of the church of God in our 
day. I allude to the great distance from Christ which 
characterizes the spiritual walk of so many believers. 
The effect of this upon the operation of Christian love 
is obvious. A distance in Spirit from the Head, leads 
to a distance in spirit from the members of the body. 
As with the beams of the sun, the farther they recede 
from their centre, the wider are they separated from 
each other; so it is with the “children of the light.” 
Each believer is a solar beam,—an emanation from the 
Sun of Righteousness. The more remote he lives 
from Christ—the centre of the soul—the wider will he 
be alienated in affection and in spirit from the members 
of Christ. His eye, less simply and constantly looking 


112 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


unto Jesus, his sense of union to, and communion 
with, Him weakened, love waning, faith declining, 
there will, of necessity, be a lessening attachment to 
the church of Christ. But the converse, oh, how 
precious! The rays of light reflected back to the sun, 
meeting and rejoicing in their centre, meet and rejoice 
in themselves. So with the saints. Drawn closer to 
Jesus,— our wandering steps retraced,—restored by 
those sanctifying unfoldings of the cross, which the 
Spirit delights to impart, the eye of penitence and 
faith, swimming though it be in tears, once more 
turned on Christ, love rekindled in the heart, oh, how 
will the affections, in their fondest and holiest power, 
go forth towards “all them who love our Lord Jesus 
Christ in sincerity !’’ His image will be their passport 
to our hearts; His name will secure their welcome to 
our homes. 

Have you felt, dear reader, the sanctifying, cementing 
power of the Redeemer’s love in your heart? Then, 
—with all affectionate fidelity is the question proposed, 
—how far do you deem yourself justified in regarding 
with frigid affection and distance of spirit any believer 
in Jesus, or in declining communion at the throne of 
grace, or alliance and confederation in the cause of our 
common Lord, with any portion of the church of God, 
on the plea of a want of ecclesiastical uniformity, or 
unity of doctrinal creed, as a basis of union? Is this 
the unity of the church spoken of in the word of God? 
Are you prepared for the result to which this plea for 
separation will lead you? Are you willing to defend 
it on a dying-bed, and go with it to the judgment-seat 


OF THE REDEEMER. 113 


of Christ? Examine it in the light of God’s word, 
and see whence it springs, what is its nature, and what 
are its tendencies. Remember you not the words of 
our Lord, in His reply to the disciple who frowned 
upon an expression of zeal for the glory of Christ, 
because it was not from one of their own order ?— 
‘“‘ And Jesus said, Forbid him not; for there is no man 
who shall do a miracle in my name that can lightly 
speak evilof me.” And is it not a solemn thought, that 
in turning our back on any holy, consistent member 
of Christ, we turn our back on Christ himself; and 
that in standing aloof from any holy confederation or 
Christian enterprise for the advancement of his truth 
and kingdom, because its promoters follow not with 
us, our very neutrality may be justly interpreted as 
criminal indifference, and our refusal to lend our co- 
operation, an act of hostility to Him whose subjects 
we profess to be! O that for the “divisions of 
Reuben, there were great searchings of heart!” Yes, 
Jesus is the “corner stone’’ of the one church, and 
the more firmly we build on, and the more closely we 
adhere to, Him, the more tenderly and closely will the 
hearts of all the saints be ‘knit together in love.” 
Precious Jesus! draw us nearer to thyself ;. then shall 
we be drawn nearer to thy one family, redeemed by 
thy most precious blood. 

“A sure foundation,” is the last quality of excel- 
lence specified concerning this precious Stone. As if 
in so momentous a matter as the salvation of the soul, 
to remove all lingering doubt from the mind, to anni- 


hilate all imaginary and shadowy conceptions of Jesus, 
10 * 


114 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


Jehovah, the great Builder of the church, declares the 
foundation thus laid to be a real and substantial one. 
Confidently here may the weary rest, and the sinner 
build his hope of heaven. Allis sure. Sure that the 
word he credits is true,—suve that the invitation that 
woos him is sincere,—suve that the welcome extended 
to him is cordial. Sure, in coming to Jesus, of free 
forgiveness, of full justification, of complete and eter- 
nal acceptance with the reconciled God. Sure that, in 
renouncidg all self-dependence, and building high his 
hope of glory on this foundation, he “shall not be 
ashamed nor confounded world without end.” All, 
too, is sure to the believer in the covenant of grace, of 
which Jesus is the Surety and Mediator. Every pro- 
mise is sure—the full supply of all our need—the 
daily efficacy of the atoning blood —the answer to our 
prayers, though long delayed —the hope of being for 
ever with Jesus —all, all is certain and sure, because 
based on Jesus, and springing from the heart of the 
unchangeable God, and confirmed by the oath of Him 
who has said, “Once have I sworn by my holiness, 
that I will not lie unto David.” 

There is yet another prophecy of our glorious Re- 
deemer as remarkable for its literal fulfilment as for 
its affecting nature and solemn instruction. It is that 
He should be a “stone of stumbling and a rock of 
offence, ’’ and that Jew and Gentile should be confe- 
derated against Him. Isa. viii. 14; “And He shall 
be.... fora stone of stumbling, and for a rock of 
offence to both the houses of Israel.’’ Rom. ix. 31, 82: 
‘‘Tsrael, who followed after the law of righteous- 


OF THE REDEEMER. 115 


ness, have not attained to the law of righteousness. 
Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith, but 
as it were by the works of the law: for they stumbled 
at that stumbling stone; as it is written, Behold, I lay 
in Sion a stumbling stone and rock of offence.’”’ What 
a literal fulfilment has this prophecy received! To 
the Jews, once God’s favourite people: now a “nation 
scattered, and peeled,” wandering over the face of the 
earth, —for where have human footsteps trodden that 
the Israelite has not penetrated ?— ‘without a king, 
and without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and 
without an image, and without an ephod, and without 
teraphim,”’ but in whose history promises of mercy and 
restoration are strangely blended with predictions of 
their apostasy and dispersion; even to them has the 
Messiah ever been, as He now is, a “stone of stum- 
bling, and a rock of offence.” 

But not Jews only,—Jews and Gentiles confederated 
together against the Son of God, form a gloomy por- 
tion of prophetic announcement, containing a yet 
more mournful shadow —a large portion of the Gospel 
record. Psa. 1.3: “‘ The kings of the earth set them- 
selves, and the rulers take counsel together against 
the Lord, and against His anointed.’’ Luke xxiii. 12: 
“And the same day Pilate and Herod were made 
friends together, for before they were at ennity between 
themselves.” Compare these passages with Acts iv. 
8—11. How striking and solemn the instruction 
conveyed in this incident! Pilate and Herod, stand- 
ing in the attitude of the deadliest hate to each other, 
are now made friends ! 


116 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


And what strange, but mighty power has thus sud- 
denly subdued their animosity, and turned their hatred 
into love? What mystic chain has drawn and bound 
together these hostile rulers? Zheir mutual and deep | 
enmity against Jesus! Believers in Christ! are the 
enemies of our glorious Redeemer, inspired by a na- 
tural and kindred feeling of hatred, induced to forget 
their private quarrels, and merge their differences in’ 
one common confederation to crush the Son of God, 
the object of their mutual hostility, — and shall not the 
friends of the Redeemer, constrained by that Divine 
principle of love which dwells in the hearts of all who 
are born of God, quench their heart-burnings, bury 
their antipathies, and draw more closely together, in 
one holy, vigorous, and determined alliance to exalt 
the Son of God, the glorious and precious Object of 
their mutual affection? Oh, if Jesus is the bond of 
union to those who hate Him, how much more should 
He be the bond of union to those who love Him! 
Beneath His cross how should all unholy jealousy, and 
bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and 
uncharitableness, be mourned over, confessed, abhorred 
and renounced by the children of the one family; 
and how should all who love the Lord Jesus Christ in 
sincerity, be unhesitatingly and cordially recognized 
as such, thus “endeavouring to keep the unity of the 
Spirit in the bond of peace !” 

What a distinct prophetical view had Isaiah also 
of the nature and glory of the Redeemer’s work ! 
‘He thus foretels it: ‘“‘ Behold, the Lord hath pro- 
claimed unto the end of the world, Say ye to the 


~ 


OF THE REDEEMER. 117 


daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation cometh; 
behold, his reward is with him, and his work before 
him.” Isa. Ixii. 11. And he thus describes it: ‘The 
Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord 
hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto the 
meek: He hath sent me to bind up the broken- 
hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the 
opening of the prison to them that are bound.”’ Isa. 
Ixi. 1. We can with difficulty realize, as the eye traces 
this evangelical declaration, that we are reading the 
prophecy, and not its fulfilment ; the shadowy writings 
of the Old, and not the noontide revelation of the 
New Testament, so luminous with the Gospel, so 
fragrant with the name, so replete with the work, of 
Jesus is it. Oh, what tidings of joy and gladness are 
here to the heart-broken, burthened captive! Could 
announcements be more suited to his case, more ap- 
propriate to his circumstances, more soothing to his 
heart? Here, from the very heart of the Bible, 
Jesus himself speaks. And never, in the days of his 
flesh, when preaching from the mountain, or in the 
synagogue, were sweeter sounds uttered from his lips 
than these. This was the work that was before him, 
to seek and to save lost sinners, to save them as sin- 
ners, to rend asunder their chains, to deliver them 
from their captivity, and to introduce them into the 
glorious liberty of the sons of God. | 

The quiet, lowly, unostentatious character of Jesus, 
blending with the most exquisite tenderness of heart, 
the pen of the evangelical prophet with equal vividness 
and beauty portrays. ‘He shall not cry, nor lift up, 


2 


118 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. A 
bruised reed shall He not break, and the smoking flax 
shall he not quench.” Isa. xlii. 2, 8. Compare this 
beautiful prophecy with Matt. xii. 15—20. Could 
the fulfilment be more perfect? Was not the entire 
life of our Lord in exact harmony with this prophetical 
portrait? Did not the glory of his lowly life, which 
Isaiah saw with a prophet’s far-reaching eye, illumine, 
ag with a living light, every step and every act of his 
history! Verily it did! Truly might he say, “ Learn 
from me, for I am meek and lowly in heart.” The 
-sublimest miracles, the most stupendous exertions of 
power, and the most brilliant displays of philanthropy, 
on which a self-aggrandizing man would have estab- 
lished successfully his claims to profound and universal 
homage, he only referred to as sustaining the glory of 
his Father in his Divine mission; while all earthly 
honour and temporal power that might have accrued 
separately to himself he utterly rejected, veiling his 
own person in the deep folds of that humility which 
clothed him as a garment. Shrinking from the 
intense gaze of a delighted multitude, and from the 
murmuring breath of popular applause, he would vanish 
as in a moment from the secne of his benevolence, 
either to lavish his boundless compassion on other and 
more wretched objects of suffering and woe, or to hide 
himself amidst the gloom and solitude of the desert. 
Never was humility like thine, thou meek and lowly 
Lamb of God! Subdue this hated self in us,—lay low 
this pride—suppress these inward risings, and draw, in 
fairer and deeper lines, thine own image on our souls! 


OF THE REDEEMER. 119 


The limits of this chapter will not permit us any 
farther to linger amidst these delightful twilight un- 
foldings of the Redeemer’s glory; else it would be 
easy, and perhaps profitable, to show how distinctly 
were foretold, and how literally were fulfilled, all the 
events and circumstances associated with his mysterious 
humiliation, sufferings, and death. There are, how- 
ever, two points connected with Isaiah’s unfolding of 
the prophetical glory of the Redeemer, too instructive 
in the spiritual and important truth which they convey 
to be entirely overlooked. 

It will be observed, that John observes of Isaiah that 
he saw the glory of Christ. ‘These things said 
Esaias, when he saw His glory.” The glory of the 
Redeemer has ever been an object visible to the 
spiritual eye. What the evangelist here records of the 
prophet, he also avers of himself and his fellow-disciples. 
‘And the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, 
and we beheld His glory.” Here is a point of vital 
moment, entering deeply into the very soul of experi- 
mental Christianity. May the Spirit of all truth give 
us a clear and solemn perception of it ! 

If aman sees not the glory of Christ, we hesitate 
not to say of him, that with regard to all other spiritual 
objects he is totally blind,— he is yet astranger to the 
illuminating grace of the Holy Spirit. To see the 
Redeemer’s glory, the eye must be spiritual; a spirit- 
ual object being only discerned by a spiritual organ. 
Hence the apostle prays in behalf of the Ephesian 
Christians, ‘“‘ That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
the Father of glory, may give unto you the Spirit of 


120 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him: that 
the eyes of your understanding being enlightened,” 
&c. So self-evident is this truth, that a lengthened 
argument to establish it would seem unnecessary. <As 
an intellectual mind alone can grapple with an abstruse 
problem in science, and as amechanical genius alone is 
fitted to comprehend the movements of a complicated 
piece of mechanism, so, in revealed truth, there must 
be an adaptation of the mind to the nature of the 
truth investigated. The eyes of the understanding 
must be enlightened; the soul must be brought into 
harmony with Divine truth, or rather into harmony 
with the God of truth. 

We are willing to concede, that to a man of intellect 
and taste, there is much in the Scriptures of truth 
peculiarly and powerfully attractive. The literature of 
the Bible, confessedly of the loftiest character, is espe- 
cially allurmg to such a mind. The beauty of its 
diction—the boldness of its conception—the richness 
of its imagery—the profoundness of its philosophy— 
the sublimity of its poetry,—the antiquity of its history, 
conspire to throw around it an interest and a charm 
peculiarly fascinating to a man of profound thought, 
to the philosopher, the poet, and the historian. It is 
just possible enough for an individual to study the 
Bible as he would study any branch of human science, 
or investigate the authenticity of any historical docu- 
ment: he may perceive the beauty of its evidence, and 
feel the power of its demonstration, and this shall be 
the utmost limit of his knowledge of the word of God! 
The “sword of the spirit’ may be so sheathed in the 


- 


OF THE REDEEMER. 121 


intellect, or wreathed with the flowers of a poetic fancy, 
that the heart may never have felt the keenness of its 
double edge, piercing and separating it from its sinful 
and idolatrous self. ‘‘For the word of God is quick 
and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, 
piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, 
and of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the 
thoughts and intentions of the heart.’’ We will venture 
a step farther. As a natural man, I may, on certain 
indisputable evidence, admit the Bible to be a record 
from God. I may give to its sublime revelations my 
firm credence, to its Divine character my profound 
reverence, to its pure ethics my warmest admiration, 
and to its holy doctrines my strongest adherence and 
most zealous advocacy. I may believe Jesus to be no 
impostor, and His religion no cunningly devised fable, 
and His name the only name given under heaven 
whereby we may be saved, and yet remain totally blind 
to the true glory of the Redeemer! All the while that 
I am thus examining the outworks of Christianity, or 
traversing the outer courts of the great sanctuary of 
truth, I have not yet taken a single step within the 
sanctuary of my own bosom, exploring its hidden 
plague, and searching out that direst of all evils that 
ever tainted and ruined a finite creature — the heart’s 
natural, deep, and deadly enmity against God! Blind 
to my own guilt, wretchedness, and woe, is it a thing 
incredible that I should be blind to the true glory of the 
Saviour ; and that to me his obedience sufferings, and 
death— facts of transcendent magnitude, and import- 


ance, interwoven with my dearest interests, and kindling 
11 


122 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


an undying light around my every step to eternity— 
should be to me but as the dreams of my boyhood? 
So true is it, “the natural man receiveth not the 
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness 
unto him: nor can he know them, because they are 
spiritually discerned.” 

But, enlightened by the Spirit of God, the believer 
beholds the glory of Jesus. Brought to see no glory 
in himself, yea, nought but deformity in that on which 
the eye once so complacently rested, the glory of the 
Redeemer, as it is reflected in his person, in his atoning 
blood and justifying righteousness, his infinite fulness 
of grace to pardon and to sanctify, fills now the entire 
scope of his moral vision, and lifts his soul in admiring 
and adoring thoughts of the holiness and love of God ! 

More than this, such is its transforming influence, 
he comes to be a partaker, in a degree, of that very 
glory which has arrested his eye, and ravished his 
heart. On him the glory of the Lord has shined, the 
Sun of righteousness has risen, —he rises from the 
dust, and shines arrayed in garments of light from 
Christ’s reflecting light. <A sight of Jesus assimilates 
the soul to his Spirit: a contemplation of his beauty 
transforms the believer more and more into the “ child 
of the light;” and thus perpetually ‘“‘looking unto 
Jesus,” the path he treads kindles and glows with an 
increasing effulgence, until its lustre expands into per- 
fect, cloudless day. ‘‘ We all, with open face beholding 
as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into 
the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the 
Spirit of the Lord,” 


OF THE REDEEMER. ee 


The medium through which the spiritual eye beholds 
the glory of Christ, is faith. It is a hidden glory 
until the Eternal Spirit imparts this mighty principle 
to the soul. The eye of reason cannot discern it, — 
the eye of intellect and of sense cannot behold it, — it 
remains a veiled thing, ‘dark with excessive bright- 
ness,’ until God the Holy Spirit utters his voice, ‘‘ Let 
there be light.” ‘“ Abraham,’ says Christ, “rejoiced 
to see my day; and he saw it, and was glad.” At 
that remote period, how did he see it?—by faith. 
Through the long and dreary vista of advancing ages 
he saw the day dawning, the sun rising. By faith he 
beheld Jesus approaching. He saw his blood, his 
righteousness, and his own interest there, ‘and he was 
glad.” The beamy prospect dilated the patriarch’s 
heart with joy. Qh yes, a sight of Jesus by faith,— 
be it distant and dim, be it shadowy and imperfect,— 
fills the soul with ineffable gladness, lights up its 
onward way, sweetens its solitude, enlivens its loneli- 
ness, and soothes its deepest sorrows. 

Isaiah not only beheld the glory of Christ, but he 
also ‘spake of it.” While he mused upon the won- 
derous sight, ‘the fire burned, then spake he with his 
tongue.” He could not but speak of that which he 
saw and felt. And who can behold the glory of the 
Redeemer, and not speak of it? Who can see his 
beauty and not extol it, — who can taste his love and 
not laud it? ‘ Come,” will be the invitation, “see a 
man who told me all things that ever I did: is not 
this the Christ ?’’ The church of old, as her eye 
wandered over the beauties of her Lord, broke forth in 


124 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


exprssions of wonder and praise; and, after particu- 
larizing and extolling these beauties, she then exclaims, 
as if all language were exhausted, “Yea, he is alto- 
gether lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my 
friend.”’ “In His temple doth every one speak of His 
glory.” So did the sweet singer of Israel. “TI will 
speak of the glorious honour of thy majesty, and of thy 
wondrous works. And men shall speak of the might 
of thy terrible acts; and I will declare thy greatness. 
They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy great 
goodness, and shall sing of thy righteousness. They 
shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of 
thy power; to make known to the sons of men his 
mighty acts, and the glorious majesty of his kingdom.” 
Psalm exlvy. 5—7, 11, 12. “We beheld his glory,” is 
the testimony of John. And in his preface to his first 
epistle he could testify, ‘‘ That which we have seen and 
heard (of the Word of life) declare we unto you.” 
Yea, the saints of the Most High must speak of the 
King in his beauty. They are constrained to show 
forth His praise, and tell of His love and loveliness, 
who is to them more precious than the gold of Ophir; 
yea, dearer than life itself. The Pharisee may mur- 
mur, the worlding may scorn, and the cold-hearted pro- 
fessor may rebuke; yet, “if these should hold their 
peace,” who have been redeemed by His most precious 
blood, and who are looking forward to His second 
appearing, as anevent which will fully introduce them 
to His glory, and conform them to His likeness, “ the 
stones would immediately cry out.” 


OF THE REDEEMER. 135 


Some important conclusions flow from the subject 
which it has been the attempt of this chapter to unfold. 
The first that it suggests to the mind is, the perfect 
harmony of the Old and the New Testaments, thus 
confirming our faith in the Divine authenticity of the 
Scriptures of truth. Upon what other ground can we 
account for this singular agreement of the Word with 
itself, and for this exact and literal fulfilment of its 
predictions, but on that of its divinity? ‘‘Thy word 
is truth,” is the glorious and triumphant inference 
fairly deducible from a fact so striking and self-evident 
as this. And in what particular is this beautiful har- 
mony especially seen ?— in exalting the Lamb of Cod. 
The Old and the New Testament Scriptures of truth 
do for Christ, what Pilate and Herod did against 
him,— they confederate together. They unite in a holy 
alliance, in a sublime unity of purpose, to show forth 
the glory of the incarnate God. Divine book! Pre- 
cious volume! Behold an illustration of what the 
church of the living God should be, a transparent 
body, illumined with the glory of Immanuel, and scat- 
tering its beams of light and beauty over the surface 
of a lost and benighted world. How much does a 
perfect representation of the glory of the Redeemer by 
the church depend upon her viszble union! A mirror 
broken into a thousand fragments, cannot reflect the 
glory of the sun with the same brilliancy, power, 
and effect, as if a perfect whole. Nor can the church 
of God, dismembered, divided, and broken, present to 


the world the same harmonious, convincing, and 
rs 


12a THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


effective testimony to the glory of Jesus, as when, in 
her unimpaired oneness, she is seen “‘looking forth as 
the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and 
terrible as an army with banners.’’ Oh then, by all 
that is fragrant in the name of Jesus, by all that is 
sanctifying in his glory and attractive in his cross, by 
all that is sweet and persuasive in Christian love, by all 
that is solemn in the near approach of death and 
eternity, and by all that is blissful in the hope of 
eternal life, springing from the one atonement, reader, 
seek to promote the visible unity of Christ’s church. 
Resolve beneath the cross, and by the grace of God, 
that you will not be a hinderance to the accomplish- 
ment of so blessed, so holy an end. Hold the faith 
with a firm hand, but hold it in righteousness. Speak 
the truth with all boldness, but speak it in love. Con- 
cede to others what you claim for yourself—the right 
of private judgment, and the free exercise of an en- 
lightened conscience. And where you see the image 
of Jesus reflected, the love of Jesus influencing, and 
the glory of Jesus, simply and solely sought, there 
extend your hand, proffer your heart, breathe your 
blessing and your prayer. Oh, this were to be like 
Christ; and to be léke Christ is grace below, and glory 
above ! | 
This subject, of momentous importance, admits of 
an individual application. Reader, what do you think 
of Christ ? What are your apprehensions of his glory, 
as it has thus far been placed before you? Do you 
see beauty, surpassing beauty, in Immanuel? Has 
his glory broken on your view?—has it beamed in 


OF THE REDEEMER. Loe 


upon your mind? has a sight of Jesus, seen by faith, 
cast thee in the dust, exclaiming, “I have heard of 
thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye 
seeth thee: wherefore I abhor myelf, and repent 
in dust and ashes?” Your honest reply to these 
searching questions will decide the nature and the 
ground of your present hope for eternity. On the con- 
fines of that eternity you are now standing. Solemn 
consideration! It is of infinite moment, then, that 
your views of the Son of God should be thoroughly 
examined, sifted, and compared with the inspired 
word. A crown now lowered on your brow, a king- 
dom stretched at your feet, a world gained and 
grasped, were as infants’ baubles, compared with the 
_ tremendous interest involved in the question, ‘“‘ What 
think ye of Christ ?”’ and what do you think of him? 
Is He all your salvation and all your desire? Have 
you laid sinful self and righteous self beneath his 
cross? and in all your poverty, nakedness, and vile- 
ness, have you received him as made of God unto you, 
‘wisdom and righteousness, sanctification and redemp- 
tion?’ Does his glory dim all other glory ; and does 
his beauty eclipse all other beauty in your eye? Can 
you point to him and say, in the humble confidence of 
faith and joy of love, “This is my beloved, and this is 
my Friend?” Eternal God! but for the righteous- 
ness of Thy Son, I sink in all my pollution! but 
for the atoning blood of Immanuel, I perish in all my 
guilt! Holy Father, look not on me, but behold my 
Shield, and look upon the face of thine Anointed! 
And when thy glory passeth by,—the glory of thy 


128 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


majesty, thy holiness, and thy justice,—then put me in 
the cleft of the rock, and cover me with thine hand 
while Thou passest by. 

Cultivate frequent and devout contemplations of the 
glory of Christ. Immense will be the benefit accruing 
to your soul. The mind thus pre-occupied, filled, and 
expanded, will be enabled to present a stronger resist- 
ance to the ever advancing and insidious encroach- 
ments of the world without. No place will be found 
for vain thoughts, and no desire or time for carnal 
enjoyments. Oh, how eruczfying and sanctifying are 
clear views of the glory of Immanuel! How emptying, 
humbling, and abasing! With the patriarch, we then 
exclaim, “I abhor myself, and repent in dust and 
ashes.”” And with the prophet, ‘‘ Woe is me! for I 
am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips.... 
Mine eyes have seen the King.” And with the 
apostle, ‘‘God forbid that I should glory, save in the 
cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world 
is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.” Oh, 
then, aim to get your mind filled with enlarged and 
yet expanding views of the glory of the Redeemer. 
Let it, in all the discoveries it affords of the Divine 
mind and majesty, be the one subject of your thoughts, 
the one theme of your conversation. Place no limit to 
your knowledge of Christ. Ever consider that you 
have but read the preface to the volume, you have but 
touched the margin of the sea. Stretching far away 
beyond you, are undiscovered beauties, and precious 
views, and sparkling glories, each encouraging your 
advance, inviting your research, and asking the homage 


OF THE REDEEMER. 129 


of your faith, the tribute of your love, and the dedi- 
cation of your life. Go forward then! ‘The glories 
that yet must be revealed to youin a growing know- 
ledge of Jesus, what imagination can conceive, what 
pen can describe them? ‘‘ Thou shalt see greater things 
than these,” is the promise that bids you advance. 
Jesus stands ready to unveil all the beauties of His 
person,—and to admit you into the very arcana of His 
love. There is not a chamber of His heart that He 
will not throw open to you; not a blessing that He 
will not bestow upon you; not a glory that He will not 
show to you. Thou shalt see greater things than thou 
hast yet seen:—greater depth of sin in your fallen 
nature shall be revealed,— deeper sense of the cleans- 
ing efficacy of the atoning blood shall be felt,— 
clearer views of your acceptance in the Beloved,— 
greater discoveries of God’s love,— and greater depths 
of grace and glory in Jesus shall be enjoyed. Your 
communion with God shall be closer, and more the 
fruit of adopting love in your heart; your feet shall be 
as hinds’ feet, and you shall walk on your high places. 
Your ‘peace shall flow as a river, and your righteous- 
ness as the waves of the sea.’’ Sorrow shall wound 
thee less deeply; affliction shall press thee less heavily ; 
tribulation shall affect thee less keenly; all this, and 
infinitely more, will result from your deeper know- 
ledge of Jesus. Ah, wonder not that the heaving, 
panting, thirsting soul of the apostle exclaimed, 
‘Doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the 
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord. 
.... That I may know him, and the power of his 


130 THE PROPHETICAL GLORY 


resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being 
made conformable unto his death.’ ‘Then shall we 
know, 7f we follow on to know the Lord.” 

Let your life be a clear reflection of the glory of the 
Redeemer. The saints of God are the only witnesses 
to this glory,—the only reflectors the Lord has in this 
dark and Christ-denying world. HoLINnEss, springing 
from the fount of the Spirit’s indwelling grace, 
cherished and matured by close views of the cross, 
and imparting a character of sanctity and beauty to 
every act of your life, will be the highest testimony 
you can bear to the Redeemer’s glory. That glory is 
entrusted to your hands. It is committed to your 
guardianship. Seeing, then, that it is so, “what man- 
ner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation 
and godliness!” How exact in principles, and upright 
in conduct,—how watchful over temper, and how vigi- 
lant where most assailed, — how broad awake to the 
wiles of the devil, and how watchful against the en- 
croachments of sin,—how strict in all transactions with 
the world; and how tender, and charitable, and meek, 
and forgiving, in all our conduct with the saints ! 
Alas! we are at best but dim reflectors of this great 
glory of our Lord. We are unworthy and unfaithful 
depositories of so rich a treasure! How much of 
clinging infirmity, of unmortified sin, of carelessness of 
spirit, of unsanctified temper, of tampering with temp- 
tation, of a lack of strict integrity and uprightness, 
dims our light, neutralizes our testimony for God, and 
weakens, if not entirely destroys, our moral influence ! 
We are not more eminently useful, because we are 


OF THE REDEEMER. ‘131 


not more eminently holy. We bring so little glory to 
Christ, because we seek.so much our own. We reflect 
so faint and flickering a beam, because our posture 
is so seldom that of the apocalyptic angel, “standing 
in the sun.’’ We realize so imperfectly our oneness 
with, and standing in Christ ; and this will ever foster 
a feeble, fruitless, and drooping profession of Chris- 
tianity. ‘As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, 
except it abide in the vine, no more can ye, except ye 
abide in me.” Qh to know more of this abiding in 
Christ! See how Jesus invites His saints to it. Are 
they fallen? He bids them take hold of His strength. 
Are they burdened? He bids them cast that burden 
on His arm. Are they wearied? He bids them re- 
cline on Him for rest. Does the world persecute them, 
—do the ‘daughters of Jerusalem” smite them,— 
does the watchman treat them unkindly? He bids 
them take refuge within the hallowed sanctuary of His 
own pierced and loving heart. Do they need grace? 
He bids them sink their empty vessel beneath the 
depths of his ocean fulness, and draw freely ‘more 
grace.” Whatever corruptions distress them, whatever 
temptations assail them, whatever adversity grieves 
them, whatever cloud darkens them, whatever necessity 
presses upon them; as the watchful Shepherd, as the 
tender Brother, as the faithful Friend, as the great High 
Priest, He bids His saints draw near, and repose in 
His love. Oh, He has a capacious bosom: there is 
room, there is a chamber in that heart for thee, my 
Christian reader! Think not thy lot is desolate, and 
lonely, and friendless. Think not that all have for- 


182 PROPHETICAL GLORY, ETC. 


saken thee, and that in sadness and in solitude thou 
art treading thy way through an intricate desert. 
There is One that loves thee, that thinks of thee, that 
has His eye upon thee, and is at this moment guiding, 
upholding, and caring for thee; that one is —Jxsus! 
Oh that thou could’st but look into His heart, and see 
how He loves thee; oh that thou could’st but hear Him 
say, so gently, so earnestly, “Abide in my love!” 
Cheer up! thou art in Christ’s heart, and Christ is in 
thy heart. Thou art not alone: thy God, even thy 
Father, is with thee. Thy Shepherd guides thee; the 
Comforter spreads around thee His wings, and heaven 
is bright before thee. Soon thou wilt be there. The 
pilgrim will repose his weary limbs; the voyager will 
be moored in his harbour of rest; the warrior will put 
off his armour, and shout his song of triumph. Then 
look up! Christ is thine, God is thine, heaven is thine. 
If God is for thee, who can be against thee? And if 
you find disappointment in created good, it will but 
endear Jesus; and if you know more of the inward 
plague, it will but drive you to the atoning blood; and 
if you have storms and tempests, they will but shorten 
the voyage, and waft you the quicker to glory. 


“THANKS BE UNTO GOD FOR HIS UNSPEAKABLE 
Girt !” 


CHAPTER V. 


THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER IN HIS 
HUMILIATION. 


* He humbled himself.”—PaAzii. ii. 8. 


WE have now, in the prosecution of our subject, ar- 
rived ata great and solemn truth. It may be regarded 
as sustaining the same relation to our theme that the 
dark background does to the picture—the shading, so 
essential to the richness, grandeur, and perfection of 
the piece. We have seen the elevation from which 
the Son of God descended—the stupendous height 
from which he stooped. The glory which belonged to 
that elevation has passed before us, faintly shadowed 
forth in the type, embodied in the symbol, uttered by 
the voice of the seer, but more authoritatively and 
distinctly affirmed by the testimony of Jesus himself. 
That same glory is now presented for our contempla- 
tion, as assuming another and a different aspect —an 
aspect so opposite and strange that, but for express 
revelation, human imagination would never haye con- 
ceived it, reason’s unillumined eye could never have 
discerned it,—the glory of the incarnate God, beaming 
forth with subdued yet burning lustre from beneath 

12 (133) 


134 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


His profound and mysterious humiliation! Oh may 
the Spirit of glory and of Christ, of grace and truth, 
rest upon us while endeavouring to explore and eluci- 
date this vast and holy subject! We shall in the 
present chapter trace the glory of the Redeemer in 
the fact of His humiliation,—in the blessings which 
flow from it to the church,—and in the lessons of 
practical holiness which it inculeates. 

There are an inconceivable magnitude and grandeur 
of meaning in the passage placed at the head of this 
chapter, which could not belong to it as applied to the 
circumstances of any finite creature, man or angel. 
‘“‘Let this mind be in you, which was also in Christ 
Jesus: who being in the form of God, thought it not 
robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no 
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, 
and was made in the likeness of men: and being 
found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself.”’ Pre- 
dicted, we say, of any other than a Divine Person, 
these words would be perfectly incoherent and unintel- 
ligible ; but regarded in their obvious and received 
import, they become luminous with one of the most 
glorious emanations found in the page of revelation. 
‘Who BEING in the form of God,” affirms his pre- 
existent and Divine nature ;—‘‘ MADE himself of. no 
reputation,’ marks his voluntary descent from that 
elevation ; *‘TooK upon him the form of a servant; 
was MADE in the likeness of men,” describes the 
inferior condition to which he stooped; ‘‘and being 
found in fashion as a man, he HUMBLED HIMSELF,” 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. £36 


broadly and distinctly asserts the fact of his profound 
abasement. 

The bare idea of humiliation on the part of Jehovah, 
divested of all that invests it with a palpable and 
tangible form, presents to the mind a conception so 
inscrutable and so vast, that but for the revelation | 
of the fact by God Himself, imagination must have 
let fall her wing in her efforts to soar to it, and the 
mind must have exhausted its powers in its attempts 
to grasp it. And yet thus is it plainly declared : ‘‘ Who 
is like unto the Lord our God, who dwelleth on high ; 
who humbleth Himself to behold the things that are in 
the heaven and on the earth?” The visible form which 
this Divine condescension assumed, in its profoundest 
stoop, is the point that now invites our attention. 

The primary step in the humiliation of the Son of 
God undoubtedly was his mysterious incarnation. This 
was the first shading of the picture,— the commence- 
ment of a series of humiliations, which followed in 
rapid succession, thickening and darkening around his 
path until he reached the utmost limits of human 
abasement, suffering and woe. We need not recapitu- 
late the scriptural evidence already adduced in support 
of this fundamental article of our faith. We have 
shown that the Eternal Word was made flesh, that the 
Deity stooped to our nature, and took it up in myste- 
rious and indissoluble union. 

Now the great glory which gilds this dark part of 
the Redeemer’s humiliation consists in the lowering of 
the infinite to the scale of the finite—the bringing 
down of the Godhead to a level with the manhood. In 


136 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


this lay his real humiliation, and from this springs 
his true glory. Had our Lord assumed our nature, 
descending from the highest order of angelic being, he 
would but have exchanged one form of created exist- 
ence for another; and although made a “little lower 
than the angels,” there would have been no such 
relinquishment of previous dignity, as could justify the 
term thus applied to him by the Holy Spirit, “‘He 
humbled himself.’’ If, as a finite creature, it were 
possible for me to assume the incarnation of an insect, 
there would be in the act but the mere semblance of 
humility, —the appearance, and not the true virtue 
itself: because, there being some proportion between 
the form relinquished and the form assumed, the step 
would be but a lower one in the same scale of finite 
being. But how vastly different in the case of our 
adorable Redeemer! As we have just remarked, 
between two finite things there is always some relative 
proportion ; thus, a grain of sand bears some propor- 
tion to the Alps, and a drop of water bears some pro- 
portion to the ocean; but between the finite and the 
infinite, there can be no possible proportion whatever. 
Now, in the person of the Son of God, the two extremes 
of being —the infinite and the finite —meet in strange 
and mysterious but close and eternal, union. The 
Divine came down to the human, — Deity humbled 
itself to humanity. This was humiliation indeed! It 
was not the creature descending in the scale of crea- 
tion, but it was the Creator stooping to the creature. 
‘“‘God was manifest in the flesh,’ —‘‘He humbled 
himself.” Oh, it is an amazing truth! So infinitely 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 13F 


great was he, he could thus stoop without compromis- 
ing his dignity, or lessening his glory. 

But, if possible, a step still lower did he seem to — 
descend. Thus, in prophetic language, did he an- 
nounce it: “I am a worm and no man.” What 
astounding words are these! Here was the God-man 
sinking, as it were, in the depths of abasement and 
humiliation below the human. ‘Iam a worm, and no 
man!’ In the meanness which marked his external 
appearance ; in the estimation in which he was held 
by men; in the contemptuous treatment which he 
received from his enemies ; the trampling of his glory 
in the dust, and the crushing of his person on the 
cross, would seem in his own view to have robbed him, 
not only of his glory as God, but even to have divested 
him of his dignity as man! “I am a worm, and no 
man!” Oh, here is glory—dglory surpassing all 
imagination, all thought, all power of utterance! He 
who bent his footsteps along this flinty path, he who 
sunk thus low, was JEHOVAH, the “mighty God, the 
everlasting Father, the Prince of peace.” Wonder, O 
heavens, and be astonished, O earth! Meanness and 
majesty, humiliation and glory, how strangely were 
they blended in thee, thou incarnate God! 

The assumption of our nature, 7 its depressed and 
brutsed condition, constituted no small feature in the 
abasement of the Son of God. That, in the strong 
language of the Holy Spirit, he was “ holy, harmless, 
undefiled, and separate from sinners,’ is a truth we 
cannot too distinctly affirm, or too earnestly maintain. 


The least misgiving touching the perfect sinlessness of 
12 * 


188 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


the human nature of our Lord, tends to weaken the 
confidence of faith in the atonement, and so to en- 
shroud in darkness the hope of the soul. As a single 
leak must have sunk the ark beneath the waves, so 
the existence of the slightest taint of sin in Jesus would 
have opened an inlet through which the dark billows 
of Divine wrath would have rolled, plunging both him- 
self and the church he sustained in eternal woe. But 
that “holy thing” that was begotten of the Holy Spirit, 
knew not the least moral taint. He ‘knew no sin,” 
he was the sacrificial ‘‘Lamb without spot.’ And 
because he presented to the Divine requirements a 
holy, unblemished, and perfect obedience and satisfac- 
tion, we who believe are “‘made the righteousness of 
God in him.” Hold fast this essential and blessed 
truth, and guard against its fatal opposite, as you 
value your own salvation, and the glory of God. 

But his taking up into subsistence with his own, our 
nature in its fallen condition, comprehends the sinless" 
infirmities and weaknesses with which it was identified 
and encompassed. “That it might be fulfilled which 
was spoken by Hsaias the prophet, saying, Himself 
took our infirmities and bare our sicknesses.”’ And 
when I see him weeping, bowed down with grief, and 
enduring privation, when I behold Him making the 
wants, and sorrows, and sufferings of others His own, 
what do I learn, but that my Lord and Master was 
truly a ‘‘ Man of sorrows and acquainted with grief?” 
Is there any spectacle more affecting, than thus to 
behold the incarnate God, entering personally and 
sympathetically into all the humiliations of my poor, 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 139. 


bruised, vile nature, and yet remaining untouched, 
untainted, by its sin? Taking my weaknesses, bearing 
my sicknesses, sorrowing when I sorrow, sighing when 
I sigh, weeping when I weep, roucuED with the feeling 
of my infirmities, in all points tempted like as I am! 
The attending circumstances of his birth, and the 
subsequent events of his life, entered deeply into 
the fact of his abasement. In each step that he took, 
he seemed to say, ‘“‘I was born to humiliation and 
suffering, therefore came I into the world.” His 
parents were poor, of mean extraction, and humble 
occupation. Until the age of thirty, he lived a life of 
entire seclusion from the world; and, as he was “ sub- 
ject unto his parents,” doubtless his early years were 
employed in assisting his father in his lowly calling ; 
thus, with his own hands, ministering to his temporal 
necessities. For, be it remembered, it was a material 
part of the original curse pronounced by God on man, 
‘‘In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread.” 
Jesus was made under the law, that he might endure 
the curse; that curse he fully sustained. There was 
not a part, the bitterness of which he did not taste, 
and the tremendousness of which he did not endure; 
and that for his elect’s sake. It were no fanciful idea, 
therefore, to suppose, that in this feature of the curse, 
our Lord personally entered; that this part of the 
penalty of human transgression he fully paid; and 
that in early life, by the sweat of his brow, he did 
literally provide for his own temporal sustenance. Oh, 
touching view of the humiliation of the Son of God! 
How does it dignify the most lowly occupation, sweeten 


140 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


the heaviest trial, and lighten the deepest care, to 
reflect, “‘thus lived, and laboured, and toiled, the 
incarnate God!” 

His riper years were marked by corresponding lowli- 
ness. The curse tracked his every step, pressing its 
claims, and exacting its penalties, to the last moment 
of existence. What were all his excessive privations, 
but parts of the same? No home sheltered him—no’ 
domestic comforts cheered him—no smile of fondness 
greeted him—no hand of affection welcomed him— 
‘<The Son of man hath not where to lay his head,” was 
the heart-rending acknowledgment extracted from his 
lips. And when a day of exhausting toil had closed 
upon him, a day spent in journeying from village 
to village, and from house to house, preaching the 
kingdom, healing all manner of diseases, supplying the 
wants, alleviating the sufferings, and soothing the 
cares of others, he would retire, lonely and unre- 
freshed, to the bleak mountain, and spend his long, 
sleepless night in unremitting prayer for his church! 
O thou adorable and adored Jehovah-Jesus! were 
ever humiliation and love like thine? 

His temptation in the wilderness was a yet darker 
shadow thrown upon his path, a still more bitter 
ingredient mingled in his cup. Imagine yourself, my 
Christian reader, shut in for a single day with one 
of the vilest and most degraded of our species. During 
that period, his whole conversation shall be an attempt 
to tamper with your allegiance to Christ, to under- 
mine your principles, to pollute your mind, to infuse 
blasphemous thoughts, to wound your conscience and 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 141 


destroy your peace. What mental suffering, what 
grief, what torture would your soul endure in that 
period of time! Yet all this, and infinitely more, 
did Jesus pass through. For forty days and nights 
was he enclosed in the wilderness with Satan. Never 
were the assaults of the prince of darkness more fearful, 
never were his fiery darts more surely aimed and 
powerfully winged, and never had so shining a mark 
presented itself as the object of his attack than now. 
There is much in this part of our Lord’s humiliation in 
the flesh on which we should delight to expatiate, did 
it come within the scope of our present design. A 
rapid glance at some of its more prominent and in- 
structive points, is all that we can now venture upon. 

Our Lord’s exposure to temptation, aud his conse- 
quent capability of yielding to its solicitations, has 
its foundation in his perfect humanity. It surely 
requires not an argument to show that, as God, he 
could not be tempted, but that, as man, he could. 
His inferior nature was finite and created; it was not 
angelic, it was human. It was perfectly identical with 
our own,—its entire exemption from all taint of sin, 
only excepted. A human body and a human mind 
were his, with all their essential and peculiar proper- 
ties. He was ‘bone of our bone, and flesh of our 
flesh :’’ he travelled up through the stages of infancy, 
boyhood, and manhood; he was encompassed with all 
the weaknesses, surrounded by all the circumstances, 
exposed to all the inconveniences, that belong to our 
nature. He breathed our air, trod our earth, ate 
our food. The higher attributes of our being were 


142 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


his also. Reason, conscience, memory, will, affections, 
were essential appendages of that human soul which 
the Son of God took into union with his Divine. 
As such, then, our Lord was tempted. As such, 
too, he was capable of yielding. His finite nature, 
though pure and sinless, was yet necessarily limited 
in its resources, and weak in its own powers. Touch- 
ing his inferior nature, he was but man. The God- 
head, as I have before remarked, was not humanized, 
—nor was the humanity deified, by the blending 
together of the two natures. Hach retained its essen- 
tial character, properties, and attributes, distinct, un- 
changed, and unchangeable. 

But, let no one suppose that a liability in Jesus 
to yield to Satan’s temptation, necessarily implies 
the existence of the same sinful and corrupt nature 
which we possess. Far from it. To deny his capa- 
bility of succumbing to temptation, were to neutralize 
the force, beauty, and instruction of this eventful part 
of his history altogether. It were toreduce a splendid 
fact to an empty fable, a blessed reality to a vague 
supposition ; it were to rob Jesus of the great glory 
which covered him when left alone, the victor on 
this battle-field. And yet, that he must necessarily 
be sinful in order to be thus capable of yielding, does 
not follow; it is an error in judgment to suppose that 
the force of a temptation always depends upon the 
inherent sinfulness of the person who is tempted. The 
case of the first Adam disproves this supposition, and 
in some of its essential features strikingly illustrates 
the case of the second Adam. In what consisted the 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 143 


strength of the assault before whose fearful onset Adam 
yielded? Surely not in any indwelling sin, for he 
was pure and upright. There was no appeal to the 
existence of any corrupt principles or propensities ; no 
working upon any fallen desires and tendencies in his 
nature; for, until the moment that the blast swept 
him to the earth, no angel in heaven stood before the 
throne purer or more faultness than he. But God 
left him to the necessary weakness and poverty of his 
own nature, and thus withdrawing His Divine support 
and restraint, that instant he fell! That our adorable 
Lord did noé fall, and was not overcome in his fearful 
conflict with the same foe, was owing solely to the 
upholding of the Deity, and the indwelling and re- 
straining power of the Holy Spirit, which he possessed 
without measure. 

But we approach the consideratien of those parts of 
this temptation which constitute it an essential element 
of the humiliation of our Lord. And think you, my 
reader, was it no humiliation for the Son of God to 
be thus assailed by the prince of darkness? Was it 
no degradation, that his dignity should be questioned, 
his authority disputed, his reverence for and allegiance 
to, his Father assailed, and his very purity tampered 
with by a fallen and corrupt spirit whom he had 
ejected from heaven? Ah! how deeply and keenly he 
must have felt it to be so, the first moment he was 
brought into contact with this arch-fiend, and subtile 
foe of God and man! 

But oh, what glory beams from beneath this dark 
veil of Christ’s humiliation! How lovely and precious 


144 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


an Object does he appear to saints and angels in this 
wondrous transaction! What holy sympathies and 
fond affections are kindled in the heart, and rise 
towards him, as the eye surveys each particular,— 
the appalling nature of the onset,—the shock which 
his humanity sustained, —the mighty power by which 
he was upheld,—the signal victory which he achieved, 
— the Divine consolation and comfort which flowed 
into his soul as his vanquished enemy retired from the 
conflict, leaving him more than conqueror,—and above 
all, the close and tender sympathy into which he was 
now brought with the tempted church! These are fea- 
tures replete with thrilling interest and rich instruc- 
tion, on which the renewed mind delights to dwell. 

But our Lord’s humiliation went deeper still than 
this! The clouds now gathering around him grew 
darker and more portentous as he advanced towards 
the final conflict. We must consider the fact of his 
bearing sin, the painful consciousness of which increased 
as the hour of its atonement drew on, as forming 
one of the most overwhelming demonstrations of that 
voluntary abasement to which he had stooped, and 
through which he was now passing. In the following 
passages, this great truth of the gospel is explicitly 
and emphatically stated. And let it be borne in mind, 
that when the Holy Spirit represents our Lord as 
bearing sin, the statement is not to receive a figurative 
but a perfectly literal interpretation, as asserting a 
solemn and momentous fact. He bore not the appear- 
ance of sin, or the punishment merely of sin, but the 
sin itself, , 


IN IS HUMILIATION. 145 


The type, which is truly significant, thus shadows 
forth the truth : “And Aaron shall lay both his hands 
upon the head of the live goat, and confess over him 
all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and all their 
transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon the 
head of the goat, and shall send him away by the hand 
of a fit man into the wilderness. And the goat shall 
bear upon him all their iniquities unto a land not 
inhabited.” Levit. xvi 21, 22. Here is the truth we 
are now contending for, clearly stated. Not the punish- 
ment of the sin merely, but the sin itself, did Aaron 
lay upon the expiatory victim, — “putting them upon 
the head of the goat.” 

And thus does the Holy Ghost declare it: ‘He 
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for 
our iniquities;’’ ‘‘The Lord hath laid on him the 
iniquities of us all ;’’ ‘‘ He shall bear their iniquities ;”’ 
‘‘Tfe bare the sin of many ;” ‘‘ Who his own self bare 
our sins in his own body on the tree;” ‘He hath 
made him to be sin for us, who knewno sin.”’ There 
stood the eternal God, in the closest proximity to 
the evil one. Never did two extremes, so opposite to 
each other, meet in such near contiguity and colli- 
sion. Essential sin, essential holiness; essential dark- 
ness, essential light; essential hatred, essential love; 
man’s deadliest foe, man’s dearest friend. What an 
hour of seeming power and triumph was this to the 
grand adversary of God and man; what an hour of 
deepening gloom and humiliation and defeat to God’s 
beloved Son! How would this Lucifer of the morning 


exult as with the swellings of pride he placed his foot 
13 


146 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


upon incarnate Deity! And how keenly and power- 
fully conscious would Jesus be at that moment, of the 
deep abasement and degradation to which he had now 
sunk ! 

But behold how this great transaction contributed to 
the deep humiliation of the Son of God. What must 
have been the revulsion of moral feeling, what the 
shrinking of his holy soul, the first instant it came in 
personal contact with sin! What a mighty convulsion 
- must have rocked his human nature, pure and sinless 
as it was! Saint of God, what composes your bitterest 
cup, arid what constitutes your keenest, deepest sorrow ? 
Has a tender Father blown upon thy blessings, re- 
moved thy mercies, lessened thy comforts, darkened 
thy bright landscape, dried up thy sweet spring? Is 
this the cause of thy shaded brow, thine anxious look, 
thy tearful eye, thy troubled and disconsolate spirit ? 
‘‘ Ah, no!’ you perhaps exclaim; “rid me of this 
body of sin, and you chase the cloud from my brow, 
and the tear from my eye, and the sorrow from my 
heart. It is the sin that dwelleth in me.’”’ Think you, 
then, what the spotless Lamb of God must have felt, 
and how deeply must it have entered into his humilia- 
tion — the existence of an all-absorbing, ever present 
and ever painful and humiliating consciousness of bear- 
ing upon his holy soul iniquity, transgression, and sin! 

But behold the glory! My reader, it is your high- 
est honour, as it was his deepest shame — your richest 
glory, as it was his deepest humiliation, that he _liter- 
ally did bear all the sins of all his church. As truly 
as we are “made the righteousness of God in him,” 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 147 


he was “‘made sin,’’ or, a sin-offering for us. Behold 
how beautifully has the Holy Spirit brought out 
the doctrines of substitution and union. Of substitu- 
tion thus, ‘‘He hath made him (who knew no sin) to 
be sin for us.’ And of wnon thus, “that we might 
be made the righteousness of God in him.” O 
amazing truth! Sinking to our deepest dishonour, 
he raises us to his highest glory. Sinking himself 
with our fallen humanity, he raises us to a.union with 
God. Substituting himself for us, he makes us one 
with himself. Ah, affecting thought! Were all our 
iniquities, and all our “transgressions in all our sins,” 
laid on Jesus? Yea, all! Before His infinite mind, to 
whom the past and the future are one eternal now, the 
sins of all his chosen ones to the remotest period of 
time, passed in review, and were made to meet on the 
head of the atoning Lamb. 

Here is opened the high source of all real blessed- 
ness to the believing soul. Sweet is the Spring, and 
sweet are the streams that flow fromit. Reconciliation 
with God— His free forgiveness—union with His 
nature— adoption into His family— acceptance in the 
Beloved—oneness with the risen Head—access within 
the veil— filial and “perpetual communion, and the 
‘peace of God which passeth all understanding, are 
among the costly results of Christ bearing sin. And 
see how completely he has borne the mighty load. The 
moment our iniquities touched him, it would seem as 
though he flung them to an infinite distance, or sunk 
them to an infinite depth. Never, in point of law and 
justice, can they appear against the pardoned soul. 


148- THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


Laid upon our Surety, condemned, and punished, and 
pardoned in him, “there is now no condemnation’’ of, 
or for sin, ‘‘to them that are in Christ Jesus.”” How 
strong is the language which declares this truth! “I 
have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, 
and as a cloud thy sins;” ‘Thou hast cast all my 
sins behind thy back;” ‘‘Thus saith the Lord, The 
iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall 
be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be 
found.” And why? ‘ Behold the Lamb of God, that 
taketh away the sin of the world!” And may we not 
account as among the most precious and costly bless- 
ings resulting from this truth, its sanctifying tendency? 
My beloved, the deepest view thou canst ever have of 
God’s hatred of sin, is in the cross of Calvary; and 
the deepest sense of the “exceeding sinfulness of sin” 
thou canst ever feel, is its entire pardon, imprinted on 
thy heart with the atoning blood of Jesus, and wit- 
nessed by the power and grace of the Holy Spirit. 
Thou dost hate it because it is forgiven; thou dost 
abhor it because it is pardoned. And with thine 
eye upon the wounds of Jesus, and his blood daily 
sprinkled on thy conscience, thou dost wrap thy white 
garments close about thee, lest thy passage through a 
sinful and seductive world should sully and pollute 
them. O powerful and precious motive to holiness ! 
My soul, yicld thyself to its sweet influence, draw thy 
constraints to a life of deeper sanctification, from the 
cross; thirst and pant with more intense desire after 
Divine conformity, as one all whose iniquities, trans- 
gressions, and sins, are for ever cancelled by the 


- 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 149 


heart’s blood of God’s dear Son. O hateful and hated 
sin, atoned for so richly, pardoned so freely, blotted 
out so entirely, how can I admire thee? how can 
I love thee? how can I cherish thee? and how 
can I yield to thee now? Thou didst burden and 
bow down to the earth the soul of my blessed Lord. 
Thou didst mar the beauty, and veil the glory, and 
humble the spirit of my Beloved. Thou didst 
crimson his body with the bloody sweat —thou didst 
wreath his brow with thorns —thou didst trouble his 
soul even unto death; and yet thou, my transgres- 
sion, art forgiven,— thou, my sin, art covered,— thou, 
my iniquity, art not imputed, and that because Jesus, 
my surety, was wounded, and bruised, and stricken 
for me ! 
‘* Thus beneath the cross adoring, 
Sin doth like itself appear ; 


When the wounds of Christ exploring, 
I can read my pardon there. 


‘i Truly blessed is this station, 

Low before his cross to lie; 
While I see Divine compassion 

Floating in his languid eye. 


‘“‘ May I still enjoy this feeling, 
In all need to Jesus go; 
Prove his blood each day more healing, 
And himself more fully know.” 


1 — e J 
We are now conducted to a consideration of the 


suffering of the Redeemer, as imparting the last and 


deepest shade to this picture of humiliation ; but from 
13 * 


150 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


which there yet spring some of the brightest beams of 
his glory. 

Our adorable Lord was a sufferer,—the Prince of 
sufferers,— the Martyr of martyrs. None had ever 
suffered as he; no sorrow was ever like his sorrow. 
Scarcely had he touched the surface of our sin-accursed 
earth, ere the cup of suffering was placed to his lips. 
The deep fountain of human woe, stirred to its very 
centre, poured in upon his soul its turbid streams from 
every source and through every channel. Human 
malignity seized upon him as its victim, and mingled 
the first draught that he tasted. Linked though he 
was by the strongest sympathies to our nature,— 
descending though he had, to elevate, sanctify, and 
save him,—man yet ranked himself among his first and 
deadliest foes. Oh, that condescension and love to our 
race so profound, should have met with a requital 
so base ! 

The necessity of Christ’s sufferings is the first point 
that arrests the mind in contemplating this subject. 
In his way-side conversation with the two disciples 
journeying to Emmaus, our Lord clearly and empha- 
tically pronounced this characteristic of his passion: 
“Ought not Christ to have suffered?” The following 
considerations would seem to justify this plea of 
necessity. 

The sufferings of Christ were necessary ¢n order to 
accomplish the eternal purpose and counsel of God. To 
suppose that his sufferings were contingent, originating 
in the circumstances by which he was surrounded, is 
to take a very low and defective view of the truth. But 


IN WIS HUMILIATION. 151 


the light in which the Scripture presents the doctrine 
of a suffering Redeemer, is that which gives the most 
exalted view of redemption, and reflects in the richest 
manner the glory of the triune God. The truth we 
have now advanced, the apostle Peter embodies in his 
awakening discourse on the day of Pentecost, and 
which truth the Holy Spirit employed in the conver- 
sion of three thousand souls: “Him being delivered by 
the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye 
have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and 
slain.” Acts ii. 23. The same doctrine is reiterated in 
ch. iv. 27. ‘For of a truth, against thy holy child 
Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, both Herod, and 
Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of 
Israel, were gathered together for to do whatsoever thy 
hand and thy counsel determined before to be done.” 
Our Lord himself confirms it when he says, “‘The Son 
of man goeth, as it was determined.” Dear reader, 
behold the fountain-head, whence arise all those pre- 
cious streams of covenant mercy which flow into your 
soul,—the electing love of God, which constrained Him 
to present His beloved Son as an atoning Lamb for the 
slaughter, from before the foundation of the world! 
Oh! that must be infinite love—vast love—costly love 
— unchangeable love — which had its existence in the 
heart of God towards thee from all eternity. O run 
with humility and gladness to this holy and blessed 
truth! Welcome it joyfully to your heart as God’s 
truth, from which you may not, you dare not turn, 
without robbing your souls of immense blessing, and 
incurring fearful responsibilities. And when by faith 


152 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


you stand beneath the cross, and gaze upon its glorious 
Sufferer, remember that in his death were fulfilled the 
eternal purpose and counsel of the triune Jehovah ; 
and that to predestination,—rejected and hated as this 
truth is by some, — you owe all that is dear and pre- 
cious to you as a ransomed expectant of glory. 

To fulfil the types, and to make good the prophecies 
concerning him, it was necessary that Jesus should 
suffer. The Levitical dispensation, and the prophetical 
Scriptures, as we have already shown, point steadily to 
Jesus ; they are replete with Christ crucified. He who 
reads and investigates them with his eye turned from 
Jesus, will find himself borne along upona rapid stream 
of prophetic annunciation he knows not whither, and 
involved in a mass of ceremonial usages, to him per- 
fectly chaotic and unintelligible, “without form and 
void.” But with the Spirit of God opening the 
spiritual eye, and moving upon the word, a flood of 
light is poured upon every page, and every page is 
seen to be rich with the history, and effulgent with the 
glory of the suffering Messiah. Thus does our Lord 
assert this truth: ‘Thinkest thou that I cannot now 
pray to my Father, and He will presently give me 
more than twelve legions of angels? But how then 
shall the Scriptures be fulfilled, that thus it must be 2 ”’ 
Matt. xxvi. 58. Again, ‘But all this was done, that 
the Scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled.” 
verse 56. It was necessary, therefore, that Christ 
should humble himself—should be a man of sorrows — 
should drink deeply the cup of suffering, and should 


Oo? 
be lifted upon the cross, in order to authenticate the 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 153 


Divine mission of Moses, to establish the consistency 
of the Jewish dispensation, to vindicate the truth of 
the prophets, to fulfil the counsel of the Lord, and 
thus to verify his own most blessed word. 

But that argument, enforcing the necessity of Christ’s 
sufferings, which the most closely touches our own 
hearts, grows out of the relation he sustained to his 
people as their Surety; pledged to accomplish their 
full salvation in a way Consistent with the justice of 
God and the honour of his law. Here it is we see 
why one so holy as Jesus was should suffer,—why God 
should lay all his wrath upon the head of His dear 
Son. Now we learn why the innocent should suffer 
for the guilty, “the Just for the unjust.’”’ He came 
to reinstate the holiness of the Divine law—to uphold 
the rectitude of the Divine government—to satisfy the 
claims of Divine justice—to vindicate the glory of God 
—to make an end of transgression, and bring in an 
everlasting righteousness for his people. Ought not 
Christ, then, to have suffered? Had he not, there had 
been no atonement for sin—no fountain opened for 
uncleanness—no avenue of return to God—no recon- 
ciliation—no way of access within the holy of holies— 
no pardon —no acceptance —no peace —no hope—no 
heaven! Oh, how wretched must have been our con- 
dition, and how fearful our doom, had not Jesus suf- 
fered! The pall of dark despair had covered us, and 
our eternal destiny had been written in letters of 
‘‘mourning, lamentation, and woe.” ‘ This,’ exclaims 
the awakened soul, “is just the Redeemer that I need, 
just the Saviour that I want. One who can stoop to 


154 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


my deep necessity, lift me from my dunghill, place me 
among the princes, and yet sustain, and more than 
sustain, magnify, by this very act of redeeming rescue, 
the majesty, purity, and honour of Jehovah.” 

The completeness of his character as a compassionate 
and sympathizing High Priest, pleaded for his suffer- 
ings. ‘It became him, for whom are all things, and by 
whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, 
to make the Captain of their salvation perfect through 
sufferings.” ‘‘ Wherefore in all things it behoved him 
to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a 
merciful and faithful high priest; ‘For in that he 
himself hath suffered, being tempted, he is able to 
succour them that are tempted ;”’ ‘‘We have not an 
high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling 
of our infirmities.” What deduction are we to draw 
from this rich cluster of precious declarations, but that 
in order to the perfection of his character as the High 
Priest of his people, as the Brother born for adversity, 
in order to be “‘touched with the feeling of our in- 
firmities,” he must Aimself suffer? He must know 
from painful experience what sorrow meant — what a 
wounded spirit and a broken, bleeding heart, and a 
burdened and a beclouded mind, were. In this school 
he must be taught and disciplined, and trained: he 
must ‘“‘learn obedience by the things which he suf- 
fered :’’ he must be made “ perfect through sufferings.” 
. And ob, how deeply has he been taught, and how 
thoroughly has he been trained, and how well has he 
learned, thus to sympathize with a suffering church! 
You have gone, it may be, with your trouble to your 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 155 


earthly friend, you have unfolded your tale of woc, have 
unveiled every feeling and emotion. But ah! how 
have the vacant countenance, the wandering eye, the 
listless air, the cold response, told thee that thy friend, 
with all his love, could not enter into thy case! The 
care that darkened thy brow, had never shaded his,—— 
the sorrow that lacerated thy heart, had never touched 
his,—the cup that thou wast drinking, he had never 
tasted. What was lacking ?— sympathy, growing out 
of an identity of circumstance. Thou hast gone to 
another; he has trod that path before you, he has 
passed through that very trouble, his spirit has been 
inured to grief, his heart schooled in trial, sorrow in 
some of its acutest forms has been his companion ; and 
now he is prepared to bend upon you a melting eye, 
to lend an attentive ear, and a feeling heart, and to 
say, ‘“‘ Brother, I have known all, I have felt all, I have 
passed through all,—I can sympathize with all.” That 
Friend of friends, that Brother of brothers, is Jesus. 
He has gone before you; he has left a fragrance on the 
brim of that very cup you are now drinking; he has 
bedewed with tears, and left the traces of his blood on 
that very path along which you are now walking; he 
has been taught in that very school in which you are 
now learning. Then, what encouragement to take 
your case, in the sweet simplicity of faith, and lay it 
before the Lord! To go and tell Jesus, confessing to 
him, and over him, the sin which has called forth the 
chastisement, and then the grief which that chastise- 
ment has occasioned. What a wonderful High Priest 
is Jesus! As the bleeding Sacrifice, you may lay your 


156 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


hand of faith upon his head, and acknowledge your 
deepest guilt; and as the merciful Priest, you may lay 
your head on his bosom, and disclose your deepest 
sorrow. O my precious Saviour! must thou sink to 
this deep humiliation, and endure this bitter suffering, 
in order to enter into my lone sorrow! 

And yet, in this view of the necessity, we must not 
lose sight of the voluntary character of the Redeemer’s 
sufferings. God was not impelled, by a necessity which 
He could not resist, to redeem, nor Jesus to be the 
Redeemer. Our Lord was not so circumstanced ante- 
cedently to his acceptance of the office of Mediator, that 
he could not have avoided the humiliation, suffering, 
and death which he endured. Had he so willed it, he 
might have resigned the human race to the dire conse- 
quences of their apostasy, remaining himself everlast- 
ingly happy and glorious. But, after his most free 
consent had been given, after having voluntarily entered 
into an engagement with his father, to secure the sal- 
vation of his covenant people, then, by the most solemn 
and irrevocable bonds, it was necessary for him to go 
forward and finish the work he had undertaken, or leave 
the church to perish eternally. ‘‘For where a testa- 
ment is, there must also of necessity be the death of the 
testator.’ Coupling this passage with his own God- 
like declaration, how harmonious appear these appa- 
rently conflicting truths: ‘“‘I lay down my life, that I 
may take it again. No man taketh it from me, but I 
lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, 
and I have power to take it again.” 

And yet he suffered most voluntarily. In this con- 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 157 


sisted greatly the perfection of his sacrifice. His penal 
death had proved of no atoning efficacy but for this 
willing obedience, and the Divine merit that were in 
it. It would have been unjust in justice to have 
inflicted punishment upon an innocent and unwilling 
person. ‘The injury thus inflicted must have recoiled 
with tremendous force upon itself; for while, on the 
one hand, seeking satisfaction justly—on the other, it 
would have exacted that satisfaction most unjustly. 
The full and free concurrence of his own will was 
essential to the perfection of his sacrifice. Yea, had 
it not been most free, and acting in porfect harmony 
with his Father’s consent, our sins could not have 
been imputed to, nor the punishment inflicted upon, 
him. Entering, then, most freely into a bond to cancel 
the mighty debt, it was righteous in God, it was just 
in justice, and it invested the throne of the eternal 
Jehovah with surpassing glory, to arrest, in default of 
the debtor, the Surety, and to exact from him the utter- 
most payment. 

And here, my reader, is the great point to which we 
are aiming to bring you— the wonderful love of Jesus 
in so willingly suffering, the “just for the unjust.” 
Oh, how readily did he humble himself, and become 
obedient unto death, even the death of the cross! 
“Lo, I come; I delight to do thy will, O my God: 
yea, thy law is within my heart ;” ‘I have a baptism 
to be baptized with, and how am I straitened till it be 
accomplished !’’ “Who gave himself for us ;’’ “‘ Christ 
_also hath loved us, and hath given himself for us.”’ 


This is the spring of all that he hath done, for “ Christ 
14 


158 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


hath loved us.” Constrained by this, he gave himself 
as the Son of God, and as the Son of man, — his soul 
and body, his life and death: yea, all that he pos- 
sessed in heaven and on earth, he freely gave for us. 
What was there above or below,—in his previous state 
of glory, or subsequent state of humiliation, that he 
retained.? What part of the price did he withhold ? 
When he could give no less—for all angels and all 
men would not have sufficed—and when he could give 
no more, he gave himself. Ah! this made his “ offer- 
ing and sacrifice to God a sweet-smelling savour.” 
And still it perfumes the oblation, and sends it up 
each moment fragrant and acceptable before the throne 
of the Holy One. Oh, surpassing love of Jesus! 
With the burden of sin—the fire of justice—the wrath 
of God —the contumely of man—the malignity of 
demons — the sorrows of Gethsemane — the pains of 
Calvary, and the sea of his own blood, all, all in vivid 
prospect before him, he yet went forward, loving not 
his own life unto the death, because he loved ours more. 
O let your heart bend low before this amazing love! 
Yield to its sweet and attractive influence; let it draw 
you from yourself, from the creature, from all, to him. 
Are you wounded? Does your heart bleed? Is your 
soul cast down within you? Is your spirit within you 
desolate? Still Jesus is love, is loving, and loves you. 
He has suffered and died for you; and, were it neces- 
sary, he would suffer and die for you yet again. 
Whatever blessing he sees good to take from you, 
himself he will never take. Whatever stream of crea- 
ture love he sees fit to dry, hzs own love will never fail. 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 159 


O can that love fail—can it cease to yearn, and 
sympathize, and soothe, and support, which brought 
Jesus from heaven to earth to endure and suffer all 
this for us? Be still, then, — lie passive and low, — 
drink the cup, and let the surrender of your sin, your 
obedience, and yourself to him, be as willing and as 
entire as was the surrender of himself for you. Zhen 
shall you, in a blessed degree, be ‘‘able to comprehend 
with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, 
and height, and know the love of Christ, which sur- 
passeth knowledge, filled with all the fulness of God.” 

But the nature of his suffering! This is yet to be 
considered as forming the most essential part of his 
deep and unheard-of humiliation. Hzile from his 
Father was no small element in the abasement of our 
adorable Redeemer,—it was no slight ingredient of the 
bitter cup he was now drinking! What a change of 
circumstances for the Son of the Highest! To leave 
the bosom of the Father, where, in all the confidence 
and endearment of the closest and holiest love, he had 
from eternity reposed, to be embosomed in a world of 
sin, of anarchy, and of woe! Oh what a descending 
was this! That he was banished from all intercourse 
with God we do not assert. His whole life, which 
would seem to have formed one continuous act of devo- 
tion, so entirely did he live in the element of prayer, 
so closely was he enfolded by the atmosphere of com- 
munion, would contradict this. But the communion 
which Jesus held with his Father on earth was far 
different from that which he had been wont to hold 
in heaven. There it was from his bosom, not a cloud 


160 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


shading his mind, nor a sorrow wounding his spirit, 
nor a tear dimming his eye. Here it was from his 
footstool, amid infirmities, suffering, ‘strong crying, 
and tears.’’ Invested with a robe of flesh, his inter- 
course with God must have received a character from 
the medium through which it passed. And although 
not earthly were his conceptions of the Divine essence, 
or carnal his frame of spirit in its approach to God, 
yet, as man, and in all points tempted like as we are, 
we may easily suppose he could sympathize with the 
depth of meaning involved in that sweet portion of his 
own word, “The Spirit also helpeth our infirmities: 
for we know not what we should pray for as we ought: 
but the Spirit itself maketh intercession for us with 
groanings which cannot be uttered.’’ Comparison 
must utterly fail when instituted between the degree 
and tone of communion with God on earth, and the 
same hallowed employment in heaven. Take the 
loftiest flight of the spirit towards God, still caged and 
cabined by this body of sin, and measure its height 
with the soarings of that same spirit when disembodied 
and glorified, freed from all incumbrance of mortal 
clay, and how low in comparison are its most elevated 
communings! This deprivation Jesus endured, this 
limited communion Jesus felt, and deeply did it enter 
into’ his humiliation. 

But the climax of his humiliation, the consumma- 
tion of his bitter sorrow, was in the garden, and on 
the cross. We go with him to Gethsemane, and we 
hear him exclaim, ‘‘ My soul is exceedingly sorrowful, 
even unto death ;’”’ “‘O my Father, if it be possible, let 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 161 


this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but 
as thou wilt;’’ ‘‘ And being in an agony, he prayed 
more earnestly ; and his sweat was as it were great 
drops of blood falling down to the ground.” We 
follow him to Calvary, and amidst the darkness and 
throes of nature, and the still deeper darkness and 
throes of his soul, a cry more plaintive and more bitter 
breaks upon my ear: “My God, my God, why hast 
thou forsaken me?” “Jesus knowing that all things 
were now accomplished, that the Scripture might be 
fulfilled, saith, I thirst. Now there was set a vessel 
full of vinegar: and they filled a sponge with vinegar, 
and put it upon hyssop, and put it to his mouth. 
When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he 
said, It is finished: and he bowed his head, and gave 
up the ghost. And behold, the veil of the temple was 
rent in twain from the top to the bottom; and the 
earth did quake, and the rocks rent; and the graves 
were opened; and many bodies of the saints which 
slept arose. When the centurion, and they that were 
with him, watching Jesus, saw the earthquake, and 
those things that were done, they feared greatly, say- 
ing, Truly this was the Son of God.”’ 

Here we rest. We have descended with him from 
the sunny heights of his glory to the dark depth of 
his abasement: farther than this we cannot pass. We 
have travelled with him to the utmost limit of igno- 
miny; beyond it, it would seem, he himself could not 
go. Now did the storm, which for ages had been 
gathering strength, break upon him in its overwhelm- 


ing fury. Now did he endure the wrath of God to its 
14 * 


162 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


uttermost. No shield was around him, no refuge was 
over him, no advocate pleaded for him. His head 
was uncovered to the tempest, his person was bowed 
to the stroke, and he met both in their fiercest 
onset. Oh, was it no humiliation now to the Son of 
God? Hear his bitter complaints: ‘Save me, O God, 
for the waters are come in unto my soul. I sink in 
deep mire, where there is no standing; I am come into 
deep waters, where the floods overflow me. I am 
weary of my crying; my throat is dried; mine eyes 
fail while I wait for my God. They that hate me 
without a cause are more than the hairs of mine head: 
they that would destroy me, being mine enemies 
wrongfully, are mighty: then I restored that which I 
took not away.” ‘Thus sank the eternal Son! Thus 
bowed to the dust the Redeemer of men! Here let us 
pause, and adore him who though ‘equal with God, 
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, 
even the death of the cross.”’ 

Briefly tracing some of the vast, blessings which this 
subject secures to the church of God, the glory which 
belongs to the Redeemer in his humiliation and suffer- 
ings will thus more fully appear. 

The first that presents itself to the mind is the deep 
and broad foundation which rt lays for the salvation of 
the church. ‘There could have been no restoration of 
man, and no satisfaction to law and justice, but in the 
humiliation of the Son of God. The very necessity of 
the case demanded it. The Divine government had 
been dishonoured,—that dishonour could only be 
removed by the humiliation of one equal in dignity, 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 163 


holiness, and glory, even an infinite Being. The 
humiliation of every angel in heaven would not have 
effaced a single stain of its reproach, nor have restored 
a single beam of its glory. The law of God had been 
humbled,— justice demanded, as the price of its repara- 
tion, the humiliation of the Lawgiver himself. The 
incarnate God did humble himself, and became obe- 
dient unto death, even the death of the cross. Thus it 
was Jesus restored that which he took not away. He 
restored holiness to the law — satisfaction to justice— 
dignity to the Divine government — honour to God, 
and happiness and immortality to man. ‘Then I 
restored that which I took not away.” Oh, what a 
stable foundation is thus laid for the full salvation of 
every believer! 

The humiliation of the Redeemer opens a fountain 
of infinitely great and ever glorious grace. Nothing 
could we have known of the glory of his person, nothing 
of the character of God; and all the things of his 
hidden love must have remained for ever sealed, had 
he not so humbled himself. His coming forth, 
invested not with the dazzling robes of his infinite 
majesty, but wearing our degraded nature, descending 
to our state of deep abasement, yea, sinking infinitely 
deeper than we, throws open a treasury of grace 
as rich in its glory, and ample in its supply, as were 
the dark humiliation and deep poverty which made it 
ours. 

Here is glory springing from his abasement, — it is 
the “‘glory of his grace ;’”’ ‘‘ We beheld his glory, full 
of grace.” ‘This fulness of grace in Jesus includes all 


164 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


that a poor sinner needs, all that a necessitous believer 
requires, all that the glory of God demanded. Here 
is the grace of pardon in all its fulness —the grace of 
justification in all its fulness —the grace of sanctifica- 
tion in all its fulness —the grace of consolation in all 
its fulness ——the grace of strength in all its fulness. 
‘“‘It pleased the Father, that in him should ail fulness 
dwell.”” Grace is poured into his lips, and gracious’ 
words proceed from his lips. Hearken! ‘Come unto 
me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will 
give you rest.” Hearken again! ‘Him that cometh 
unto me, I will in no wise cast out.’ Does he not 
bind,up the broken heart? Does he not preach glad 
tidings to the meek ? Does he not “satisfy the hungry 
soul, and satiate the weary soul with goodness ?”’ Has 
he ever sent the poor empty away? Was he ever 
known to turn his back upon one humble comer 
drawing near, bowed with guilt, disconsolate with sor- 
row, oppressed with trial? Never! never! Oh, it is 
with infinite delight —delight of the depth of which 
we can form no conception—that he welcomes poor 
sinners. He thinks of his own humiliation for sin; 
he remembers his own sorrows and tears, agonies and 
death; and throwing himself, as it were, in the very 
centre of a bosom storm-tossed with godly grief, he 
seeks to soothe and hush it toa calm. And how does 
he allay the tempest? He pours the oil of his own 
love upon the waves: he sprinkles the conscience with 
- that blood which cleanseth from all sin, and bids the 
soul go in peace. Dear reader, where least we should 
have expected it, Jesus is set before us, the Door of 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 165 


hope,” even in the deep valley of his humiliation. “TI 
will give the valley of Achor for a door of hope.” 
The Gospel of this precious promise is found in the 
wondrous theme we are now contemplating — the hu- 
miliation of the incarnate God. To that humiliation 
we must sink, into that valley we must descend. Con- 
vinced of sin, separated from all self-reliance and 
creature-trust, emptied, humbled, laid low in the dust 
before God, we shall then find Jesus to be the “ Door 
of hope”’ set open before us in the deep and dark valley 
of our poverty, hopelessness, vileness, and abasement. 
Just the Door we need, is Jesus. A Door to a Father’s 
forgiving heart ; a Door to God’s reconciled love; a 
Door to the sweetest, closest, holiest fellowship and 
communion; a door into heaven itself; a door so wide, 
that the greatest sinner may enter, —so free, that the 
penniless may come. | 


Door of hope for sinners poor, 
Here the hopeless may draw nigh; 
Jesus bids them stay no more, 
And receives them graciously. 


** Door of mercy open wide, 
He that will may enter here ; 
Find in Jesu’s pierced side, 
Shelter from each rising fear. 


** Door of pardon for the vile, 
Here the vilest enter in, 
Find the fruit of Jesu’s toil, 
Full atonement for their sin. 


4 


166 THE GLORY OF TIE REDEEMER 


‘Door of peace, yea, peace with God, 
Sinners may adore and bless — 
Peace, the fruit of Jesu’s blood, 
Peace, the fruit of righteousness. 


“Door of heaven, fivre saints shall raise 
Loud hosannas swelling high, 
And in gratitude and praise 
Spend a long eternity. 


The humiliation of Christ is also the believer's path 
to the enjoyment of the richest blessings here, and the 
highest glory hereafter. How little do we associate 
our most costly mercies, and even those which we are 
accustomed to esteem of a more ordinary character, 
(although every mercy is infinitely great,) with the 
abasement of our Lord! How seldom do we trace 
our happy moments, and hallowed joys, and high 
delights, and sacred scenes, and precious privileges, 
to this dark part of his eventful history! And yet all 
flow to us through this very channel, and but for this, 
never, never had been ours. When the ocean of 
his goodness rolls in upon me, wave on wave,— when 
I feel the cheering warmth of creature smiles beaming 
sweetly and fondly,— when I review, one by one, my 
personal, domestic, and relative mercies,— when even 
the cup of cold water, proffered by the hand of Christian 
kindness, moistens my lips,— what is the thought that 
forces itself upon my mind ?— “all this springs from 
the deepest humiliation of my adorable Christ!” And 
when I ascend into the higher region of grace, and 
survey the blessings so richly and so freely bestowed, 


% 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 167 


—a rebel subdued—a criminal pardoned —a child 
adopted—a royal priest anointed—union with Christ— 
covenant relationship with God—access within the holy 
of holies—conformity to the Divine image — still more 
deeply am I overwhelmed with the thought, ‘all this 
proceeds from the infinite abasement of the incarnate 
God!’’ And when yet higher still I ascend, and 
passing from grace to glory, contemplate the heaven of 
bliss that awaits me,—in one moment absent from the 
body of sin, and present with the Lord, away from the 
world, beautiful though it is, because God has made it, 
yet the throne of Satan, the empire of sin, the scene 
of sorrow, pollution, suffering and death; and eter- 
nally shut in with God, where all is joy, and all is 
holiness,—made perfectly holy, and consequently per- 
fectly happy, to sin no more, to sorrow no more, to 
weep no more, to wander no more, to fall no more,— 
oh, how full of glory then becomes the humiliation of 
my incarnate Lord! Beloved, when God exalts thee, 
remember it is because thy Saviour was abased. When 
thy cup is sweet, remember it is because his cup was 
bitter. When thou dost press thy mercy fondly and 
closely to thy heart, remember it is because he pressed 
his heart to the spear. And when the eye of faith and 
hope looks forward to the coming glory, oh, forget not 
that, because he endured thy hell, thou shalt enjoy his 
heaven. 

How gloriously does the love of the Father towards 
us shine in the humiliation and sufferings of Jesus ! 
How deep, how immense, how real that love must be, 
thus to have dealt with His beloved Son, in order to 


168 THE GQLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


waft all the blessings of heaven and immortality into 
our souls ! If I want to know in some degree the height 
of the Father’s love, I must in a proportionate degree 
know the depth of the Son’s humiliation. Beloved, 
ponder this amazing truth. Sink down into it until 
you find it too deep for mortal thought to fathom ; 
grasp it until its infinite dimensions expand beyond 
your powers of conception. God is love, and loving 
His Son, God loves you; and the strong and costly 
proof of it is, that he resigned Jesus to the shame and 
the spitting, gave up His darling One to the power of 
the dogs, and abandoned him to darkness and woe 
upon the cross, withdrawing every beam of light from 
his mind, and every drop of consolation from his heart. 
Love prompted the gift, love constrained to the sur- 
render, love sank him low, and love stands pledged 
to give you every blessing that you need; and this is 
its security—‘‘ He that spared not His own Son, but 
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him 
also freely give us all things?” O ascend from your 
narrow, straitened views of the Father’s love! They 
disonour that Father, they undervalue His gift, they 
grieve the Spirit, and they bring leanness into your 
own soul. In the humiliation and sufferings of Jesus, 
God has unlocked every chamber of his heart, and in- 
vites you to enter and revel amidst their untold riches. 
In view of this stupendous truth, He asks you to 
surrender yourself simply and unreservedly to His 
government and service—to walk obediently—to trust 
implicitly—to bow resignedly—to imitate closely—and 
to be ever ascending in faith, and hope, and love, 
towards your heavenly home. 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 169 


A spiritual and continued contemplation of the Re- 
deemer’s humiliation supplies a powerful check to sin. 
What is every sin committed, but opening afresh the 
wounds, and re-acting anew the humiliation of Jesus? 
Oh, how hateful must that sin appear in our serious 
moments, which shut out the sun of God’s countenance 
from the soul of Christ, and sunk him to such incon- 
ceivable depths of humiliation! We need every view 
of Divine truth calculated to sanctify. At present, the 
deepest sanctification of the believer is imperfect: his 
loftiest soarings towards holiness never reaching the 
goal. And yet to be ever thirsting, panting, wrest- 
ling, and aiming after it, should be classed among our 
highest mercies. Oh, we too much forget this truth, 
that the thirsting for holiness is as much the Holy 
Spirit’s creation, as it is his work to quench that thirst. 
‘Blessed are they that hunger and thirst after right- 
eousness;” or, Blessed are they who have the desire 
for Divine conformity, who long to know Christ, and 
to resemble Christ more perfectly. They may never 
reach the mark, yet ever pressing towards it,— they 
may never attain to their standard, yet, ever aiming 
for it, they are truly blessed. Here, then, is one 
powerful mean of attaining to holiness,— the spiritual 
eye brought in close and frequent contact with the 
lowly life of God’s dear Son. But for our sins, his 
mind had never been shaded with clouds, his heart had 
never been wrung with sorrow, his eye had never been 
bedewed with tears, he had never suffered and died, 
had never known the wrath of the offended God. 


How fraught with soothing and consolation is this 
15 


- 


170 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


subject to the bereaved and tried believer! It tells you, 
weeping mourner, that having drained all His wrath, 
and poured it on the head of your Surety, nothing is 
reserved for you in the heart of God but the deep 
fountain of tender mercy and loving-kindness. Then 
_ whence springs your present trial, but from the loving 
heart of your Father? In the life of Jesus all was 
humiliation, in the life of the believer all is glory ; and 
all this glory springs from the headship of Christ. In 
every step that he trod, he is one with him,—the only 
difference being that Jesus changes positions with the 
believer, and thus what was bitter to him becomes sweet 
to us; and what was dark to him, becomes light to us; 
and what was his ignominy and shame, becomes our 
highest honour and glory. 

Humbling as may be the way God is now leading 
you, forget not that the great end is to bring you into 
fellowship with Christ’s humiliation—Jinto a more 
realising oneness with your tried Head. How con- 
tracted were the believer’s views of, and how limited 
his sympathy with, the abasement of God’s dear Son, 
but for the humiliation of his life, but for the way 
the Lord leads him about in order to humble him! 
Deut. vii. To be brought into sympathy with you in 
all the gloomy stages of your journey, ‘‘he humbled 
himself ;”’ and that this feeling might be reciprocal, 
bringing you into a sympathy with the dark stages of 
his life, he humbles you. But deep as your present 
humiliation may be, you cannot sink so low, but 
you will find he sunk yet lower, and is therefore 
able to sustain and bear you up. “I was brought low, 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 171 


and he helped me.’’ Never can Christian sink beneath 
the everlasting arms; they will always be under- 
neath you. You may be sorely tried—deeply bereaved 
—— fearfully tempted—painfully wounded. Saints and 
sinners, the church and the world, may each con- 
tribute some bitter ingredient to your cup; neverthe- 
less, the heart of Jesus is a pavilion within whose 
sacred enclosure you may repose until these calamities 
be overpast. Your greatest extremity can never exceed 
his power or sympathy, because he has gone before his 
people, and has endured what they never shall endure. 
In the shadow now deepening around you, there is 
no frown; in the bosom of the cloud now gathering 
over you, there lurks no thunderbolt. On the path 
along which you tread, no lightning gleams, for Jesus 
has borne it all, and borne it far away. Be not 
tempted, then, to believe that your case, extreme as it 
may be, can exceed the limit of his compassion, power, 
and sympathy. Behold what glory thus springs 
from the humiliation and sufferings of our adorable 
Redeemer ! 

This subject is of an eminently practical tendency. 
It especially points to Christ as an example. In view 
of the Redeemer’s humiliation, how appropriate and 
forcible is the exhortation: ‘ Let this mind be in you, 
which was also in Christ Jesus!” The great and holy 
lesson the Lord the Spirit would inculcate as the 
foundation of this truth, is profound self-abasement, 
increasing, habitual lowliness of mind. Never was so 
holy a precept based upon such a doctrine, illustrated 
by such an example, and enforced by such a motive 


172 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


as this. It would seem, while descending into the 
dark valley of Divine abasement, as though all human 
self-exaltation must wither, and all self-glory must die. 
The atmosphere would seem too pure for affections 
so vile to exist even for a moment. It must be 
acknowledged as a truth of great moment, that only 
beneath the cross is this holy and precious grace 
truly cultivated and nurtured. There can be no evan- 
gelical humility until sin is felt and deplored, and 
Christ is seen and loved. The Lord, by various pro- 
cesses, may seek to “hide pride from man.’’ Beneath 
the hand that has smitten, the haughty spirit, if it 
does not cherish secret and determined rebellion 
against the dispensation, may for a while be subdued, 
and the lofty look be laid low; but the pressure once 
removed,—the sorrow vanishing, with it often vanishes 
all semblance of real humility and submission; and 
the spirit is more haughty, and the eye more lofty 
than before. 

But a spiritual inward perception of this stupendous 
truth—God humbling himself for man’s transgression 
—the eternal Spirit laying it upon the heart with 
sanctifying power, begets a spirit of deep self-abase- 
ment, and promotes that lowliness and humbleness 
of mind with which Jehovah deigns and delights to 
dwell. Oh, how levelling is a sight of the cross of the 
incarnate God to human pride! Bereavements may 
empty— afilictions may humble —trials may subdue, 
and in the hand of the sanctifying Spirit they often 
work wonders for a child of God, and are not to be 
despised, or in any degree lightly esteemed; but the 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 173 


eross in the heart, this, this it is which truly and 
effectually lays the soul prostrate in the dust before the 
holy God, with deep abhorrence of self, and of sin’s 
exceeding sinfulness. 
But what is it to have “‘the mind that was in 
Christ ?’? We answer, it is to be ever aiming after the 
highest perfection of holiness. It is to have the eye of 
faith perpetually on Jesus as our model, studying him 
closely as our great example, seeking conformity to 
him in all things. It is to be regulated in all our 
conduct by his lowly spirit. First, with regard to 
others, — to choose the low place, to acknowledge God 
in, and to glorify him for, the grace, gifts, and the use- 
fulness bestowed on other saints, and to exemplify in 
our social intercourse the self-denying, expansive bene- 
volence of the Gospel, which enjoins the duty of not 
seeking paramountly our own interests, but to sacrifice 
all self-gratification, and even honour and advantage, 
if, by so doing, we may promote the happiness and 
welfare of others,—thus it is to live, not for ourselves, 
but for God and our fellow-men; for “‘no man liveth 
to himself, and no man dicth to himself ;’’ in the spirit 
of him, who, on the eve of returning to his glory, took 
a towel and girded himself, and washed his disciples’ 
feet, it is to serve the saints in the most lowly acts and 
offices. Second, it is to exemplify, with regard to our- 
selves, the same lowly spirit which he breathed. It is 
to be little in our own eyes—to cherish a humble esti- 
mate of our gifts, attainments, usefulness, and station 
—to be meek, gentle, and submissive under rebuke and 


correction,—to “seek not great things for ourselves,” 
15* 


# ad 


174 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


—to court not human praise, watching our hearts with . 
perpetual vigilance and jealousy, lest we thirst for the — 
“‘henour which cometh from man, and not the honour | 
which cometh from God only.” It is to contribute to 
the necessities of saints without begrudging, to give to 
Christ’s cause without ostentation, to do good by 
stealth,—to seek, in all our works of zeal, and benevo- _ 
lence, and charity, to hide ourselves, that se/f may be. 
perpetually mortified ;—in a word, it is to hunger and 
thirst after righteousness, to be poor in spirit, lowly in 
mind, to walk humbly with God, and to live to, and 
labour for, and aim after, the glory of God in all 
things. This is to have the “mind that was also in 
Christ Jesus.” 

There cannot, perhaps, be a position, however pecu- 
liar and difficult, in which the believer may be placed, 
but he will find that Jesus, either by precept or example, 
has defined the path in which he should walk. Let 
me illustrate this, by citing a few individual cases. 
The subject of this chapter pointedly and solemnly 
addresses itself to the rich. Circumstanced as you 
are by the providence of God, you have need closely 
and prayerfully to ascertain how, in your situation, 
Jesus walked. One of the peculiar snares to which 
your station exposes you is high-mindedness, and con- 
sequent self-trust and complacency. But here the 
Lord Jesus presents himself as your example. He, 
too, was rich; creating all things, he possessed all 
things. The Creator of all worlds, all worlds were at 
his command. Yet, amazing truth! in the days of his 
humiliation, he was as though he possessed not,— 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 175 


“Though he was rich, yet for our sakes he became 
poor.” In view of such an illustrious Pattern, what is 
your duty? Simple and obvious. You are in a degree 
to become poor, by devoting your substance to the 
glory of God. To amass wealth, for the purpose of 
hoarding it, is contrary to the spirit of the Gospel, and 
is opposed to the teaching and example of Christ. It 
is a sin—an awful, a soul-perilling sin. It exposes you 
to a vortex, which has already drawn and engulfed 
within its fearful abyss thousands of rich professors. 
Unless you are strictly following the steps of Christ, 
as one to whom immense responsibilities attach in con- 
nexion with worldly prosperity, increasing wealth, or 
already acquired affluence, you are encircled by immi- 
nent danger. Your property is a talent, for which, as 
a steward, youare as certainly and as solemnly account- 
able to God as for any other. It is perhaps the one 
talent that he has given you. What if you bury it in 
covetousness and parsimony, or in prodigal expenditure 
and self-indulgence, refusing to relax your grasp of it 
to promote His cause and truth, who became poor to 
enrich us, how will you meet his scrutiny and his 
glance when the judgment is set, and he demands 
an account of your stewardship? Nor is it a small, 
though, perhaps, a solitary talent. Bestowed upon but 
few, the obligation becomes the greater to consecrate it 
unreservedly to the Lord. And how can you withhold 
it, in view of the claims which crowd upon you on 
either hand? What! are you at a loss for a channel 
through which your benevolence might flow? Are 
you inquiring, “ How shall I devote my property to 


176 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


God? To what especial object shall I contribute of 
my substance?’ In what way may this, my one 
talent, best answer the end for which it is bestowed ?” 
Cast your eye around you,—surely you cannot long 
hesitate. Survey the map of Christian missions, is 
there no part of Christ’s kingdom languishing through 
an inadequacy of pecuniary support? Is there no 
mission embarrassed, if not abandoned, no laborious 
missionary disheartened, perhaps recalled, for the want 
of that very substance which you are either hoarding 
up in the spirit of avarice, or lavishing in unnecessary 
and extravagant selfishness, or else, in the anticipation 
of a posthumous benevolence, have locked up in a piece 
of dry parchment, in the shape of a testamentary 
bequest, to be disposed of after your death? Is there 
no important enterprise impeded in its course of bene- 
volence by the lack of funds?—no useful society dis- 
couraged and crippled through the narrowness and 
insufficiency of its resources? Is there no important 
sphere of labour in your vicinity neglected, no spot in 
the moral wilderness entirely untilled, because the 
means to supply and sustain an effective agency have 
been wanting? Is there no sanctuary of God bur- 
dened with debt, the existence of which presses like an 
incubus upon the spiritual prosperity and zealous exer- 
tions of the Christian community worshipping within 
its walls, and which your outstretched hand could 
remove and cast away? Is there no faithful, hard- 
working minister of Christ within your knowledge and 
your reach, combating with straitened circumstances, 
oppressed by poverty, and toiling amidst lonely care, 


IN WIS HUMILIATION. 177 


embarrassment, and anxiety, studiously and delicately 
screened from human eye, which it is in your power to 
alleviate and remove? Is there no widow’s heart you 
could make to sing for joy? no orphan, whose tears 
yon could dry? no saint of God tried by sickness, or 
want, or imprisonment, from whose spirit you could 
lift the burden, and from whose heart you could chase 
the sorrow, and from whose feet you could strike the 
fetter? Surely a world of want, and woe, and suffering 
is before you, nor need you yield to a moment’s hesita- 
tion in selecting the object around which your charity 
should entwine. | 

Here, then, is your example. Jesus became poor, 
lived poor, and died poor. Dare you die a rich man— 
an affluent professor? I beseech you, ponder this 
question. If your Lord has left you an example that 
you should follow his steps, then you are called upon 
to become poor, to live poor, yea, even to die poor for 
him. But especially are you exhorted to rejoice in 
that, by the grace of God, you are made low. James 
i. 10. That iv. the midst of so much calculated 
to nourish the pride and lofty independence of the 
natural heart, you have been made to know your deep 
spiritual poverty, and as a sinner have been brought to 
the feet of Jesus. By that grace only can you be kept 
low. Here is your only security. Mere wealth invests 
its possessor with no real power or greatness. Ii 
confers no moral nor intellectual glory. It insures not 
against the inroad of evil. It throws around no shield. 
It may impart a measure of artificial importance, 
authority, and influence in the world’s estimation; 


178 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


beyond this, what is it? Unsanctified by Divine 
grace, it entails upon its unhappy possessor an innu- 
merable train of evils. As a Christian man, then, 
exposed to the snares of-even a moderate degree of 
worldly prosperity, your only security is in drawing 
largely from the “ exceeding riches of Christ’s grace ;”’ 
your true wealth is in the fear of God ruling in your 
heart, in the love of Christ constraining you to ‘lie 
low in a low place;’’ to bear the cross daily; to walk 
closely, obediently, and humbly with God; employing 
the property with which He has entrusted you as a 
faithful steward ; your eye ever ‘looking unto Jesus” 
as your Pattern. 

Equally full and pointed in its instruction is this 
dark page in the Redeemer’s history, to those of his 
saints who, by the providence of God, are placed in 
elevated walks in life, and upon whom are conferred the 
distinctions of human rank, power, and greatness. To 
assert, as some have done, that the word of God refuses 
to recognize human distinctions in society, and that 
when Divine grace takes possession of the heart, it 
becomes the duty of its subject to relinquish the rank, 
forego the influence, descend from the position, and go 
out of the sphere of life in the possession of which 
grace found him, would seem, not only to transcend the 
wisdom, but even to arraign the providence of God. 
He who despises a rich man because he is rich, as much 
reproaches God, as he who oppresseth a poor man 
because he is poor. The same providence which or- 
dained the one, created the other. In the one case, 
we reproach God for creating the rich, and in the 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 179 


other, we reproach Him for creating the poor. In 
both we impeach his sovereignty, wisdom and good- 
ness. There is much in the levelling and equalizing 
spirit of the age to awaken strong suspicion and alarm. 
Let us be clearly understood. With the holy desire 
and fervent prayer of those who long for a clearer 
and wider line of demarcation between the church 
and the world,—for a more visible separation of the 
one from the other,—for more spirituality among the 
Lord’s people,—more heavenly-mindedness, less sinful 
conformity to, and unnecessary mingling with, the 
world, we truly and deeply sympathize. But with the 
spirit to which we have alluded,—a spirit which seeks 
to sap the foundation of human governments, to up- 
heave human society, to loosen its bonds, annihilate 


| 


its orders, and equalize its distinctions, we can have 
no sympathy whatever, believing it opposed to the 
spirit of true Christianity, which inculcates upon all 
men reverence for the civil power; which enjoins 
homage to kings, obedience to magistrates, prayer for 
all that are in authority, “honour to whom honour, 
and tribute to whom tribute is due ;’”’ remembering that 
“the powers that be are ordained by God.” 

Would it not also appear on examination, that 
even among many saints of God, views are found to 
exist, the tendency of which is to foster a similar prin- 
ciple to that we have just reprehended ? There would 
seem to be an impression,—though the idea would 
probably meet with instant rejection,—that providence 
and grace are opposed to each other —that, when the 
purpose of grace is accomplished, the arrangements of 


189 TIE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


providence must be broken up; in other words, that 
the grace of God disqualifies for the previous sphere of 
elevated life which the providential arrangements of 
God had assigned to its subject. We think such an 
idea, practically acted upon, as some have done, fraught 
with many and serious evils. God will be glorified in 
everything that He had created, from the mote in the 
sunbeam, to the highest product of His power. Hspe- 
cially is He glorified in maintaming His saints in the 
different spheres and relations of life in which His 
grace has called them. ‘Thus He makes use of one 
believer’s rank, of another’s wealth, of another’s 
influence, of another’s attainments. On all is in- 
scribed, ‘‘ Holiness to the Lord;” and all, sanctified 
and set apart to a holy purpose and end, are pressed 
into His service, and are made to contribute to His 
glory. Imagine, then, how antagonistical the one to the 
other would providence and grace be made to appear, 
were a man of rank to relinquish his rank; a man of 
wealth to part with his wealth; a man of influence to 
come out of the sphere of his influence, the moment 
the great transition from death to life, from darkness 
to light, had taken place. The change from nature 
into grace is not an immediate translation from grace 
to glory. He is called spiritually out of the world, but 
yet left in the world, and left in it, too, that for awhile 
he may glorify Him who has called him. ‘These are 
in the world,” says Christ to his Father. And again; 
‘‘ As thou hast sent me into the world, even so also 
have I sent them into the world.” And although it is 
most true, that “‘not many wise men after the flesh, 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 181 


not many mighty, not many noble are called,” yet it 
is equally true that to those who are so called, the 
inspired exhortation is addressed: ‘‘ Brethren, let every 
man wherein he ts called, therein abide with God.” 
But if, my reader, God has called you by his sove- 
relgn grace, in the circumstances to which I have 
alluded, the grand point that we would press upon 
you, is the importance of placing prominently and con- 
stantly before you the Lord Jesus as your Pattern. 
Have you rank? have you distinction? have you 
wealth? have you influence? So had Christ. But how 
did he wear that rank, and sustain that distinction, and 
dispose of that wealth, and employ that influence? In 
the spirit of the profoundest humility, and with a view 
to the holiest, and sublimest end! On what occasion 
will you detect in him the parade of lofty title, or the 
pride of elevated distinction, or the haughty reserve of 
superior birth, or the tyrannical exercise of sovereign 
power, or the selfish indulgence of unbounded in- 
fluence? Never! The ‘Ancient of days” did seem 
to be the infant of days,—the eternal God as the low- 
liest man, — with so meek, so humble, and so con- 
descending a carriage, did he deport himself in the 
days of his flesh. Of him, and from him, you have 
need to learn how best to glorify your heavenly Father 
in your present position. Looking narrowly into his 
word, examining closely his precept and example, you 
will avoid all worldly aggrandisement in your profession 
of Christian discipleship, — you will be reminded that 
his ‘kingdom is not of this world;” that in the 


church the “rich and the poor meet together; that 
16 


182 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


on common ground they there stand; that there all 
human distinction is lost, and all embrace each other 
as fellow-heirs of the same eternalinheritance. But if 
forbidden to carry your worldly distinctions into your 
Christianity, you are not forbidden to carry your 
Christianity into the elevated circle in which you move, 
showing how the grace of the Lord Jesus can make 
you poor, though rich; humble, though elevated ; and 
child-like, though gifted. Oh, be constrained in the 
spirit of the profoundest humility to lay your title, 
your wealth, your honour, and your intellectual attain- 
ments at the foot of the cross, an unreserved, conse- 
crated, and willing offering to His glory, who though 
the “King of kings, and Lord of lords,” once hung 
upon if in ignominy and suffering and death. You 
‘know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,’’—the rich, 
the amazing, the sovereign, the free grace of Jesus, to 
which you owe all that is precious and glorious in the 
prospect of eternity; you know from personal and 
blessed experience this fathomless, boundless grace, 
which has made you what you are, and will make you 
what you shall yet be,—let this grace, then, accomplish 
its perfect work in you, by leading you to glory only in 
Jesus, to yield yourself supremely to his service, and 
to regard the worldly distinction God has conferred 
upon you as valuable only as it promotes His kingdom, 
truth, and glory, who ‘“‘though rich, for your sakes 
became poor, that you, through his poverty, might be 
made rich.” 

Permit me to reiterate the exhortation, — cultivate, 
above all spiritual conditions, most assiduously, prayer- 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 183 


fully, earnestly, and fervently, poverty of spirit. Rest 
not short of it. This is the legitimate fruit, and the 
only safe evidence of our union to Christ, and the 
indwelling of the Spirit in our hearts. Nothing can 
suffice for it. Splendid talent, versatile gifts, pro- 
found erudition, gorgeous eloquence, and even exten- 
sive usefulness, are wretched substitutes for poverty of 
spirit. They may dazzle the eye, and please the ear, 
and delight the taste, and awaken the applause of man, 
but, dissociated from profound humiliation of mind, 
God sees no glory in them. What says He? “To 
this man’’—to him only, to him exclusively—“ will I 
look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, 
and trembleth at my word.”’ We may think highly of 
gifts, but let us learn their comparative value and true 
place from the words of our Lord, spoken in reference 
to John: “ Verily I say unto you, Among them which 
are born of women, there hath not risen a greater than 
John the Baptist: notwithstanding he that ds least in 
the kingdom of heaven, is greater than he.’ Behold 
the true position which Christ assigns to distinction 
of office, of place, and of gifts—subordinate to lowli- 
ness of spirit. This is their proper rank; and he who 
elevates them above profound self-abasement, deep 
lowliness of spirit, sins against God, impeaches His 
wisdom, and denies the truth of His word. 

But how shall we adequately describe this blessed 
state? How draw the portrait of the man that is 
‘“‘noor, and of a contrite spirit?’ Look at him as he 
appears in his own apprehension and judgment—“ the 
chief of sinners,’’—“‘less than the least of all saints,”’ 


184 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


—‘‘though I be nothing.” Prostrate, where others 
exalt him; condemning, where others approve him ; 
censuring, where others applaud him; humbling him- 
self, where others have put upon him the greatest 
honour. Confessing in secret and in the dust before 
God, the flaws, the imperfections, and the sins of those 
things which have dazzled the eyes, and awaken to 
trembling extasy the souls of the multitude. Look at 
him in the place he assumes among others,—taking the 
low position; in honour preferring others; washing 
the disciples’ feet; willing to serve rather than be 
served : rejoicing in the distinction, the promotion, the 
gifts, the usefulness, and the honour put upon his 
fellow-saints ; and ready himself to go up higher at his 
Master’s bidding. Look at him under the hand of God, 
——meck, patient, resigned, humbled, drinking the cup, 
blessing the hand that has smitten, justifying the 
wisdom, the love, and the gentleness which mark the 
discipline, and eager to learn the holy lessons it is sent 
to teach. Look at him before the cross,—reposing all 
his gifts, and attainments, and honours at his foot, and 
glorying only in the exhibition it presents of the holy 
God pardoning sin through the death of His Son, and 
as the hallowed instrument by which he becomes cruci- 
fied to the world, and the world to him. 

And how shall we array, in the strongest light, 
before you, the moteves which urge the cultivation of 
this poverty of spirit? Is it not enough that this is 
the spiritual state on which Jehovah looks with an eye 
of exclusive, holy, and ineffable delight? ‘To this 
man will I look.” ‘‘Splendid gifts, brilliant attain- 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 185 


ments, costly sacrifices, are nothing to me. To this 
man will I look, that is poor and of a contrite spirit, 
and that trembleth at my word.” ‘To this would we 
add, if you value your safe, happy, and holy walk,—if 
you prize the manifestations of God’s presence,—“ the 
kisses of His mouth, whose love is better than wine,’’— 
the teaching, guiding, and comforting influence of the 
Holy Spirit, seek it. If you would be a ‘savour of 
Christ in every place,’— if you would pray with more 
fervour, unction, and power,—if you would labour 
with more zeal, devotedness, and success, seek zt. By 
all that is dear, and precious, and holy,—by your own 
happiness, by the honour of Christ, by the glory of 
God, by the hope of heaven, seek to be found among 
those who are ‘‘ poor, and of a contrite spirit,” who, 
with filial, holy love, tremble at God’s word, whom 
Jesus has pronounced blessed here, and meet for glory 
hereafter. And though, in approaching the Great 
High Priest, you have no splendid and costly intel- 
lectual offerings to present, yet with the royal penitent 
you can say, “‘ Thou desirest not sacrifice, else would I 
give it: thou delightest not in burnt offering. The 
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a 
contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise.”’ ‘This, 
Lord, is all that I have to bring thee.” 

Avoid a spurious humility. True humility consists 
not in denying the work of the Holy Spirit in our 
hearts, in underrating the grace of God in our souls, 
in standing afar off from our heavenly Father, and in 
walking at a distance from Christ, always doubting the 


efficacy of his blood, the freeness of his salvation, the 
16 * 


186 THE G@LORY OF THE REDEEMER 


willingness of his heart, and the greatness ofhis power 
to save. Oh no! this is not the humility that God 
delights to look at, but is a false, a counterfeit hu- 
mility, obnoxious in His sight. But, to ‘‘draw near 
with a true heart, in full assurance of faith,” in lowly 
dependence upon his blood and righteousness; to ac- 
cept of salvation as the gift of his grace; to believe 
the promise, because he had spoken it; gratefully and 
humbly to acknowledge our calling, our adoption, and 
our acceptance, and to live in the holy, transforming 
influence of this exalted state, giving to the Triune God 
all the praise and glory; thzs is the humility which is 
most pleasing to God, and is the true product of the 
Holy Spirit. 

This subject addresses itself especially and sooth- 
ingly to those who, like their Lord, are the subjects of 
deep humiliation and suffering. But imperfectly, 
perhaps, beloved reader, are you aware of the high 
privilege to which you are admitted, and of the great 
glory conferred upon you in being identified with Jesus 
in his life of humiliation. ‘This is one of the numerous 
evidences by which your adoption into the family of 
God is authenticated, and by which your union with 
Christ is confirmed. It may be you are the subject of 
deep poverty, your circumstances are straitened, your 
resources are limited, your necessities are many and 
pressing. Perhaps you are the ‘‘man that hath known 
affliction ;’’ sorrow has been your constant and intimate 
companion; you have become “‘ acquaznted with grief. 
The Lord has been leading youalong a path of painful 
humiliation, You have been ‘‘emptied from vessel to 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 187 


vessel.”’ He has brought you down, and laid you low; 
step by step—and yet, O how wisely and how gently— 
he has been leading you deeper, and yet deeper into 
the valley! But why all this leading about? why this 
emptying? why this descending? ven to bring you 
into a union and communion with Jesus in his life of 
humiliation! Is there a step in your abasement that 
Jesus has not trodden with you—ah, and trodden 
before you? Is there a sin that he has not carried, a 
cross that he has not borne, a sorrow that has not 
affected him, an infirmity that has not touched him? 
Hyen so will he cause you to reciprocate this sympathy, 
and have fellowship with him in his sufferings. As 
the Head did sympathize with the body, so must the 
body sympathize with the Head. Yea, the very same 
humiliation which you are now enduring, the Son of 
God has before endured. And that you might learn 
something what that love, and grace, and power were 
which enabled him to pass through it all, he pours a 
little drop into thy cup, places a small part of the cross 
upon thy shoulder, and throws a slight shadow on thy 
soul! Yes, the very sufferings you are now enduring 
are, in a faint and limited degree, the sufferings of 
Christ. ‘‘ Who now rejoice in my sufferings for you,”’ 
says the apostle, ‘and fill up that which is behind of 
the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his body’s sake, 
which is the church.” There is a twofold sense in 
which Jesus may be viewed as a sufferer. He suffered 
in his own person as the Mediator of his church ; those 
sufferings were vicarious and complete, and in that 
sense he can suffer no more; “for by one offering he — 


188 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


hath perfected for ever them that are sanctified. The 
other now presents him as suffering in his members: 
in this sense Christ is still a sufferer; and although 
not suffering to the same degree, or for the same end, 
as he once did, nevertheless he who said, ‘Saul, Saul, 
why persecutest thou me ?”’ is identified with the church 
in all its sufferings; in all her afflictions, he being 
afflicted. The apostle therefore terms the believer's’ 
present sufferings, the “ afflictions of Christ.” 

Behold, then, your exalted privilege, ye suffering 
sons of God! See how the glory beams around you, 
ye humble and afflicted ones! You are one with the 
Prince of sufferers, and the Prince of sufferers is one 
with you! Oh! to be onE with Christ — what tongue 
can speak, what pen can describe the sweetness of the 
blessing, and the greatness of the grace? ‘To sink with 
him in his humiliation here, is to rise with him in his 
exaltation hereafter. ‘To share with him in his abase- 
ment on earth, is to blend with him in his glory in 
heaven. ‘To suffer shame and contumely, persecution 
and distress, poverty and loss, for him now, is to wear 
the crown, and wave the palm, and swell the triumph, 
and shout the song, when he shall descend the second 
time in glory and majesty, to raise his bride from the 
scene of her humiliation, robe her for the marriage, 
and make her manifestly and eternally his own. 

Oh! laud his great Name for all the present conduct 
of his providence and grace. Praise him for all the 
wise, though affecting, discoveries he gives you of your- 
self, of the creature, of the world. Blessed, ah! truly 
blessed and holy is the discipline that prostrates your 


IN HIS HUMILIATION. 189 


spirit inthe dust. There it is that he reveals the secret 
of his own love, and draws apart the veil of his own 
loveliness. here it is that he brings the soul deeper 
into the experience of his sanctifying truth; and with 
new forms of beauty, and expressions of endearment, 
allures the heart, and takes a fresh possession of it for 
himself. And there, too, it is that the love, tenderness, 
and grace of the Holy Spirit are better known. As the 
Comforter, as the Revealer of Jesus, we are, perhaps, 
more fully led into an acquaintance with the work of 
the Spirit in seasons of self-abasement, than at any 
other time. The mode and time of his Divine mani- 
festation are thus beautifully predicted; ‘‘He shall 
come down like rain on the mown grass; as showers 
that water the earth.”” Observe the gentleness, the 
silence, and the sovereignty of his operation—“he shall 
come down like rain.” How characteristic of the 
blessed Spirit’s grace! Then mark the occasion on 
which it descends,—it is at the time of the soul’s deep 
prostration. The waving grass is mown, the lovely 
flower is laid low, the fruitful stem is broken; that 
which was beautiful, and fragrant, and precious, is cut 
down—the fairest first to fade, the loveliest first to die, 
the fondest first to depart; then, when the mercy is 
gone, and the spirit is bowed, and the heart is broken, 
and the mind is dejected, and the world seems clad in 
wintry desolateness and gloom, the Holy Spirit, in all 
the softening, reviving, comforting, and refreshing ten- 
dency of his grace, descends, speaks of the beauty of 
Jesus, leads to the grace of Jesus, lifts the bowed soul, 
and reposes it on the bosom of Jesus, and wakes its 
heart to the sweetest strains of music. 


190 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER, ETC. 


“T live, His power to show, who once did bring 
My joys to weep, and now my griefs to sing.” 


Precious and priceless, then, beloved, are the seasons 
of the believer’s humiliation. They tell of the soul’s 
emptiness, of Christ’s fulness; of the creature’s in- 
sufficiency, of Christ’s all-sufficiency; of the world’s 
poverty, of Christ’s affluence: they create a necessity 
which Jesus supplies, a word which Jesus fills, a sorrow 
which Jesus soothes, a desire which Jesus satisfies. 
They endear the cross of the incarnate God, they 
reveal the hidden glory of Christ’s humiliation, they 
sweeten prayer, lift the soul to God; and then, 
‘truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his 
Son, Jesus Christ.”’ Art thou as a bruised flower ? 
Art thou as a broken stem? Does some heavy trial 
now bow thee in the dust? O never, perhaps, wast 
thou so truly beautiful; never did thy grace send forth 
such fragrance, nor thy prayers ascend with so sweet 
an odour ; never did faith, and hope, and love develope 
their hidden glories so richly, so fully as now! In 
the eye of the wounded, bruised, and humbled Christ, 
thou wert never more lovely, and to his heart never 
more precious than now,—>pierced by his hand, smitten 
by his rod, humbled by his chastisement, laid Jow at 
his feet, condemning thyself, justifying him, taking to 
thyself all the shame, and ascribing to him all the 
glory. 


‘THANKS BE UNTO GOD FOR HIS UNSPEAKABLE 
Girt !” 


CHAPTER VI. 


THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER IN HIS 
RESURRECTION. 


« And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. And he laid his right 
hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear not; I am the first and the 
last; I am he that liveth, and was dead; and behold, I am alive for 
evermore.”—Jev. i. 17, 18. 


WE now stand upon the threshold of asubject second 
to none yet considered in the grandeur of its character, 
in the immensity of its results, and in the glory with 
which it encircles the person and the work of our 
adorable Redeemer. It is that single doctrine of the 
Bible, the existence of which authenticates the truth, 
and developes the beauty of all the others. Indeed, it 
is to Christianity what the soul is to the body, what 
the foundation is to the building, what the key-stone 
is to the arch—it would seem necessary to the very 
existence of revelation, imparting vitality, substance, 
and security to every doctrine of the inspired word. 
The life of Jesus is the life of the Bible—the life of 
the believer —the life of glory. The one fact —the 
resurrection of Christ — would appear to be the foun- 
tain of life to the church of God in all ages of the 
world. It throws back a quickening influence, felt by 
prophets and by patriarchs; it is the life of the church 


now, and it will, to the remotest period of time, trans- 
(191) 


192 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


mit an influence that shall be felt by the last vessel 
of mercy. Impressed thus with its vast importance, 
its essential relation to the truth of the Bible, and to 
the existence of the church of God, we humbly enter 
upon its discussion. And O may the Eternal Spirit 
of truth so anoint both the writer and the reader, that 
this glorious and precious doctrine may come to our 
minds with all the power, freshness, and sweetness of 
a newly-discovered, heaven-descending doctrine ! 

We have placed at the head of this chapter a sublime 
portion of the inspired word, which, while it embodies 
the doctrine before us, places it in a lucid and conyinc- 
ing point of. view. At the first glance, it may seem to 
direct the eye rather to the glorified humanity of our 
Lord, than specifically to the single fact of his resur- 
rection. But a little reflection will convince the mind 
that the two doctrines are closely interwoven, the one 
with the other ; and the appearance of Jesus in a state 
of ascension-glory, necessarily involves his resurree- 
tion-glory, and so places the master-fact of the Bible 
beyond the region of doubt. The passages are affirm- 
ative, from his own lips, of the risen life of Jesus; and 
as this is the point now demanding our consideration, 
a brief exposition of the words may greatly assist our 
investigation. 

The occasion on which they were spoken is deeply 
instructive. Our adorable Immanuel frequently re- 
veals the most brilliant beams of his glory in seasons 
of the most painful trial and deepest gloom. The dark 
providential dispensations of God often bring out in 
richer radiance the glories of His beloved Son, as the 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 193 


darkness of night reveals more distinctly and brightly 
the existence and beauty of the heavenly bodies. For 
the manifestation of this remarkable revelation of his 
risen glory to his servant, our Lord selects precisely 
such an occasion—an occasion which, to the eye of 
reason, would appear the most unpropitious and im- 
probable; but to faith’s eye, ranging beyond second 
causes, the most appropriate for such a revelation of 
Jesus. Domitian, though not released from his fearful 
responsibility for the act, was but the instrument of 
executing the eternal purpose of grace and love. God’s 
hand was moving, and moving, too, as it often does, 
in the “thick darkness.” Exiled as John was by this 
Roman emperor to“a desolate island of the Aigean sea, 
‘for the word of God, and for the testimony of Jesus 
Christ,’’ the Redeemer was but preparing the way for 
the revelations of those visions of glory, than which, 
none more sublime or more precious ever broke upon 
the eye of mortal man. God was not only placing his 
beloved servant in a right posture to behold them, but 
was also most wisely and graciously training and dis- 
ciplining his mind spiritually and humbly to receive 
them. ‘There are two features in the Lord’s manifest- 
ation of his glory to his saints worthy of our serious 
notice. As in the case of the apostle John, there is 
often a preparation for the manifestation. The believer 
is placed in a position suited to a proper view of the 
object. A holy disciplining is employed. There is a 
bringing down, a laying low, a soul-emptying and 
humbling process, often most trying and painful, but 


most needed in preparing the Lord’s way into the soul. 
17 


194 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


Other objects of love and beauty are removed, other 
glory is dimmed, the palace is ‘swept and garnished,” 
the eye is “anointed with fresh eye-salve,” then the 
Lord of glory enters——then Jesus draws nigh,—reveals 
his beauty, manifests his glory, and unfolds Ais love. 

The second feature is illustrated by the case of the 
apostle Paul, and marks the subsequent process 
through which the soul often passes. Through the 
abundance of the revelations of the Redeemer’s glory 
that are sometimes made, the Lord has now to fortify 
the soul against the risings of self; and lest, through 
the clinging infirmities of our unsanctified nature, we 
should be “‘ exalted above measure,” a ‘messenger of 
Satan ’’ is sent to bring and keep us low in the dust 
before God. 

But mark how this dark and trying incident was 
making for the good of this holy exile. Banished 
though he was from the saints, from society, and from 
all the means of grace, man could not banish him 
from the presence of God, nor persecution separate him 
from the love of Christ. Patmos, to his view, became 
resplendent with the glory of the risen Saviour— the 
reconciled God and Father was his sanctuary— the 
Holy Spirit, the Comforter, overshadowed him—and 
the Lord’s day, already so hallowed and precious to 
him in its association with the resurrection of the Lord 
—broke upon him with unwonted effulgence, sanctity, 
and joy. O, how richly favoured was this beloved 
disciple! Great as had been his previous privileges— 
journeying with Christ, beholding his miracles, hang- 
ing on his lips, reposing on his bosom—yet never had 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 195 


he been so privileged — never had he learned so much 
of Jesus, nor had seen so much of his glory, nor had 
drunk so deeply of his love, nor had experienced so 
richly his unutterable tenderness, gentleness, and sym- 
pathy, and never had he spent such a Lord’s day as 
now, the solitary inhabitant of a lonely isle though he 
was. Qh, where is there a spot which Jesus cannot 
irradiate with his glory—where is there solitude which 
he cannot sweeten with his presence—where is there 
suffering, privation and loss, which he cannot more 
than recompense by his sustaining grace and soothing 
love—and where is there a trembling and prostrate 
soul, which his “‘right hand’? cannot lift up and 
soothe! This, then, was the occasion on which the 
Lord appeared in so glorious a form, with such sooth- 
ing words, and sublime revelations. to his beloved 
servant. Wenow proceed to the subject before us. 
The resurrection-life of Jesus, as we have remarked, 
is the life of the child of God. Before more fully 
going into the consideration of this great truth, it may 
be profitable briefly to trace the close relation which 
this one fact sustains to the veracity of the Bible it- 
self; for if this doctrine be false, it falsifies the sacred 
word, neutralizes the faith, and annihilates the hope of 
the church. “If Christ be not risen,’ argues the 
apostle, ‘‘then is our preaching vain, and your faith is 
also vain; yea, and we are found false witnesses for 
God. And if Christ be not raised, ye are yet in 
your sins. Then they also who have fallen asleep in 
Christ are perished.” Now, as on this one fact the 
truth of the Gospel hinged, and the life of the church 


196 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


was suspended, and the whole glory of the Redeemer 
hung, and events the most stupendous and solemn 
were poised, we wonder not that the apostles placed 
this doctrine in the very foreground of their ministry ; 
everywhere, and on all occasions, proclaiming it 
with marvellous boldness, power, and success, the 
testimony of their own conscience, and the descend- 
ing evidence of the Holy Spirit, bearing witness 
that it was true. ‘And with great power gave 
the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord 
Jesus: and great grace was upon them all.” How 
necessary, then, would it appear that, in their 
preaching, they should lay great stress upon this 
doctrine, proclaiming it as men who knew it to be 
no lie, and who in the face of the rack, and the 
boiling caldron, and the cross, and the scourge, and 
the prison, and the banishment, undaunted and un- 
moved, should press it to their hearts, and hold it 
high—the glorious truth of God! 

If the tomb still enclosed the lifeless body of their 
Master, then were made good the assertions, and, then 
were realized the predictions of his enemies, that he 
was an impostor, and his religion an imposition. If 
the apostles could prove, as eye-witnesses of what they 
asserted, that the tomb of their Lord was empty, and 
that nothing of him remained in it but the shroud that 
had wrapped his form, and the “‘napkin that was about 
his head;” then would they confound their enemies, 
strike the death-blow to Judaism, and triumphantly 
establish the truth of Christianity. As it was every- 
thing to the success of their cause, to prove that Christ 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 197 


was alive, so it was everything to the Sanhedrm, in 
their plot to defeat their cause, to disprove that Christ 
was alive. Both saw that the verification or the falsi- 
fication of this single fact was of the first moment. 
Everything hung upon it. The chief priests and rulers, 
driven to desperation, affirmed that the body was stolen; 
the apostles, strong, but calm, in the belief of the 
truth of what they asserted, affirmed that the body 
was quickened. Vain and weak attempt of the Jewish 
council to defeat the evidence of a fact, the truth of 
which they could not gainsay! The body stolen! 
The grave robbed! By whom? By his enemies? It 
was their interest to have allowed the body of our Lord 
to remain undisturbed in the grave, that the proof of 
his imposture might be the more palpable and over- 
whelming. Surely they would not have taken a step 
tending to impart even the semblance of truth to the 
predictions of Christ, and the declarations of his friends. 
But supposing that they had secreted the body, why 
did they not, if in their power, produce it? This would 
have decided the question of his resurrection in their 
favour, and have stifled in its birth, at once and for 
ever, the infant and rising religion. By his disciples ? 
But who can prove that they stole the body? Is it 
probable that, if confederated to deceive, they would 
witness against themselves? And if the soldiers were 
awake, would they have allowed themselves to be over- 
come by a handful of unarmed and timid men? And 
is it likely that the disciples, thus unarmed and timid, 
would have opposed their weakness to the strength of 


a Roman guard, strongly armed, and awed, by the fear 
17 


198 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


of certain death, to the most sleepless vigilance? Or 
would they have thus perilled their lives for a man 
who had so shamefully deceived, and so cruelly aban- 
doned them? Or if, as the rulers would have made 
it appear, the soldiers were asleep, how came they 
to know that the disciples secretly, and by night, took 
the body away ? 

But we turn to the testimony of the apostles them- 
selves. How unlikely were they to impose upon the 
credulity of the world and the church! They were un- 
learned and unsophisticated men, incapable of a plot. 
They were poor and uninfluential men, possessing nei- 
ther the means nor the power of executing, even had 
they the skill to conceive it. And yet how clearly and 
triumphantly do they establish the great fact for which 
they contended! The apostle Paul thus condenses 
their personal and unanimous testimony. “I delivered 
unto you first of all that which I also received, how 
that Christ died for our sins, according to the Scrip- 
tures; and that he was buried, and that he rose again 
the third day, according to the Scriptures ; and that he 

was seen by Cephas, then by the twelve: after that he 
was seen by above five hundred brethren at once; of 
whom the greater part remain unto this present, but 
some are fallen asleep. After that he was seen by 
James; then by all the apostles. And last of all he 
was seen by me also, as by one born out of due time.”’ 
1 Cor. xv. 8—8. What further testimony need we 
than this ? 

But what are some of the great truths confirmed by 
the resurrection of Jesus, and in the belief of which the 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 199 


believer is built up, by this glorious and life-inspiring 
doctrine? They are many and vast. Indeed, it would 
not be too much to affirm of the entire system of 
Divine truth, that it depended mainly for its evidence 
upon the single fact of Christ’s resurrection from the 
dead. In the first place, zt establishes the Bible to be 
the revelation of Gop. If the types which shadowed 
forth, and the prophecies which predicted the resurrec- 
tion of the Lord, received not their substance and their 
fulfilment, in the accomplishment of that fact, then the 
Scriptures were not true, the types were meaningless, 
and the predictions were false. For thus do they unite 
in setting forth this glorious and precious truth. First, 
as it regards the types. What was the receiving back 
of Isaac after he had been laid upon the altar, and the 
knife raised to slay him, but the shadowing forth of 
Christ’s resurrection? As the binding of him upon 
the wood prefigured the sacrificial death of Christ, so 
the unbinding of him from the altar, and his surrender 
to his father the third day from the time that he had 
received the command to sacrifice him, prefigured the 
risen life of Christ. Significant type! radiant with the 
glory of the risen Jesus! In the one part we see him 
dying, in the other part we see him rising. The one 
shadows forth his atoning sacrifice, the other his risen 
glory. And here did the mind of Abraham rest. His 
towering faith rose above the type; he looked beyond 
the shadow. His soul embraced the crucified and the 
risen Lord. Strong in the exercise of a prospective 
faith, he beheld before him as vividly, and he reposed 
in as firmly, the dying and the living Redeemer, as did 


200 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


John when the sweet voice broke upon his ear, “1 am 
he that liveth, and was dead.” ‘“‘ By faith Abraham, 
when he was tried, offered up Isaac. . . . Accounting 
that God was able to ratse him up even from the dead ; 
from whence also he received him in a figure.” 

A part of the ceremony observed in the purifica- 
tion of the leper, points to the same glorious truth. 
‘“¢Two birds alive and clean,” were to be brought to 
the priest. One was to be ‘killed in an earthen vessel 
over running water.’’ The priest was then to ‘dip the 
living bird in the blood of the bird that was killed,” 
and to “let it go out of the city into the open fields,”’ 
Ley. xiv. The.bird killed in an earthen vessel was a 
type of the human nature of our Lord crucified for the 
leprosy of sin, the atoning virtue of whose precious 
blood is of contenual efficacy, typified by the running 
water; for the “blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us 
from all sin.” The diving bird dipped in the blood of 
the bird slain, and then let free, was the type of the 
resurrection life of Jesus, who, as the great High 
Priest, ‘“‘ever liveth to make intercession for us,” by 
pleading within the vail the merits of his atoning 
blood. 

The type of the slain and the living goat embodies 
in vivid outline the same essential doctrine. Aaron 
was commanded to kell the goat of the sin-offering, 
and bring his blood within the vail. But upon the 
head of the live goat he was to place both his hands, 
and confess over him all the iniquities of the children 
of Israel, and then to send him away by the hand of a 
fit man into the wilderness. ‘And he shall leé go the 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. _— 201 


goat in the wilderness.” Lev. xvi. Our adorable Lord 
was the glorious substance of this expressive type. 
Both parts met, and were realized in him. ‘ He was 
delivered for our offences, and rose again for our 
justification.” 

The prophetic Scriptures are equally as explicit in 
setting forth the resurrection of Christ. It will not be 
necessary that we quote them accompanied with any 
lengthened comment, as in a former part of this work 
allusion has already been made to the Scripture pro- 
phecies concerning the Redeemer. Psalm ii. 7; “‘ Thou 
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.”’ Psalm 
xvi. 9,10: “‘My flesh shall also rest in hope. For 
thou wilt not leave my soul in hades, nor wilt thou 
suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.” Isa. lv. 38: 
‘“‘T will make an everlasting covenant with you, even 
the sure mercies of David.” Now mark how exactly 
these portions of the prophetic Scriptures are quoted 
by the apostle Paul, and strictly applied by him to the 
resurrection of Christ. Acts xiii.: ‘“ But God raised 
him from the dead: and he was seen many days by 
them who came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, 
who are his witnesses unto the people. And we declare 
unto you glad tidings, how that the promise which was 
made unto the fathers, God has fulfilled the same unto 
us, their children, in that He raised up Jesus 
again; as it is also written inthe second Psalm, Thou 
art my Son, this day have L begotten thee. And as con- 
cerning that He raised him up from the dead, now no 
more to return to corruption, He said on this wise, Z 
will give you the sure mercies of David. Wherefore he 


Q * 


202 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


saith also in another Psalm, Thou shalt not suffer thine 
Holy One to see corruption. For David, after he had 
served his own generation, by the will of God, fell 
asleep, and was laid unto his fathers, and saw corrup- 
tion: but he whom God raised again, saw no corruption.” 
How brightly does the doctrine of the risen Saviour 
shine throughout this remarkable portion of God’s holy 
word! ‘Truly the life of Jesus is the life of the Scrip- 
tures. Again, “‘Thy dead men shall live, together with 
my dead body shall they arise.” Isaiah xxvi. 19. “TI 
know that my Redeemer liveth.”’ Job xix. 25. Thus does 
the resurrection of Christ from the dead confirm the 
truth of God’s holy word. The types find their sub- 
stance, and the prophecies their fulfilment, in him who 
was emphatically the ‘plague of death,and the destruc- 
tion of the grave.” / 

The ‘resurrection of the Redeemer established the 
truth of his Godhead. Thus the Holy Spirit speaks by 
the apostle—‘ And declared to be the Son of God with 
power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resur- 
rection from the dead.” Rom.i.4. His miracles had 
already proved the truth of his Divine Sonship. Yet 
there wanted one other evidence, the crowning one of 
all,— the resurrection. This one evidence would put 
the final seal to the truth of his Deity. If not, then 
all that he had previously said, predicted, and done, 
would prove but to have been, as his enemies have 
asserted, the stratagem of a designing man, attempting 
to impose upon the credulity of a few devoted but 
deluded followers. But this return to life on the exact 
day which he had predicted; breaking, by the exercise 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 203 


of his Divine power, from the cold embrace of death 
and the imprisonment of the grave, put at rest for ever 
the question of his deity, and DECLARED him to be 
the Son of God. Oh, how truly and properly Divine 
did he now appear! August and convincing as had 
been all the previous attestations of his Godhead— 
his life one succession of the most astonishing and 
brilliant achievements of Divine power and goodness— 
diseases healed, sight restored, demons ejected, the 
dead raised, tempests hushed, and winds stilled,— 
his death marked by prodigies of terrible and sur- 
passing wonder and sublimity—the ecarth heaving 
beneath his feet, the sun darkening above him, the 
graves opening around him; yet never had his God- 
head shone forth with such demonstrative power and 
resplendent glory, as when he broke from the tomb 
and rose triumphant over hell, death, and the grave. 
Then did he fulfil this prediction, and redeem this 
pledge—‘‘ Destroy this temple, and in three days I will 
raise it up again.” Receding for a while from com- 
munion with life—as if to create a pause in nature, 
which would awaken the interest and fix the gaze 
of the intelligent universe upen one stupendous event 
—he disappeared within the very domain of the “king 
of terrors,’ wrapped around him its shroud of dark- 
ness, and laid himself down,—Hssential Life locked in 
the embrace of death, immortality slumbering in the 
tomb! But he rose again! bursting from the cold 
embrace, and awaking from the mysterious slumber, 
he came back to life, all radiant, immortal, and Divine ! 

Saint of God! Want you a further and stronger , 


204 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


evidence that your faith has credited no cunningly 
devised fable? That he to whose guardianship you 
have committed your precious soul, is able to keep 
it until the morning of your own resurrection glory? 
Behold it in the risen life of the incarnate God! He 
has come up from the grave, to make good all his 
previous claims to deity, thus to encourage and confirm 
your belief in the truth, dignity and glory of his 
person, and to assure you that he that ‘believeth 
in him shall not be ashamed.” Now may you take 
up the triumphant strain, as it falls from the lips 
of the departing apostle, prolonging it until another 
shall catch it from your expiring tongue: ‘‘I know in 
whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he 
is able to keep that which I have committed unto him 
against that day.”’ 

The resurrection of Christ was the Father’s great 
seal to the truth of His Son’s mission, and the public 
expression of His entire satisfaction with, and full 
acceptance of, his atoning work. The quickening of 
Christ’s body is, therefore, frequently ascribed to the 
Father,—‘‘ Whom God hath raised up,’—‘“‘ But. God 
raised him from the dead,’—‘‘The working of His 
mighty power which He wrought in Christ, when He 
raised him from the dead,”—‘“ Christ was raised up 
from the dead by the glory of the Father.” Partici- 
pating as the Son himself and the Holy Spirit did in 
this work—for it was a work employing equally the 
power, and involving equally the glory of the triune 
God—it is yet particularly spoken of as the act of the 
Father. And why? Because at His hands His Son had 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 205 


received the great commission—by Him he had been 
invested with the mediatorial office—and by Him sent 
to discharge the claims of law and justice in behalf of 
His covenant people. Who, therefore, but the Father, 
could authenticate the truth of His mission, receive 
back his office, release him from the obligation, and 
accept the work at his hands? This He did “when 
He raised him from the dead, and set him at His 
own right hand.” Here was the grand evidence of the 
perfection and acceptance of his sacrifice. The atoning 
work of Jesus was in itself perfect and complete. It 
was all that God demanded, all that the church 
required, and all that law and justice asked. Yet 
there wanted one proof that this work was accepted by 
God, and was satisfactory to Divine justice. On the 
cross he had uttered that wondrous cry, which sent 
gladness through all heaven, and dismay through all 
hell—‘“‘It is finished!’ But, lo, he dies! The 
Captain of our salvation is conquered! The promised 
Victor is vanquished! He is laid in the grave! The 
stone covers him! ‘The earth imprisons him! What 
proof have we now that he was more than mortal? 
What evidence that he was God? What Divine seal 
is affixed to the great charter of redemption? What 
pledge have we that it isi complete? What security 
against the law’s loud thunder, and the consuming 
flames of justice — against the wrath of the offended 
God, and the condemnation that is to come? In a 
word, how may we know that all the Divine perfec- 
tions are harmonized in our salvation, and that ‘“who- 


soever believeth in Jesus shall not perish, but have 
18 ‘ 


206 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


everlasting life?’’ Behold, the Father raises him from 
the dead! This is the evidence—this is the seal—this 
is the pledge — and this the security. We need even 
ask no more. It satisfied God, it satisfies us. Zhen 
did God ‘‘rest in his love;’’ and then, if ever, did He 
rejoice over his church with singing. It was a sub- 
lime, a momentous event. It was bringing forth the 
top-stone amid the shouts of angels, and placing it 
upon that finished work of which his death had been 
the foundation. At that moment all created intelli- 
gences were summoned to witness the great and final 
seal affixed to redemption’s perfect work. And while 
every eye was thus intently bent upon the yielding 
grave, the Father, in that stupendous act of his power 
and love, utters his solemn voice, “This is my beloved 
Son, in whose person I delight, and with whose work I 
am well satisfied.” O what majesty now encircled 
the rising form of the incarnate God! Never had he 
appeared so truly the Saviour, never so illustriously 
the Redeemer, and never so perfectly the Mediator 
and Advocate as now—sealed by God the Father, 
quickened by God the Spirit, and radiant with the 
beams of his own Divine glory. 

But not only was it his personal release from all the 
obligations he had assumed as the sin-bearer of his 
people, but his resurrection also involved the complete 
justification of his church. Obeying, suffering, and 
rising as the Representative, the Surety, the Head 
of his church, may we not say, that what he did was 
not so much his own act, as that of the church in him? 
He obeyed not for himself, nor for himself did he die 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. Q07 


and rise again, but for his ‘body, the church.” His 
resurrection, therefore, was as much his church’s entire 
release, discharge, and justification, as it was his own. 
Then was the glorious sentence of acquittal passed — 
then transpired the great act of justification. The 
emerging of the Redeemer from the grave, was the 
emerging of the redeemed from all condemnation. 
His release from the cold grasp of the destroyer was 
their release from the iron hand of the law. ‘‘ He was 
taken from prison and from judgment; and as he 
passed out of the court of God’s justice, and from the 
prison-house of death, the church, purchased with 
his blood, passed out with him, legally and fully 
discharged, exclaiming as the last barrier yielded, and 
the last fetter broke, ‘‘ Who is he that condemneth? it 
is Christ that died, yea rather, that is RISEN AGAIN !” 
On this ground, therefore, the apostle argues that 
righteousness is imputed to us, ‘‘if we believe on him 
that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead; who 
was delivered for our offences, and was raised again 
for our (declared) JUSTIFICATION.” Precious Re- 
deemer! What surpassing glory beams forth from 
thine emptied sepulchre! 

It was also the consummation of his glorious victory. 
Until this moment, the Redeemer had all the appear- 
ance of one vanquished in the great fight. He was 
left slain upon the battle-field. Indeed, it would 
appear that he had really endured a momentary defeat. 
He was now under the dominion of death; and as 
death was the consequence and penalty of sin, so long 
as he was subject to its power, he still lay beneath the 


208 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


sins of his people. Cancelled although they were by 
the blood he had just shed, the great evidence of their 
remission did not, and could not, transpire until the 
resurrection had passed. What gloom now enshrouded 
the church of God! The Sun of Righteousness was 
setting in darkness and in blood; and with it were 
descending into the tomb, the hopes of patriarchs 
and prophets, of seers and apostles. ~The “king of 
terrors’’ had laid low his illustrious victim; and the 
cold earth had closed upon his sacred body, mangled 
and lifeless. Oh what a victory did hell and sin, death 
and the grave, now seem to have achieved! But the 
‘“‘triumphing of the wicked is short.’’ In three days 
the tomb, at the mighty fiat of Jehovah, unveiled its 
bosom, and yielded back its Creator and Lord. The 
Sun of Righteousness ascended again in cloudless 
glory and peerless majesty, to set no more for ever. 
The church of God, now “begotten again unto a 
living hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from 
the dead,’ arose from the dust and put on her beauti- 
ful garments. Now was the scene changed. His 
enemies, no longer wearing even the semblance of 
victory, were overthrown and vanquished. Hell was 
disappointed, and its gates for ever closed against the 
redeemed. Sin was thrown to an infinite distance, and 
‘death had no more dominion over him, God having 
loosed its pains, because it was not possible that he 
should be holden by it.” He rose the mighty and the 
illustrious Conqueror. And all this conquest, let it 
not be forgotten, was achieved in behalf of the chosen 
and the beloved people. It was our battle that he 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 209 


fought, it was owr victory that he won. ‘Therefore 
called though we are to ‘“‘wrestle against the principal- 
ities and against the powers,” and exhorted though we 
are to “take unto us the whole armour of God,” we 
yet are confronted by enemies already vanquished. 
It would seem as though we were summoned, not so 
much to go out upon the field of battle, as upon the 
field of conquest; not so much to combat with the 
foe, as to gather up the spoils of victory. For what is 
every successful conflict with our spiritual adversaries, 
—what is every corruption mortified,—what is every 
temptation resisted,—what is every sin overcome,—but 
a showing forth the great victory already won by the 
Captain of our salvation? Every triumph of the Holy 
Spirit in the heart of a regenerate man, is a display of 
the triumph of him who, in hanging on the cross, and 
in rising from the grave, “spoiled the principalities and 
the powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing 
over them in it.” 

But there is a most important and blessed view of 
the glory of the Redeemer’s resurrection still to be 
considered; a view which will be found to bring this 
essential doctrine of our faith with living power to the 
soul, causing each believer in Jesus to feel a personal 
interest in, and identity with, it. Zhe resurrection of 
Christ from the grave is the spiritual, assured, and 
eternal life of the church. In this light, the risen life 
of Jesus is everything to the believer’s salvation, as it 
is everything to the entire system of Christianity. 
Death seemed to rest upon all that related to the king- 


dom of Christ, during the short period that he himself 
1s* 


4 
210: THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


continued under its dominion. It was a three days of 
fearful, agonizing suspense. If there ever was silence 
in heaven, may we not suppose it was during that 
period? The salvation of millions yet unborn, as of 
millions who had died in the faith of Jesus, and the 
everlasting honour and glory of the triune Jehovah, 
were suspended upon that single event. But he rose 
again, the death of death, the life of the church. The 
quickening of his natural body was the quickening of 
his spiritual body. Here we are again brought back to 
that elevating and sanctifying truth—the federal rela- 
tion of Christ to his church—the responsible headship 
of Jesus—his perfect oneness (implying more than mere 
union) with his church. We have seen that in dying, 
his death was the death of the church in him, — its 
death to the claims of the law, to the penalty of justice, 
to the imputation of sin, and to the power of death 
itself. Therefore says the apostle, ‘I am crucified with 
Christ,’’ — ‘Dead with Christ,” — “Reckon ye also 
yourselves to be dead to sin,” — ‘Ye also are become 
dead to the law.” Now, as all this death of the be- 
liever comes through the sacrificial death of Christ, so 
also does all the “fe of the believer come through the 
risen life of Christ. And in language equally as clear 
and explicit is this corresponding truth set forth. <A 
few passages will be sufficient proof. ‘“‘God hath 
QUICKENED us together with Christ,” — “Risen with 
Christ,’’ — ‘‘ Christ téveth in me,’’—“‘ Buried with him 
in baptism, wherein also (emblematically) ye are RISEN 
with him through the faith of the operation of God, who 
hath raised him from the dead. And you hath He 


- 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 211 


QUICKENED together with him.” Here, then, are two 
grand truths placed before us, written as with a sun- 
beam,—the believer’s oneness with Christ, and Christ 
the new and spiritual life of the believer. 

Now let us attempt to unfold the great and glorious 
truth —the manifestation of Christ’s risen life in the 
soul of a child of God. The apostle, in the following 
passage, places in beautiful and striking contrast, the 
two opposite elements of the Christian character—the 
death and the life. ‘Always bearing about in the 
body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of 
Jesus might be made manifest in our body.” That 
there is a literal signification which we are to attach 
to the “‘ dying of the Lord Jesus,” as it applied to the 
case of the apostle, there cannot be a doubt. We have 
shown that the great fact which everywhere, and on all 
occasions, they asserted, was the resurrection of their 
Master. If this fact were proved—as proved it was 
beyond all possibility of doubt—then their argument 
was a triumphant one, that the religion of Jesus was 
no fable, and that he himself was no impostor. But 
when, in place of confuting this doctrine by argument, 
and disproving this fact by evidence, the Sanhedrim 
strove by violence, persecution, and cruelty, to silence 
the propagators of this statement, was it not naturally 
to be inferred that they knew the falschood of their 
own account, though unwilling to admit the truth of 
the apostles’? In vain did they endeavour, by stripes, 
and imprisonments, and torture, to compel the apostles 
to “‘speak no more in his name;” in vain did they 
substitute power for proof, and cruelty for argument ; 


212 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


undaunted and undismayed they girded themselves to 
their work, ‘‘and with great power gave they witness 
of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus.”’ 

Now the “bearing about in the body the dying of 
the Lord Jesus,”’ in its literal acceptation of the words, 
consisted of the persecutions to which the apostles 
submitted in defence of the doctrine which they so 
firmly believed, and so zealously preached. And was 
this, we ask, no evidence of the truth of the fact which 
they affirmed? Would they have submitted to the 
scorn and the contumely, to the persecution and the 
suffering which they endured, had they been conscious 
that they were propagating a falsehood, and were palm- 
ing a deceit upon the world? There is a limit to 
enthusiasm. There is a line, beyond which an impostor 
dares not pass. But the apostles, in “taking joyfully 
the spoiling of their goods,’’ in cheerfully exposing 
themselves to peril and to death for the sake of the 
doctrine which they affirmed, demonstrated their own 
belief that Jesus was alive; and their believing that 
he was alive, was no small proof that he actually lived. 

But the “bearing about in the body the dying of 
the Lord Jesus,” has a deeper meaning than this. We 
are not to restrict its experience to the early and 
suffering days of Christianity, nor its meaning to that 
scathed and scarred appearance of the earthly taber- 
nacle, to which Paul, in another place, thus touchingly 
alludes : ‘From henceforth let no man trouble me: 
for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.” 
Every truly regenerate individual bears about with 
him the “marks of the dying of the Lord Jesus.” 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 213 


“Ye are dead,’ says the apostle; and again, “ Our 
old man is crucified with Christ, that the body of sin 
might be destroyed.” And when thus the flesh is 
crucified, with its affections and lusts, and the re- 
deemed body is presented to God a living sacrifice 
upon the altar of a holy and filial obedience, then most 
spiritually, most emphatically is it true of us, ‘ always 
bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus.” 

But turn we now to the contemplation of the glorious 
truth which the Holy Spirit has placed in soothing 
contrast with this: ‘That the life also of Jesus might 
be made manifest in our body.” The one great fact 
of which the believing soul wants to be assured, is 
that Jesus lives. Convince him that Christ is risen, 
that he is alive at the right hand of God, and you have 
supplied a mighty lever, which raises him above the — 
deepest agitations, changes, trials, and conflicts of this 
mortal life. But oh, who can assure him of this, but_ 
the living Saviour himself? and who can enable him to 
press it to his heart as a personal truth but the Holy 
Spirit, the great testifier of Christ, and the witness of 
the soul? Now in what points of view is the life of 
Jesus manifest in the saints ? 

In the first place, their conversion to God is a con- 
vincing and precious evidence that Jesus is alive. In 
the regeneration wrought in the soul by the Holy 
Spirit, the life of Jesus is imparted. He breathes into 
the soul morally dead the breath of life, and it becomes 
a diving soul. Until, in the exercise of his distinct 
office, this Divine Person of the adorable Trinity con- 
vinces of sin, quickens and brings the soul to Christ 


. 914 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


for acceptance, risen with Christ although that soul 
mystically is, it yet remains totally dead to, and insen- 
sible of, its great privilege, an utter stranger to that 
new life which springs from oneness with the “second 
Adam.” The new nature which the eternal Spirit now 
imparts is nothing less than the creation of the life of 
Christ in the soul; yea, even more than this, it is the 
bringing of Christ himself into the soul to dwell there 
the “hope of glory’ through time, and glory itself 
through eternity. 

Here, then, is an evidence that Jesus is alive, to the 
renewed mind the most convincing and precious. Thus 
quickened by the Eternal Spirit of God, believers be- 
come temples of Christ. Jesus lives in them. “Tin 
them.” ‘If Christ be in you, the body is dead,” &c. 
‘Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man 
hear my voice, and open the door, Z will come in to 
him.” ‘“‘ Know ye not that Christ 1s in you 2” “ Christ 
liveth in me.” “My little children, of whom I travail 
in birth again until Christ be formed in you.” “ Christ 
in you the hope of glory.”’ Thus every believer is a 
living witness that Jesus is alive, because he bears 
about with him the very life of Jesus. By the indwell- 
ing of the Spirit, and realized by faith, Christ abides in 
the believer, and the believer abides in Christ. ‘‘I in 
them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect 
in one; that they also may be one in us.” 

We have already stated that this glorious entrance 
of Christ within the soul transpires at the period of 
the new birth. What, then, is every new conversion, 
every fresh trophy of redeeming grace, but a new mani- 


f 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. ya dy 


festation to the universe of the life of Jesus? Con- 
template the spectacle! I see the sinner pursuing his 
mad career of folly, rebellion, and guilt. He is, per- 
haps, a blasphemer—a sceptic—a sensualist—a lover of 
pleasure—a hater of God, and a despiser of the Lord 
Jesus. Suddenly he is arrested. I see him bowed to 
the earth, his heart broken with sorrow, his spirit 
crushed beneath the burden of sin. He smites upon 
his breast; he acknowledges his transgression, con- 
fesses his iniquity, deplores it in the dust. Presently I 
see him lift his eye and rest it upon the bleeding Saviour 
—he gazes, wonders, believes, adores—is saved! By 
whom is this miracle of grace wrought? The Spirit 
has descended to testify that Jesus is alive. That 
newly-converted soul, so lately dead in sins, but 
now quickened with Christ; that sinner but recently 
dwelling among the tombs, whom no human power 
could tame, now sitting at the feet of Jesus, clothed 
and in his right mind, demonstrates that Christ is in 
heaven, and is alive for evermore. Oh, it is the 
heaven-descending life of Jesus! It is, so to speak, a 
second incarnation of the Son of God, assuming, as it 
were, another tabernacle of flesh, investing himself 
with another veil of mortality. Show me, then, a soul 
just passed from death unto life, and I will show you 
an evidence that Jesus is alive at the right hand of God. 

But not only is Jesus the actual, but he is also 
the relative, life of the believer.—the life of his 
pardon and acceptance. See it in reference to the 
blood of Immanuel. It is the blood of him who was 
essential life. And, although springing from his 


916 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


pure humanity, essential life gave it all its virtue 
and its power. ‘The resurrection of Jesus confirmed 
for ever the infinite value and sovereign efficacy of 
his atoning blood. O what virtue hath it now, 
flowing from the life of Jesus! It has removed 
transgression to the distance of infinity, and to the 
duration of eternity from the church. Washed whiter 
than snow, all iniquity forgiven, all sin blotted out, 
the believer stands before God a pardoned soul. And 
oh! what life does he find in the constant applica- 
tion to his conscience of the atoning blood! One 
drop, what peace does it give! what confidence does 
it inspire! what vigour does it impart to faith, and 
power to prayer, and cheerfulness to obedience! Oh, 
it is living blood. He who spilt it, ¢ves to plead it— 
lives to apply it—lves to sustain its virtue, until there 
shall be no more sins to cancel, and no more sinners to 
save. “The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from all 
sin,’ and “‘ speaketh better things than the blood of 
Abel,” because it possesses undying life. Behold 
then, beloved, how manifestly is Jesus the life of thy 
pardon. Oh! as fresh, as efficacious, as precious is 
that blood at this moment, as when it sprang warm 
and gushing from the pierced side of the glorious 
Redeemer. It is life-giving and life-sustaining blood. 
Here we see the antitype of the “living bird dipped 
in the blood of the bird slain,” and then suffered to 
go free, suspended mid-heaven upon the wing of un- 
restricted and joyous life. As the living bird bore 
upon its plumage the crimson symbol of atonement— 
death and life thus strangely blended—what was the 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 217 


glorious gospel truth it shadowed forth, but the close 
and indissoluble union of the pardoning blood with 
the resurrection life of our incarnate God? And, O 
believer! lose not sight of the deep significance of the 


‘“‘running water’’over which the bird was slain. That 
flowing stream was the image of the perpetual life of 
the blood of Jesus. And it bids thee, in language 
too expressive to misunderstand, and too persuasive 
to resist, to draw nigh and wash. Glorious truth that 
it teaches! Precious privilege that it enforces ! — the 
repeated, the perpetual going to Immanuel’s atoning, 
life-giving, life-sustaining blood, thus keeping the 
conscience clean and at peace with God. My beloved 
reader, no experimental and practical truth does this 
work enforce of greater moment, of more precious 
nature, and more closely interwoven with your happy, 
holy walk, than this. Your peace of mind — your 
confidence in God—your thirsting for holiness — your 
filial access—your support in the deepest trial—spring 
from your soul’s constant repose beneath the cross. 
What is thy present case ? what is the sin that wounds 
thy spirit? what the guilt that burdens thy con- 
science? what the grief that bows thy heart? what 
the fearfulness and trembling that agitate and rock 
thy mind? what gives thee anxious days and sleep- 
less nights? See yonder stream! ’Tis crimson, ’tis 
flowing, ’tis vivifying with the life-blood of Jesus. 
Repair to it by faith. Go now—go at this moment. 
Hast thou gone before? go yet again. Hast thou 
bathed in it once? bathe in it yet again. See! it isa 


“running stream.” Cast thy sin, thy guilt, thy bur- 
19 


218, THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


den, thy sorrow upon its bosom; it shall bear them 
away, never, never more to be found. O deal closely 
with the atoning, life-giving blood! Were I here 
to end my task, penning not another sentence, this 
should be its closing one— deal closely, constantly, 
believing with Immanuel’s blood. When thou dost 
rise in the morning, and when thou dost le down 
at night— wash in the blood. When thou goest to 
duties, and when thou comest from duties — wash in 
the blood. When thy deepest sigh has been heaved, 
when thy holiest tear has been shed, when thy most 
humbling confession has been made, when thy sincerest 
resolution has been formed, when thy holiest covenant 
has been renewed, when body, soul, and spirit have 
again been fully, freely, unreservedly dedicated — 
wash in the blood. When you draw near to the Holy 
Lord God, and spread out your case before Him — 
plead the blood. When Satan accuses, and conscience 
condemns, and death terrifies, and judgment alarms— 
flee to the blood. Oh! nothing, save the atoning blood 
of the spotless Lamb, gives thee acceptance at any 
moment with God. And this, at any moment, will 
conduct you into the secret chamber of His presence, 
and bow His ear and heart to your faintest whisper, 
and to your deepest want. | 
Christ is equally the life of the righteousness that 
justifies. He was “raised again,” or restored to life, 
‘for our justzfication.’’ The believer stands before 
God in the righteousness of the living Head. The 
resurrection from the dead was God’s acknowlédg- 
ment of the perfection, and His full acceptance of 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 219 


the obedience, of His dear Son, as the Basis of His 
_ people’s justification. By this stupendous act of His 
power and glory, He proclaimed the eternal acquittal 
of his church. Never did the work of our great 
Surety appear so complete; never did the robe of 
righteousness, wrought by his life of obedience, and 
steeped in his own blood upon the cross, appear so 
truly Divine, so glistening with beauty, as when he 
broke the sceptre of death, and rose, resplendent 
with living glory, from the tomb,—‘‘the Lord our 
righteousness.” 

Here is a truth, the vastness of which is only 
equalled by its unspeakable preciousness. The Lord 
Jesus is the life of our acceptance with God. We 
stand as believers in the righteousness of the living 
Head. Within the vail he has entered, “now to 
appear in the presence of God for us,” presenting all 
his people each moment complete in himself. It is 
a present justification. Ye are complete in him.” 
“Accepted in the Beloved.” “Justified from all 
things.” Perfection in himself, the enlightened soul 
utterly repudiates. Completeness in aught that he 
is, or has done, he totally rejects. Incomplete his 
deepest repentance—incomplete his strongest faith — 
incomplete his best obedience ——incomplete his most 
costly sacrifice —low in the lowest dust does he lay 
himself. ‘Too mean he cannot think of himself — too 
little he cannot be in his own eyes. Language fails 
to express the deep self-loathing and sin-abhorrence 
of his soul. But, lo! a voice is heard, — oh, it falls 
upon his ear like the music of the spheres: “‘YE ARE 


220 THE G@LORY OF THE REDEEMER 


COMPLETE IN HIM.” In one moment all is peace. 
The believing soul ceases from his works — the weary 
spirit enters into rest, because, believing, it enters into 
Jesus. In Christ he now stands complete. His par- 
don complete — his justification complete —his adop- 
tion complete—his whole person complete before the 
holy God! Is not this a great truth? And is it not 
a glorious one? Where is the doctrine that exceeds 
it? Where is the declaration that has in it such Ufe 
as this? Dear reader, it may be thou hast long been 
looking at thyself for some one thing complete. 
Something—in thy judgment thou mayest reject the 
thought—yet in thy heart there is that principle which 
has been looking for something in thyself to commend 
thee to God, —something to make thee more accept- 
able to, more welcome by, Him. But behold where 
thy completeness is found—in, and solely in Christ. 
O precious truth! A poor, vile sinner, standing before 
the holy God, complete in righteousness, the object of 
His infinite love and delight, over whom He rejoices 
with singing! Oh, how Divine, how finished, and how 
glorious must that righteousness be which so covers 
thy soul as to present thee before the God of immacu- 
late purity, “‘ without a spot, or a wrinkle, or any such 
thing !” | 
Behold, too, as a result of this blessed truth, the 
eternal security of the weakest believer in Jesus. The 
act of justification once passed under the great seal of 
the resurrection of Christ, God can never revoke 
without denying Himself. Here is our safety. Here 
is the ground of our dauntless challenge —- “Who 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. oot 


shall lay anything to the charge of God’s elect? ¢é 
is God that justifieth.’ What can I want more? 
What more can I ask? If God, the God of spotless | 
purity, the God of inflexible righteousness, justifies 
me, ‘‘who is he that condemneth?” Sin may con- 
demn, but ‘it ts God that justifieth ’ The law may 
alarm, but ‘it ts God that justifieth!’ Satan may 
accuse, but ‘it is God that justifieth ! Death may 
terrify, but ‘it is God that justifieth!’ Then, “if 
Gop be for us, who can be against us?” Who will 
dare to condemn the soul whom He justifies? How 
gloriously will this truth shine forth in the great day 
of judgment! Every accuser will then be dumb. 
Every tongue will then be silent. Nothing tending 
eternally to condemn, shall be laid to the charge 
of God’s elect. God Himself shall pronounce them 
fully justified and for ever saved: “For whom He 
justifies, them He also glorafies.”’ All this is con- 
firmed to us by the resurrection of Christ from the 
dead. 

And what is the life of fatth which the believer 
lives, but a manifestation of the life of the Lord 
Jesus? The highest, the holiest, the happiest life 
lived below, is the life of facth. But nature contri- 
butes nothing to this life. It comes from a higher 
source. Itis supernatural—it is opposed to nature. 
It springs from the life “hidden with Christ in God.” 
“T am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live, yet 
not J, but Christ liveth in me: and the life which 
I now live in the flesh, L live by the faith of the Son 


of God.” Here is a glorious manifestation of the 
19 * 


4 


279 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


life of Jesus. It is not he that lives,—“ not I,’ but 
Christ in him —“ Christ liveth in me.” If we desire 
any evidence that Jesus is risen, that he is alive again, 
and that he is the life of the soul, here itis! See the 
faith of the child of God sifted as wheat, yet not one 
grain falling to the ground. Tried as gold, yet not 
one particle lost. Severely tempted, but never failing. 
Though in the flame, yet never consumed. And why? 
Because Christ lives in the soul. The living Christ 
is there, guarding his wheat, watching his gold, 
strengthening, feeding, nourishing, sustaining that 
faith, but for which it must fail, be consumed, and die. 
Dear believer! thy faith may be sharply tempted, 
severely tried — tried by Satan — tried by strong cor- 
ruption—tried by adversity—tried by straitened cireum- 
stances, but never, never shall it quite fail, for Jesus 
lives in thee, and lives in thee for ever... O blessed 
trial of faith, that manifests in, and endears to thee, 
the life of Jesus! It is the precious trial of “ precious 
faith,’’—a faith which, the more deeply it is tried, the 
more deeply it manifests the risen life of its Divine 
‘¢ Author and Finisher.” 

And what, too, are all the supports of the believer in 
seasons of trial, suffering, and bereavement, but so 
many manifestations of the life of the Lord Jesus? 
Thus was it exemplified in the case of the apostles. 
‘¢ We are troubled on every side,” says Paul, ‘ yet not 
distressed ; we are perplexed, but not in despair ; perse- 
cuted, but not forsaken; cast down, but not destroyed. 
Always bearing about in the body the dying of the 
Lord Jesus, that the life also of Je:us might be made 


‘ JN HIS RESURRECTION. 995 


manifest in our mortal flesh.’ In another place 
alluding to their sufferings, the apostle says, ‘ I think 
that God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were 
appointed unto death: for we are made a spectacle”’ 
—(margin, ““We are made a theatre’’)—“ unto the 
world, and to angels, and to men.” ‘Theirs was no 
smooth and flowery, but a rugged and a thorny, way 
to God. They passed through the baptism of fire to 
glory. They fought their way to their thrones through 
the martyr’s tribulations. But what to them were 
ignominy and suffering? What to them were the 
malice and the fury of their persecutors, hemming 
them in on every side, and confronting them at every 
step ? What to them were the torture, which stretched 
the limb and tore the nerve,—the famine, which 
wasted the body’s strength, and dimmed the eye’s 
lustre,—the emprisonment, which wore away the elasti- 
city of the spirit, and the death of long and lingering 
agony, waich wrenched the soul from its frame-work 
of flesh? They shrunk not, they murmered not, they 
fled not, for Christ was living in them. Why should 
they be depressed, or why yield to despair? They 
knew their Lord was risen, that he was alive, and was 
at the right hand of God, upon the throne. They 
knew that their life was bound up with his. They felt 
that Jesus was pouring forth each moment from the 
ocean-fulness of his own risen life, perpetual streams 
of existence into theirs; and that if, on the one hand, 
they were troubled, yet on the other, they were not 
in distress ; if perplexed, they yielded not to despair ; 
if persecuted, they felt they were not forsaken; if cast 


294. THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


down, they knew they were not destroyed, because 
they were conscious that, while bearing about in their 
bodies the dying of the Lord Jesus, the life also of 
Jesus was manifested in those bodies. 

From the apostles, we turn to the church of God. 
What is our path to glory, but the path of trial, of 
tribulation, of suffering, and of death? Our Lord and 
Master, in the expression of his wisdom and love, 
forewarns us of this. ‘In the world ye shall have 
tribulation.”” And his apostles but echo the same 
sentiment when they affirm that it is “through much 
tribulation we must enter the kingdom.” But the life 
of our risen Lord is daily manifested in us. ‘This it 
is, and this only, that keeps the soul buoyant amidst 
the billows, strong in faith, joyful in hope, soaring 
in love. Thus is Jesus the life of every grace, the 
life of every promise, the life of every ordinance, the 
life of every blessing ; yea, of all that is really costly 
and precious to the child of God. Jesus is the sub- 
stance, the glory, the sweetness, the fragrance, yea, 
the very life itself. Oh! dark and lonely, desolate 
and painful, indeed, were our present pilgrimage, but 
for Jesus. If in the world we have tribulation, in 
whom have we peace ?—in Jesus! If in the creature 
we meet with fickleness and change, in whom find we 
the “Friend that loveth at all times ?”—in Jesus! If 
in the wilderness the well is exhausted, and the stream 
is dried, and the gourd withers, in whom find we an 
ever-flowing fountain, and an ever-grateful and out- 
spreading shade !—in Jesus! When adversity comes 
as a wintry blast, and lays low our comforts, when 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. ppots: 


the cloud is upon our tabernacle, when health, and 
wealth, and distinction, and influence, and friends are 
gone, in whom do we find the covert from the wind, 
the faithful, tender “‘ Brother born for adversity ?”’— 
in Jesus! When temptation assails, when care 
darkens, when trial oppresses, when bereavement 
wounds, when heart and flesh are failing, who throws 
around us the protecting shield, who applies the 
precious promise, who speaks the soothing word, who 
sustains the sinking spirit, who heals the sorrow, and 
dries. the tear ?—Jesus! When sin struggles in the 
heart, and guilt burdens the conscience, and unbelief 
beclouds the mind, whose grace subdues our iniquities, 
whose blood gives us peace, and whose light dispels 
our darkness ?—Jesus/ And when the spark of life 
wanes, and the eye grows dim, and the pulse grows 
feeble, and the heart’s-blood congeals, and the mind 
wanders, and the soul, severing its last fetter, mounts 
and soars away,— who, in that awful moment, draws 
near in form unseen, and whispers in words unheard 
by all but the departing one, now in close communion 
with the realities of the invisible world —-“‘ Fear not, 
I am the resurrection and the life; he that believeth 
in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live: and 
whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die ?”’ 
— still, 1 is Jesus ! 

From this subject many sanctifying, practical, and 
consolatory lessons are deducible. Is Jesus alive? 
then the saints of God are arisen people. What a 
glorious character is theirs! Mystically they are 
risen with Christ from the tomb, and spiritually they 


226 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


are risen from the grave of death and sin to newness 
of life. One of the most fruitful causes of a feeble 
Christianity is the low estimate the believer forms of 
his spiritual character. Were this higher, were it 
more proportioned to our real standing, our responsi- 
bility would appear in a more solemn light, our sense 
of obligation would be deeper, and practical holiness 
of a high order would be our more constant aim. 
Ours is a glorious and exalted life. Our standing is 
higher, infinitely higher than the highest angel,— our 
glory infinitely greater than the most glorious seraph. 
“Christ is our life.” ‘‘ We are risen with Christ.” 
By this we are declared to be a chosen, an adopted, a 
pardoned, a justified, and a quickened people. ‘This 
is our present state — this our present character. We 
bear about with us the life of God in our souls. As 
Jesus bore about in his lowly, suffering, tempted and 
tried humanity, the hidden, essential life, so we, in 
these frail, sinful, bruised, dying bodies, enshrine the 
life derived from the risen Head, the hidden life con- 
cealed with Christ in God. What an exalted charac- 
ter, what a holy one, then, is the believer in Jesus! 
Herein lie his true dignity and his real wealth—it is 
that he is a partaker of a Divine nature, that -he is 
one with his risen Lord. All other distinctions in 
comparison vanish into insignificance, and all other 
glory fades and melts away. Poor he may be in this 
world, yet is he rich in faith, and an heir of the king- 
dom, for he has Christ. Rich he may be in this 
world, titled and exalted, yet if Christ is in his heart, 
that heart is deeply sensible of its native poverty, is 
lowly, child-like, Christ-like. 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. Lot 


If this is our exalted character, then how great our 
responsibilities, and how solemn our obligations! 
The life we now live in the flesh is to be an elevated, 
a risen, a heavenly life. ‘If ye be risen with Christ, 
seek those things which are above, where Christ 
sitteth on the right. hand of God. Set your affec- 
tion on things above, not on things on the earth. 
For ye are dead, and your life is hidden with Christ 
in God.” What is the holy state here enjoined ?— 
heavenly-mindedness. On what ground is it enforced? 
—our resurrection with Christ. As a risen people, 
how heavenly-minded, then, ought we to be! How 
illy does any other state comport with our new and 
hidden life! How incompatible and incongruous do 
grovelling pursuits, and carnal joys, and earthly 
ambitions appear, with a life professedly one and 
risen with the incarnate God! But even here much 
heavenly wisdom is needed to guide in the narrow 
and difficult way. ‘To go out of the world —to be- 
come as a detached cipher of the human family, — to 
assume the character, even in approximation, of the 
religious recluse, the Gospel nowhere enjoins. To 
relinquish our secular calling, unless summoned by 
God to a higher and more spiritual service in the 
church, to relax our diligence in our lawful business, 
to be indifferent to our personal interests and re- 
' sponsibilities, to neglect our temporal concerns, and 
to be regardless of the relative claims which are bind- 
ing upon us, are sacrifices which a loyal attachment 
to our heavenly King does not necessarily demand ; 
and if assumed, are self-inflicted, and if made, 


228 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


must prove injurious to ourselves, and displeasing to 
God. 

But to be heavenly-minded, in the true and scrip- 
tural sense, is to carry our holy Christianity into 
every department of life, and with it to elevate and 
hallow every relation and engagement. There is no 
position in which the providence of God places his 
saints, for which the grace of Jesus is not all suf- 
ficient, if sincerely and earnestly sought. The states- 
man in the cabinet, the legislator in the senate-house, 
the professor in the chair, the magistrate upon the 
bench, the warrior in the camp, the seaman upon the 
deck, may maintain, even amidst circumstances the 
most unfavorable and hostile, a high degree of hea- 
venly-mindedness, and may bear a holy and uncom- 
promising testimony for God and for Christ. Nor is 
there any sphere, however humble, nor calling, how- 
ever mean, to which the life of Jesus in the soul may 
not impart dignity, lustre, and sacredness. Christi- 
anity through all grades, and classes, and occupations, 
is capable of diffusing a Divine, hallowing, and en- 
nobling influence, transforming and sanctifying all 
that it touches. Blessed and holy are they who know 
it from personal and heartfelt experience. 

But ‘if we be risen with Christ,’’ what is it to seek 
those things which are above, and to set our affec- 
tions not on things on the earth? In other words, 
what is true heavenly-mindedness? It involves, in 
the first place, habitual and close converse with God. 
Upon no other terms can this spiritual state be main- 
tained. The life of the soul can only be sustained by 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 299 


constant and ceaseless emanations from the life of 
God. There must be a perpetual stream of existence 
flowing into it from the “ Fountain’ of life.’ And 
how can this be experienced but by dwelling near 
that Fountain? Of no practical truth am I more 
deeply and solemnly convinced than this, that ele- 
vated spirituality—and oh, what a blank is life apart 
from it!—can only be cultivated and maintained by 
elevated communion. The most Holy, heavenly- 
minded, devoted, and useful saints have ever been 
men and women of much prayer. They wrestled with 
God secretly, and God wrought by them openly; and 
this was the source which fed their deep godliness, 
which supplied their rich anointing, and which con- 
tributed to their extensive and successful labours for 
Christ. Thus only can the life of God in the soul of 
man be sustained. Such is the mighty evil by which 
this indwelling principle is begirt, and such the hos- 
tile influences by which its every development is as- 
sailed, it is quite impossible that a plant so heavenly 
and divine, embedded in a soul so earthly and un- 
genial, can thrive but as it dwells in its own atmo- 
sphere—the atmosphere of close intercourse with God. 
How stands your soul touching this holy and _ prac- 
tical truth, my reader? Perhaps you are at the head 
of a family whose claims draw largely upon your 
time, your sympathies, and your thoughts. Perhaps 
you are a man of business, deeply immersed in this 
world’s lawful, yet low and deadening, cares. Per- 
haps you are placed upon ‘a pinnacle of the temple,’ 


occupying some post of distinction and honour in the 
20 


230 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


church of God! one of its builders, zealously labour- 
ing upon the external parts of the structure; or the 
man of societies and comities, living in the me- 
ridian of a controversial, exciting, and bustling Chris- 
tianity. Has the thought ever crossed your mind, 
that you may all the while be living in sad and awful 
neglect of secret, close, and real fellowship with your 
Father? that you may be almost a stranger to closet 
prayer, closet wrestling, closet transaction with God? 
It is quite possible that this may be so. Your family, 
your business, your profession, even what you would 
term your religious engagements, may crowd the re- 
ligion of your soul into the smallest compass of time. 
Oh think not that spirituality of mind, even in an 
ordinary degree, can thus be sustained or promoted! 
Marvel not at the difficulty you find in maintaining 
even the holy spark alive. Wonder not at the little 
real delight you take in drawing near to God, at the 
growing distaste you find for spiritual duties —at the 
little life that breathes in your prayers—at the want 
of power and sweetness in the ministry of the word— 
at the greater preponderance of your mind and affec- 
tions to the things that are earthly and sensual. But 
return to prayer —return with earnestness, with real 
desire for more heavenly-mindedness, for more true 
and close walking with God, and God will return to 
you. Return to ejaculatory prayer—to closet prayer 
—to family prayer—to social prayer—return but to 
PRAYER! The way of thy return is open—it is a 
‘“new and a living way,” sprinkled with the recon- 
ciling blood of the great High Priest, now alive upon 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. pe 


his throne, and leading into the holiest. And the 
moment thou turnest thy face towards God, thou shalt 
find His face turned towards thee. Let nothing then 
rob you of this precious mean of advancing your 
heavenly-mindedness,— nothing can be its substitute. 
Other duties, however spiritual—other enjoyments, 
however holy — other means of grace, however impor- 
tant and necessary, never can supply the place of prayer. 
And why? because prayer brings the soul into imme- 
diate contact with Christ, who is our life, and with 
God, the Fountain of life. Exclude all air from the 
body, and it would soon cease to exist. Shut out all 
prayer from thy soul, and how can you expect to main- 
tain its Divine life, vigorous and healthy? As the 
total absence of the breath of prayer marks the soul 
‘‘ dead in trespasses and in sin;’’ so the waning of the 
spirit of prayer in the quickened soul as surely defines 
a state in which all that is spiritual within seems 
‘“Cready to die.” . 
Another mean of increasing and promoting eminent 
spirituality of mind, is a diligent and prayerful read- 
ing of God’s holy word. This, we fear, is not an ele- 
ment in the Christianity of the many. It defines a 
duty sadly, and to a great extent neglected. The 
tendency of the age is to substitute the writings of 
man for the book of God. Let them come but with 
the robe of religion gracefully thrown around them, 
and whether they assume the form of history, or 
story, or song, they are devoured by the professing 
multitude, who would deem their true spirituality 
unquestionable! But the Divine life of the soul is 


232 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


not to be fed and nourished by the profound dis- 
coveries of science, or the recondite axioms of phi- 
losophy, or the brilliant flowers of genius, or the 
dreams of a poetical imagination. It ascends to a 
higher and a diviner source; it aspires towards the 
aliments of its native clime. The bread that comes 
down from heaven, and the water that flows, pure as 
crystal, from beneath the throne of God and the 
Lamb, can alone feed, and nourish, and refresh this 
hidden principle. Jesus is its sustenance; and the 
Gospel, as it unfolds him in his glory and grace, is 
the spiritual granary from whence its daily food is 
drawn. ‘To this it repairs, oftentimes pressed with 
hunger, or panting with thirst, weary and exhausted, 
drooping and faint, and it finds its doctrines and its 
precepts, its promises and its admonitions, its ex- 
hortations and revelations, a ‘‘ feast of fat things, a 
feast of wines on the lees: of fat things full of mar- 
row, of wines on the lees well refined.” And thus 
refreshed and satisfied, the grateful soul adoringly 
exclaims, “Thy words were found, and I did eat 
them; and thy word was unto me the joy and re- 
joicing of my heart.” ‘Truly did Jesus testify, 
‘“‘ Verily, verily I say unto you, Except ye eat the 
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have 
no life in you;” 
that if there exists no appetite for spiritual food, 
there is wanting the great evidence of the life of God 
in the soul. A mere semblance of life, an informed 
judgment, a ‘fair show’ of religion ‘in the flesh,’ 
can content itself with anything short of the spi- 


A 


evidently and solemnly implying 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 233 


ritual aliment contained in God’s word. <A ministry 
without Christ, without unction, without power, and 
without profit; the duty and the day rigidly ob- 
served without spirit and without sweetness; the 
monthly periodical, the religious story, the drawing- 
room exposition, may seem to feed the lamp of mere 
profession, can keep alive the “‘form of godliness,” 
and satisfy a soul utterly destitute of its ‘ power.” 
But the Divine life of a quickened soul, while it 
disdains no auxiliary to its spiritual advance, can 
yet feed on nothing but Divine food. The “flesh 
and the blood” of Immanuel can alone meet and 
satiate its hungering and thirsting. It is from 
heaven, and its supply must be heavenly; it is from 
God, and its nourishment must be Divine. Jesus, 
and Jesus alone, received into the heart, rested in 
and lived upon by faith, is the food of a believing 
man. Nothing but Christ,—‘ Christ all”? in him- 
self, and Christ ‘in all’ means, ‘in all’ ordinances, 
‘in all’ channels, ‘in all’ seasons,—sustains a soul 
whose “‘life is hidden with Christ in God.” Dear 
reader, do you see the importance, and feel the so- 
lemnity of this truth? Oh, it is a great and solemn 
one! Except by faith you ‘eat the flesh and drink 
the blood of the Son of man, you have no life in 
you!’ Yourmind content with anything as a substitute 
for this—your faith standing in the wisdom of men 
—your sacramental observances—your religion of 
‘meats, and drinks, and divers washings, and carnal 
ordinances”’—your “keeping of days, and months, 


and times, and years,’ or, to use great plainness of 
20 * 


284 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


speech in a subject so momentous, your past sub- 
mission to the rite of baptism—your present habitual 
observance of the Lord’s supper—your visible union 
with the church of God, all will avail you nothing in 
the great matter of your soul’s salvation without Christ ! 
Does this startle you? Are you alarmed at the dis- 
covery? It is, I trust, with the affection and tender- 
ness which the spirit of the Gospel inspires, that I 
thus address you. Nothing short of Christ—Christ’s 
righteousness, Christ’s atonement, Christ’s flesh and 
blood, Christ in us, Christ without us, Christ risen, 
Christ alive at the right hand of God, yea, ‘ Christ all 
and in all,’ can meet the deep immortal necessities of 
your soul. You want all that Christ is in the matter 
of pardon, and justification, and sanctification, and 
wisdom, and redemption. If anything less than Jesus 
had sufficed, if an expedient less magnificent, or if an 
expenditure less costly had answered for God and man, 
then less would save you. But since the incarnate 
God alone is the Saviour of a poor, lost sinner, see 
that you detract not from, or add to, this salvation by 
any works of human merit. To return to our first 
observation: be exhorted to an intimate acquaintance 
with God’s holy word, as supplying a powerful help 
to the progress of the soul in deep spirituality. And 
if your time for reading is limited, limit it to one book, 
and let that one book be—the Brpiz. Let it be the 
companion of your hours of solitude: the solace in 
your seasons of sorrow; the store-house in all your 
necessities ; the man of your counsel in all your doubts 
and perplexities. Then will your blessed experience 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. O35 


resemble that of the Psalmist, ‘Thy word have I hid- 
den in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee. 
This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy word hath 
quickened me. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and 
a light unto my path. I rejoice in thy word, as one 
that findeth great spoil.” 

But observe the exhortation, in connexion with the 
precept, “Set your affection on things above, not on 
things on the earth.”’ How solemn and full of 
meaning are these words! ‘To set the affections on 
heavenly things, is to realize the ardent desire of the 
apostle, that he might ‘“‘know Christ and the power 
of his resurrection.” Oh, there is a mighty, ele- 
vating power in the resurrection of Christ! It is the 
great lever to a child of God, lifting him above earth, 
heavenward. ‘To know that he is closely and insepar- 
ably one with the risen Head of the church, is to 
be the subject of a continuous quickening influence, 
which in spirit raises him from the dust, and the 
darkness, and the pollutions by which he is sur- 
rounded ; fixing the affections with greater ardency of 
devotion and supreme attachment on things above. 
Oh, nothing will more sanctify and elevate our hearts, 
than to have them brought under the “power of 
Christ’s resurrection.” Following him by faith, from 
the dust of earth to the glory of heaven, the affec- 
tions will ascend with their Beloved. Where he is,— 
the heart’s most precious treasure, —there it will be 
also. And oh, to have the heart with Christ in 
heaven, what an unspeakable mercy! And why 
should it not be? Has earth more that is attractive, 


236 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


and lovely, and holy, and worthy of its affection, than 
heaven? Here, we are encircled by, and combat with 
spirits of darkness and pollution, principalities and 
powers, —there, is ‘‘an innumerable company of - 
angels.” Here, we are much separated from the 
church of God, — there, is the ‘‘general assembly and 
church of the first-born,’ from whom nothing shall 
divide us, Here, the Divine presence is often with-' 
drawn, and we are taunted and accused by our foes, 
— there, is ‘‘God the judge of all,’ whose presence 
will be our eternal glory, and who will “bring forth 
our righteousness as the light, and our judgment as 
the noon-day.”’ Here, we often hang our heads in 
sorrow, at the imperfections we mark in the saints,— 
there, are the “spirits of just men made perfect,” 
‘without fault before the throne.” Here, we often 
lose sight of our beloved Lord,— there, is ‘‘ Jesus, the 
Mediator of the new covenant,’ never more to be 
veiled from our view. Oh, then, how much richer, 
and more attractive is heaven than earth, to a re- 
newed and holy mind, each moment growing richer 
and more attractive, by the accession to its numbers 
of those, the holy and loved ones of the earth, who 
have for a little while preceded us to that world of 
perfect bliss! Our treasure in glory, how rapidly it 
accumulates! Death, which impoverishes us here by 
snatching from our embrace the objects of our love, 
by that same act augments our riches in heaven, into 
the full possession and enjoyment of which it will, in 
its appointed time, beneficently translate us. But the 
sweetest, the most powerful attraction of heaven, let 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 237 


us never forget, is, that Jesus is there. Ah! what 
would heaven be, were he absent? Could we, at this 
moment, rush into the fond embrace of the dearest of 
the glorified ones, and meet not the “ Chief among 
ten thousands, the altogether lovely One,’ who on 
-earth was more precious to our hearts than life itself, 
oh, how soon would its glory fade from our eye, and 
its music pall upon our ear! It would cease to be 
heaven without Christ. Even on earth his presence 
and his smile constitute the first dawnings of that 
better world. And he who lives most in the enjoy- 
ment of this,—and oh, how much more may be 
enjoyed than we have the faintest conception of !— 
has most of the element of heaven in his soul. Aim, 
then, to cultivate heavenly affections, by a life of high 
communion with God. 

But there is also a prohibition. ‘Set your affec- 
tion not on things on the earth.” It is not the 
design or tendency of the Gospel, to destroy or im- 
pair any single class of those human affections which 
God has created. On the contrary it recognizes, 
encourages, and strengthens them all. He is the 
fondest parent, the most dutiful child, the most faith- 
ful servant, the sincerest friend, the best citizen, 
whose affections are sanctified and regulated by the 
hallowing influence of the Gospel of Christ. It is 
the Gospel, experienced in the heart, that alone gives 
tone, elevation, and security to the conjugal, the 
parental, and the filial relation, defining and enforcing 
the duties of each. It is worthy of remark, that in 
the identical chapter which declares the believer risen 


238 THE GLORY OF TIE REDEEMER 


with Christ, and which exhorts him to consequent 
heavenly-mindedness, some of the precepts to which 
we have referred, are thus strikingly portrayed, and 
earnestly enforced. ‘‘ Wives, submit yourselves unto 
your own husbands, as it is fit in the Lord. Hus- 
bands, love your wives, and be not bitter against 
them. Children, obey your parents in all things; 
for this is well-pleasing unto the Lord. Sathers, 
provoke not your children to anger, lest they be dis- 
couraged. Servants, obey in all things your masters 
according to the flesh, not with eye-service, as men- 
pleasers! but in singleness of heart, fearing God. 
Masters, give unto your servants that which is just 
and equal; knowing that ye also have a Master in 
heaven.” ‘Thus closely are the weighty precepts of 
God interwoven with the sublimest doctrines of His 
word. 

And yet there is much solemn meaning in the pro- 
hibition, ‘(Set not your affection on things on the 
earth,’’ worthy of our deepest consideration. The 
circle it embraces is a wide one. It includes every 
earthly object tending to injure and impair the 
heavenly-mindedness of him who is mystically and 
spiritually risen with Christ. That was a solemn 
charge which, with tears, the holy apostle alleged 
against some of the primitive professors,—‘ who 
mind earthly things.” Against the sin with which 
they were chargeable, and which rendered their 
Christianity of so doubtful a character, he warns the 
Colossians, in the passage before us, ‘Set not your 
affection on things on the earth.” The prohibition 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 939 


includes creatures, riches, honours, pleasures, yea, 
every earthly object that would be a ‘substitute for 
Christ,— everything that would render him less glo- 
rious to the:eye, less precious to the soul, less an 
object of the heart’s holiest, fondest, and supreme 
affection. Oh, many a mother has taken. the little 
flower God has entrusted to her, and placing it in 
her bosom, has been so elated with its beauty and its 
fragrance, as to forget the ‘‘ Rose of Sharon,” the 
“Lily of the valley.” Her affections have been in- 
ordinately set upon an earthly object,—her love to 
Jesus has, in consequence, waned. Her zeal for His 
glory has cooled; her walk with God has been less 
close. She has followed her Lord afar off; the 
means of grace have been neglected ;—her child has 
come between her soul and Christ, and presently he 
has transferred it from her bosom to his own. He 
has blighted the mercy that tended to supplant in her 
holy affections the God of the mercy. 

Delicate as is the subject, and needing as it does to 
be treated with a tender and skilful hand, we never- 
theless must allude to that u due, idolatrous, if not 
superstitious, attachment to, and reverence for, Chris- 
tian ministers by churches and by individuals, which 
we think, comes within the scope of this prohibition, 
the existence and growing extent of which demand 
a prompt and effectual check. ‘The office of the 
Christian ministry is strangely misunderstood at the 
present time. By one part of the professing church, 
the Christian minister is all but detfied; and by 
another part, he is all but erucified. By the one he 


240 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


is exalted into the place of God; so that multitudes, 
in the blindness of their superstitious attachment, 
‘worship him as God;’ by the other, his office is 
altogether denied, and his dignity, authority, and 
instructions are cast out of the church, to be trodden 
under foot by men. Fearful extremes are these! 
And yet, both at this moment to an alarming extent 
exist. Who will be found tenderly, yet earnestly and 
faithfully, to lift up his voice against them, for the 
Lord’s sake? May not a slight investigation of 
God’s holy word, bearing upon this subject, clearly 
point out the middle and the better path between 
these opposite and dangerous points of opinion, which 
at the present time threaten, and even already are 
working, the greatest evil to the church of God? 

In turning, then, ‘‘to the law and to the testi- 
mony,’ we find that there exists in the church of 
Christ, the office of the Christian ministry, having its 
appointment from Christ himself, the great Head of 
the church: “ And Jesus spake unto them saying, All 
power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go 
ye, therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in 
the name of the Father and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things, 
whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I am 
with you alway, even unto the end of the world.” 
Matt. xxviii. 18-20. Again: “And he gave some, 
apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists ; 
and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of 
the saints, for the work of the ministry.” Eph. iv. 
11, 12. This high commission, which no man, nor 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. O41 


body of men, can confer, every minister of the Gospel 
bears, whom the Holy Spirit has called to the work, 
and who “ goes forth, preaching everywhere, the Lord 
working with him.” Let no man, at his peril, deny 
his office or despise his work. The ministerial 
character is described: ‘‘A bishop must be blameless 
as the steward of God; not self-willed, not soon 
angry, not given to wine, no striker, not given to 
filthy lucre ; but a lover of hospitality, a lover of good 
men, sober, holy, just, temperate; holding fast the 
faithful word as he hath been taught, that he may be 
able by sound doctrine both to exhort and to con- 
vince the gainsayers.”’ Tit. i. 7-9. They are to be 
thus recognized by the saints: ‘‘ Let a man so account 
of us as of the ministers of Christ, and stewards of 
the mysteries of God.” 1 Cor. iv. 1. They are to 
be respected, honoured and loved: ‘Receive him 
(Epaphroditus) therefore in the Lord with all glad- 
ness; and hold such (mar gin, honour such,) in repu- 
tation.” Phil. i. 29. ‘And we beseech you, 
brethren, to know them who labour among you; and 
are over you in the Lord, and admonish you; and to 
esteem them very highly in love for their work’s 
sake.” 1 Thess. vy. 12, 18. “Let the elders that 
rule well be counted worthy of double honour, 
especially they who labour in the word and doctrine.”’ 
1 Tim. v. 17. They are to be especially prayed for : 
‘““Now I beseech you, brethren, for the Lord Jesus 
Christ’s sake, and for the love of the Spirit, that ye 
strive together with me in your prayers to God for 


me.” Rom. xv. 80. ‘ Withal praying also for us, 
21 : 


242 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


that God would open unto us a door of utterance, to 
speak the mystery of Christ.’’ Col. iv. 3. “Brethren, 
pray for us.” Their authority is to be acknowledged, 
and their word obeyed: “I beseech you, brethren 
... that ye submit yourselves unto such, and to every 
one that helpeth with us and laboureth.” 1 Cor. xvi. 
16. “For to this end also did I write, that I might 
know the proof of you, whether ye are obedient in 
all things.’ 2 Cor. i. 9. “Remember them who 
have the rule over you, who have spoken unto you 
the word of God.” Heb. xiii. 7. Their temporal 
necessities are to be amply and cheerfully ministered 
to by the churches whom they serve: “If we have 
sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if 
we shall reap your carnal things?” (see the first 
epistle to the Corinthians, the ninth chapter). ‘Let 
him that is taught in the word communicate unto him 
that teacheth in all good things.” Gal. vi. 6. ‘The 
labourer is worthy of his hire.” Luke x. 7. These 
are some of the statutes of the New Testament, bear- 
ing upon the Christian ministry: from them it will 
appear —that the office is of Divine institution, that 
it is essential to the existence of a Gospel church, that 
it is connected with the discharge of certain functions, 
and that itis clothed with dignity and authority, which 
are to be recognized and exercised, not for its own 
self-agerandisement, but for the welfare of the saints, 
and for Christ's honour and glory. On the other 
hand, equally clear is it, that the Christian ministry 
possesses essentially no Divine rights of its own, that 
it confers no spiritual gifts, conveys no spiritual 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 243 


grace, and that it disclaims all superstitious reverence, 
and rejects all idolatrous attachment and worship from 
the creature. 

With all earnestness and solemnity of feeling we 
urge the reader to avoid the two extremes of error 
which we have pointed out, and to which we have 
thus opposed the word of God. Let him, on the one 
hand, be careful how he takes a step in sapping the 
foundation, or in impairing the influence, of an insti- 
tution which Christ has so distinctly appointed, and 
so signally blessed. Second to none, but superior to 
all, ag an instrumentality of promulgating truth and 
of promoting Christ’s kingdom in the world, is the 
CHRISTIAN MINISTRY, composed of Divincly called, 
spiritually taught, and holy men. Dark will be that 
day when this holy bulwark of our country, this 
mighty engine of the truth, this powerful safeguard 
of virtue, and this distinguished glory of the church, 
ceases to occupy that elevated and commanding posi- 
tion assigned to it by the “‘chief Shepherd and Bishop 
of souls.’ In placing yourself in opposition to it, 
you are not, perhaps, aware that you are allying 
yourself with the enemies of God and of truth, who 
reject Christ as a deceiver, who oppose Christianity 
as a fiction, and who deride the Christian ministry as 
a system of priestcraft. From such turn away. Have 
no fellowship with’ them in these doctrines, not even 
in appearance. Countenance them not in their at- 
tempts to uproot the Divine and hallowed institutions 
of the New Testament, by holding views inimical to, 
and destructive of, any one of these institutions. The 


944 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


church of God has never existed without a holy and a 
Divinely taught ministry. He who first gave to his 
church ‘apostles and prophets, pastors and teachers,” 
‘for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the 
ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ,’ has 
never ceased, in all the scenes of persecution and 
darkness through which she has passed, to replenish, 
glorify, and comfort her with men after His own 
heart; thus guarding the high office with a jealous, 
sleepless, and loving eye, from all the evil that has 
ever threatened its overthrow. And so will He ever 
guard it. In the fierce conflict of mind with mind, 
of principle with principle, of truth with error, which 
is fast approaching, nay, which even has already be- 
gun, the pulpits of our land cannot be dispensed with. 
This is the field upon which the great battle is to be 
fought. While a godly press will be found an in- 
valuable and an indispensable barrier against the 
advancing foe, it is from the pulpit those silver 
trumpets are to be blown, at whose shrill sound the 
hosts of Israel are to gather themselves to ‘the help 
of the Lord against the mighty;” and at whose 
overpowering blast the walls of Antichrist shall fall 
before Him. Rather than be found, then, in opposi- 
tion to Christ’s ministry, seek, by all scriptural and 
holy means, to impart to it greater efficiency and 
strength, praying continually to the ‘Lord of the 
harvest, that he will send forth move labourers into his 
harvest.” 

On the other hand, seek to divest your mind of all 
unscriptural, superstitious, and idolatrous views and 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 945 


feelings in reference to the natures and powers of this 
office. Remember it is but a human instrumentality, 
possessing no essential, inalienable grace or holiness 
of its own; that it is an agency, powerful and effica- 
cious only as God the Eternal Spirit makes it so; 
that the treasure of the everlasting Gospel is in 
‘earthern vessels;’ and that ‘Paul may plant, and 
Apollos may water’—and this is the utmost limit of 
their agency—but that God only can give the in- 
crease. See, too, that you dishonour not God, nor 
grieve the Holy Spirit, nor cast reflection upon this 
sacred office, by refusing the message of God’s word 
from the lips of any of His servants, by whom he may 
send it. Oh! what numbers rob their own souls of 
vast blessings, and Christ of much glory, by not taking 
heed to this! They will attend upon sanctuaries 
where, confessedly, no healing waters flow, and upon 
ministrations barren of Gospel truth, clothed with no 
unction, and conveying no blessing, rather than break 
from fetters which education, or prejudice, or super- 
stition, or habit, have forged, and woven around 
them, and humbly and earnestly inquire from the 
Lord, in the spirit and languago of the church of old, 
—‘“Tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth, where 
thou feedest; where thou makest thy flock to rest at 
noon!” Were this petition more sincerely and 
frequently urged, the answer would not long tarry. 
““Q thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by 
the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids beside 
the shepherds’ tents.” Receive it as a word sent from 


God to thy soul, dear reader. It is the Lord’s mes- 
aL 


246 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


sage to thee. Go where His Spirit leads thee — go 
where the name of Jesus draws thee—go where his 
glory attracts thee— go where his truth invites thee 
— go where his blessing awaits thee. It should be 
to you of but little consideration through what chan- 
nel, or by what instrument, the Lord feeds your soul, 
so that He does feed it. The nourishment of God’s 
life within you is of the first and greatest moment. 
A scrupulous conscience, a prejudiced mind, a con- 
tracted heart, may be productive of the greatest in- 
jury to your spiritual interest. Of what value will 
it be, if God gives your request, by giving you a 
ministry according to your prescribed order, but 
sends leanness into your soul? And this he will do 
—perhaps he is now doing—if His word is in any way, 
directly or indirectly, undervalued, slighted, or re- 
fused. Oh that God may fill your heart with His 
love — love to himself—love to His people—love to: 
His truth —and love to His ministers, by whom His 
truth is proclaimed, by whatever name they may be 
known among men. 

But the evil against which many of the Lord’s 
people need to be tenderly cautioned, and which we 
think is deprecated by the broad precept, “‘Set not 
your affection upon things on the earth,” is, that undue 
exalting of the instrument which we sometimes mark 
in Christian communities. A church may so vaunt 
itself of the talents, the gifts, the attainments, the 
popularity and even the success of its pastor, as 
greatly to detract from the glory of God, grieve the 
Spirit, and seriously injure both itself and the object 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 247 


of its adulation. How keenly is the spiritual mind 
pained by the humiliating spectacle of man-worship 
which sometimes meets the eye! What applauding 
of human eloquence — what burning of incense at the 
shrine of human intellect and genius— what vain 
boasting of profound learning, and brilliant talent, 
and popular gifts—the mere mint, and anise, and 
cummin — while the infinitely weightier attributes of 
a holy, powerful, and useful ministry, are lightly 
esteemed, if not totally dispensed with! ‘The evils 
which arise from this vain-glorying in men, and this 
undue admiration of, and exclusive attachment to, 
a particular order of ministeral character and fitness, 
are many and various. We have only space to allude 
to a solitary one—the painfully depressing effect it 
produces upon the feelings of other ministers and 
pastors, — men self-taught, of irregular mental train- 
ing, and lacking, it may be, that intellectual furni- 
ture, polish of address, and those graces of elocution, 
which a university may be supposed to confer; yet 
men profound in the Scriptures, mighty in prayer, 
rich in Christian experience, deeply taught and 
anointed by the Spirit, partaking largely of the grace 
of Jesus—the true polish and refinement of a man 
of God—humble-minded, and eminently successful in 
winning souls to Christ. That the church of God is 
honoured and blessed by many such men, is a fact 
demanding a prompt and most grateful acknowledge- 
ment. They are, in some particular departments of 
labour, the most effective workmen. The church 
could ill spare them. Is there not, then, danger of 


948 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


impairing influence that should be jealously guarded, 
and of wounding feelings that should be tenderly 
shielded, and of undervaluing an office that should be 
highly esteemed, by attaching an undue importance 
to a certain class of gifts and accomplishments, the 
possession of which has, perhaps, more frequently 
proved a greater snare than a blessing? 

But, even where there exists not this vain boasting 
in man, may there not be, even in more spiritual 
communities, a setting of the affections upon the 
instrument, tending to its undue exaltation, thus 
entrenching upon the power of the Spirit and the 
grace and glory of Christ? Oh, it is a lovely and 
a holy sight, the strong attachment of a pastor and 
a church! Harth presents no spectacle of moral 
beauty surpassing it; and angels, bending from their 
thrones in heaven, must gaze upon it with new ecstasy 
and delight. We would not breathe a word, or pen 
a sentence, tending to mar the symmetry, or shade 
the beauty, or impair the strength, of such a union. 
This only would we say,— receive him reverently and 
gratefully, as the Lord’s messenger, esteem him very 
highly in love for his works’ sake; yet hold him 
infinitely subordinate to Christ, and with a loose and 
gentle grasp. If heavenly-minded, and the channel 
of blessing to your souls, he is the Lord’s gift, and as 
such only is he to be regarded. All that he pos- 
sesses, really valuable, is from Jesus ;—his gifts, his 
acquirements, his grace, his usefulness, his moral 
loveliness, and even those minor attractions of person 
and address,—which, if possessed, may, without much 


IN HIS RESURRECTION 249 


holy caution, but strengthen the heart’s idolatry, and 
shade the infinite loveliness of Christ,—came from 
God, are the bestowments of His undeserved mercy, 
and were intended but to lead you up to Himself, the 
source from whence they proceed. Then lend your 
ear and yield your heart to the needed exhortation, as 
it bears upon this point,—‘‘ Set not your affection on 
things on the earth.” Cherish a devout and grateful 
spirit for the precious and invaluable gift of a holy, 
affectionate, and useful minister; bwt rest not in him 
short of Jesus. Give to him his proper place in your 
affections and thoughts—a place infinitely beneath the 
adorable Son of God, God’s “‘ unspeakable gift.” He is 
not his own, nor yours, but the Lord’s. And He, whose 
he is and whom he serves, may, in the exercise of his 
infinite wisdom and sovereign will, and I may add, 
tender love, suspend for a while his labours, or trans- 
fer him to another section of the vmeyard, or, which 
would be more painful, crumble the earthen, though 
beautiful, vessel to dust, and take the precious trea- 
sure it contained to Himself. Still, Christ is all; 
he is your all; and, as the chief Shepherd and Bishop 
of his church, he will never take himself from her. 
The happy secret of retaining our mercies is to receive 
and enjoy Christ in them; to turn every blessing be- 
stowed into an occasion of knowing, and loving, and 
enjoying more of Jesus, apart from whom, poor indeed 
were the most costly blessing. Blessed indeed would 
our blessings then be! Leading our affections up to 
God; giving us a deeper insight into a Father’s love ; 
laying us lower in the dust at his feet; filling the 


250. THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


Spirit with secret contrition and tender brokenness, 
the heart with adoring love, the mouth with grateful 
praise; endearing the channel through which it de- 
scends, and the mercy-seat at which it was sought and 
given; encouraged and stimulated by the gift, to 
devote person, time, influence, and property, more 
simply and unreservedly, to the glory of God; then 
should we keep a longer possession of our sanctified 
blessing, nor fear the thought, nor shrink from the 
prospect of its removal; or, if removed, we should be 
quite satisfied to have God alone as our portion and 
our all. 

Against the love of the world, this holy and stringent 
precept as solemnly warns the believer. As those who 
are professedly risen with Christ, but who yet, for a 
while, dwell in a world of perpetual seduction, how 
needed, how kind the exhortation! How necessary 
to be constantly reminded of our risen life! Behold 
how we are cautioned,—‘‘ Be not conformed to this 
world, but be ye transformed by the renewing of your 
mind. Love not the world, neither the things that 
are in the world. If any man love the world, the love 
of the Father is not in him. Tor all that is in the 
world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, 
and the pride of life, is net of the Father, but is of the 
world.” Are you walking in filial obedience to this 
precept? Oh, as a risen man, love not the world! 
Let it be to you as a dead thing. Receive them with 
gratitude, and use them for God’s glory, but oh, set 
not your affections inordinately, exclusively, sinfully 
on “things on the earth’? — husband, wife, children, 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 251 


wealth, honour, estate, dress, recreation, or whatever 
is of ‘‘the earth, earthly.” ‘Love not the world, 
neither the things that are in the world.” You are 
dead; you are alive. Your death is a death to things 
below; your life is a life to things above. You are 
crucified, you are risen. You are professedly cruci- 
fied to the world; you are mystically risen with Christ ; 
then live as one whose treasure, whose conversation, 
and whose allis on high, even “‘where Christ sitteth 
at the right hand of God.” | 

The resurrection of Christ is the pledge and earnest 
of the glorious resurrection of the believer. This great 
event —the crowning bliss of the church —has long 
been as a star of hope, on which the eye of faith has 
loved to gaze. Patriarchs, and prophets, and apostles, 
sang, and spake, and wrote of it. Who does not 
recognize the doctrine of the resurrection, and trace 
the yearning of his soul for this glorious event, in the 
expressive and touching words of Job xiv. T—9? 
‘There is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it 
will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof 
will not cease. ‘Though the root thereof wax old in 
the earth, and the stock thereof die in the ground; 
yet through the scent of water it will bud, and bring 
forth boughs like a plant.” How strikingly and 
beautifully significant is this figure of the resurrec- 
tion! His faith grafted upon the doctrine, see how 
his heart longed for the arrival of the event :— “Q 
that thou wouldest hide me in the grave, that thou 
wouldst keep me secret until thy wrath be past; 
that thou wouldst appoint me a set time, and 


252 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


remember me! If a man die, shall he live again? 
All the days of my appointed time (not the appointed 
time of his death as some interpret it, but of his 
resurrection, for this is the event he is now anticipat- 
ing,) will I wait until my change come. Thou shalt 
call—oh! how sweetly will fall the sound of the 
archangel’s trump upon the ear of those who sleep 
in Jesus ! — “thou shalt call, and I will answer: thow 
wilt have a desire to the work of thine hands.” But 
if possible, in terms yet more distinct and glowing, 
the holy patriarch announces his faith in this doc-. 
trine, and expresses his ardent longing for this event, 
—‘‘I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall 
stand at the latter day upon the earth. And though 
after my skin, worms destroy this body, yet in my 
flesh I shall see God, whom I shall see for myself, 
and mine eyes shall behold, and not another; though 
my reins be consumed within me,”’—(marg. my reins 
within me are consumed with earnest desire for that 
day.) How clearly does the prophet Isaiah enunciate 
the doctrine,— ‘‘Thy dead men shall live, together 
with my dead body shall they arise!” — Or, as it has 
been more properly rendered,* “Thy dead men shall 
live,” — alluding to the church’s dead, —“my dead 
body shall rise,’”"—Christ here being the speaker, and 
referring to his mystical body, whom he has promised 
to raise at the last day. ‘‘ Awake and sing, ye that 
dwell in dust; for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and 
the earth shall cast out the dead.”—Isaiah xxyvi. 19. 


* Lowth. 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. O58 


But our limits forbid any lengthened quotation 
from God’s word, establishing this doctrine. We 
must rather assume than prove its existence. The 
hope to which the resurrection of the Lord has begot- 
ten the believer, is termed by the apostle a “‘lively,” 
or, as it may be rendered, a “living hope.’’ Its life 
springs from the resurrection-life of Christ, just as 
the same glorious event imparts quickening to the 
whole Christian economy. ‘Blessed be the God 
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who, ac- 
cording to his abundant mercy, hath begotten us 
again unto a living hope, by the resurrection of Jesus 
Christ from the dead.’’ Thus the believer, and he 
alone, can adopt the language of his Lord, as he re- 
sions his body to the dust—and oh! let it be the 
epitaph of all who sleep in Jesus, — ‘‘ MY FLESH ALSO 
SHALL REST IN HOPE.” A living hope, based upon 
the resurrection of Jesus, smooths his suffering path- 
way to the tomb; hope dissipates its gloom, and 
kindles within its sombre recesses an immortal radi- 
ance: and hope—the Pharos of the Sepulchre — 
throws its bright beams across the dark waters of 
eternity, revealing in all its glory, an ‘inheritance 
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fadeth not 
away.” ‘Q yes!” may every slumbering believer 
exclaim, ‘My flesh shall rest in hopeof a glorious 
resurrection to eternal life.” Observe how closely 
the two events, —the resurrection of Jesus, and that 
of the believer,—are interwoven the one with the 
other. “Now is Christ risen from the dead, and 


become the first-fruits of them that slept.” *‘ very 
22 


254. THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


man in his own order: Christ the first-fruits; after- 
ward they that are Christ’s at his coming.” What 
was the meaning of the first sheaf, which, under the 
law, was commanded to be presented before the Lord 
in His temple? Was it not to be considered as an 
earnest, a pledge, and a pattern of the future harvest, 
ripening for the sickle? So was the resurrection of 
Jesus Christ from the dead! In like manner he 
burst from the grave, the “first-fruits,” the earnest, 
the pledge, and the pattern of a future and a glorious 
harvest. As surely as he rose, so surely shall all his 
people rise. As certainly as the first golden sheaf 
has been presented in the temple, and waved before 
the throne of God, as certainly shall the ‘“ blade, the 
ear, and the full corn in the ear,” be sickled in and 
gathered home, “and not the least grain fall upon the 
earth.” 

‘“‘ But how are the dead raised up?” That there is 
much of sublime mystery associated with this event, 
we readily admit. But its very mystery endears Him 
to the soul ‘‘ who hath abolished death,” (or, rendered 
at of none effect ;) ‘and hath brought life and immor- 
tality to light by the Gospel.” Thus is this mystery 
explained: “It is sown in corruption; it is raised in 
incorruption: it is sown in dishonour; it is raised in 
glory: it 18 sown in weakness; it is raised in power: 
it is sown a natural body ; it is raised a spiritual body. 
Behold, I show you a mystery. We shall not all 
sleep; but we shall all be changed, in a moment, in 
the twinkling of an eye, at the last trumpet: for the 
trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 255 


incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this 
corruptible must put on incorruption, and this mortal 
must put on immortality.” Yes, this very body, as 
much redeemed by the precious blood of the incarnate 
God, as the deathless principle it enshrines, shall rise 
again! And by what power? The power of Om- 
nipotence! ‘‘He that raised up Christ from the 
dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his 
Spirtt that dwelleth in you.” Every entombed saint 
_of God, is an entombed temple of the Holy Spirit. 
Think of this, and tread lightly, as ye carry it to 
the grave. Ye bear a temple of the Holy Ghost! 
Precious is the dust, and hallowed the urn that con- 
tains it. And shall that temple lie in ruins for ever? 
God forbid! Oh, it is a mighty and a glorious work, 
to resuscitate, remould, and re-occupy this dilapidated 
structure !—to gather from the four winds of heaven 
every particle of the scattered dust,—to bring bone 
to its bone, and sinew to its sinew,—to invest the re- 
formed skeleton with a covering more soft and delicate 
than an infant’s—to summon back its former occu- 
pant, and then to lift it to glory, outliving, in its 
deathlessness, the stars of heaven, and outshining in 
its brilliancy the brightest angel before the throne. 
Oh, it is a stupendous work! But stupendous as it 
is, it transcends not in its mightiness the power of 
God. Oh, we deal too faintly with the almightiness 
of Jehovah! We limit the power of the Holy One 
of Israel. Bring but this power to bear upon the 
doctrine of the resurrection, and all its mystery is ex- 
plained, and all its difficulty vanishes. On this Divine 


256 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


perfection, rested the faith of Abraham, who, in 
obedience to God’s command, bound his son upon the 
altar, and took the knife to slay him, “believing that 
God was adle to raise him up again, even from the 
dead.’’ Shall it, then, be thought a thing incredible, 
that God should raise the dead? The difficultzes of 
summoning together every atom of dust, borne though 
it may have been by the winds to the furthermost 
parts of the earth, or strewn upon the waves of the 
sea,—of distinguishing what element belonged to 
each individual, and appropriating to each his own 
—of clothing the framework with a new and a death- 
less nature, and animating it with the same human 
soul which it contained in the long years of its 
humiliation, oh, how’do they vanish before one touch 
of Omnipotence! What! shall He who at first 
formed man out of the dust, and breathed into him 
the breath of life—shall He at whose fiat world on 
world started into being, each one, for aught that we 
know, teeming with a population partaking of His 
likeness, and sharing in His immortality, shall He 
who “upholds all things by the word of His power,” 
who ‘taketh up the isles as a very little thing,” who 
“holds the winds in His fist, and the waters in the 
hollow of his hand,” who “hath His way in the whirl- 
wind and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of 
His feet,’’—shall He be perplexed and baffled when 
fe comes to unlock the world’s charnel-house, quick- 
ening, and summoning to His bar, each slumbering 
occupant? Qh, it will be a stupendous and a glorious 
work! but reason and revelation unite in ascribing it 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. yang | 


to Him as worthy of His infinite greatness, majesty, 
and glory. 

But ‘with what body do they come?” The iden- 
tical body that was sown, yet so changed, so spiritual- 
ized, so glorified, so immortalized, as to rival in beauty 
the highest form of spirit, while it shall resemble, in 
its fashion, the glorious body of Christ himself. We 
can form but a faint conception, even from the glow- 
ing representations of the apostle, of the glory of the 
raised body of the just. But this we know, it will be 
in every respect a structure worthy of the perfected 
soul that will inhabit it. Wow it is the antagonist, 
and not the auxiliary of the soul—its clog, its pri- 
son, its foe. The moment that Jesus condescends to 
‘grace this mean abode’ with his indwelling presence, 
there commences that fierce and harassing conflict 
between holiness and sin, which so often wrings the 
bitter cry from the believer, ‘‘O wretched man that 
I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this 
death?” Oh what a cumbrance is this body of 
sin! Its corruptions, its infirmities, its weaknesses, 
its ailments, its diseases, all conspire to render it the 
tyrant of the soul, if grace does not keep it under, 
and bring it into subjection as its slave. How often 
when the mind would pursue its favorite study, the 
wearied and overtasked body enfeebles it! How often, 
when the spirit would expatiate and soar in its con- 
templations of and in its communings with God, the 
inferior nature detains it by its weight, or occupies it 
with its wants! How often, when the soul thirsts for 


Divine knowledge, and the heart pants for holiness, 
22* 


958 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


its highest aspirations and its strongest efforts are dis- 
couraged and thwarted by the clinging infirmities of 
a corrupt and suffering humanity ! 

Not so will it be in the morning of the resurrection. 
“‘ Then shall this corruptible put on incorruption, and 
this mortal shall put on immortality.”” Mysterious 
and glorious change! ‘‘In a moment, in the twinkling 
of an eye, at the last trumpet,” the dead in Christ 
shall awake from their long sleep, and spring from 
their tombs into a blissful immortality. Oh, how 
altered! oh, how transformed! oh, how. changed! 
“‘Sown a natural body, it is raised a spzritual body.” 
“A spiritual body !’’ Who can imagine, who describe 
it? What anatomy can explain its mysteries, what 
pencil can paint its beauties? “A spiritual body!” 
All the remains, all the vestiges of corrupt matter 
passed away. ‘‘A spiritual body!” 
so sanctified, so etherealized, so invested with the high 
and glorious attributes of spirit, yet retaining the 
‘form and pressure’ of matter; that now, sympathiz- 
ing and blending with the soul in its high employ- 
ment of obeying the will and chanting the praises 
of God, it shall rise with it in its lofty soarings, and 
accompany and aid it in its deep researches in the 
hidden and sublime mysteries of eternity. ‘Our 
conversation is in heaven,’’ — oh that it were always 
there !— ‘from whence also we look for the Saviour, 
the Lord Jesus Christ: who will change our vile body, 
that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, 
according to the working whereby he is able even to 
subdue all things unto himself.” Then, oh then, shall 


So regenerated, 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 959 


we be perfectly like Christ. Like him in the spotless 
purity of the mind, like him in the perfect beauty of 
the body. Transporting thought ! 

There is yet another view of our subject peculiarly 
soothing. Have you lately committed to the dust 
some beloved object of your affection, now sleeping 
in Jesus? Are you wont to ‘go unto the grave to 
weep there ?’”’ Oh listen to the voice of Jesus, which 
proclaims, “I am the resurrection and the life: he 
that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall 
he live.” Let this declaration chasten your grief, 
and moderate your sorrow, and dry your tears. The 
Lord, in the faith of whose finished work his people 
fall asleep, is their resurrection and their life: and 
soon the heavens will part, the archangel’s trumpet will 
sound, and he will come again, that he may awake 
them out of sleep, and then, ‘thy brother shall arise 
again.’ ‘‘And I heard a voice saying unto me, Write, 
Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord.” Ah! 
blessed and holy indeed are they! for they shall have a 
‘“‘part in the first resurrection, and on them the second 
death shall have no power, but they shall be kings 
and priests unto God, and shall reign with him for 
ever.” ‘I am the resurrection and the life.’’ Pre- 
cious words! Then, death, where is thy sting? and 
grave, where is thy victory? Thou hast none, both 
are gone, for Jesus has abolished both. ‘I am the 
resurrection and the life.” Divine and glorious title, 
thou Captain of my salvation! Then, why since 
“through death thou hast destroyed him that had 
the power of death, that is, the devil,’ should I be 


260 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


in bondage through its fear? And why, since thou 
hast “‘ died, and risen, and revived,” and hast declared 
that he that believeth in thee, though ‘he die, yet 
shall he live,’ should I shrink from descending into 
the grave, narrow, and dark, and lonely though it 
be? Precious Son of God! thou art “the resurrec- 
tion and the life,” and because thou livest, I shall 
live also! 

But there is another resurrection! Unconverted 
reader, it is yours, Have you ever seriously thought 
of it? ‘They that have done evil, unto the resur- 
rection of damnation. Poor thoughtless, careless, 
prayerless, Christless soul! dying in your sins, ah! 
long ere thy body rises, thy soud will have been a prey 
to the ‘worm that dieth not,’ and to the ‘fire that is 
never quenched.’ It will have been years in torment 
ere the body becomes its companion in misery. And 
when the archangel’s trumpet shall exclaim, ‘‘ Awake 
ye dead, and come to judgment,” then will thy body 
‘‘yise to shame and everlasting contempt,” and be 
reunited to the soul, fearfully increasing the torment 
that shall endure for ever. Yes, the same body, now 
the servant of Satan, and the instrument of sin; now 
pampered by luxury and indulgence, the prey of 
every vile affection, that identical body shall rise 
again, with all its appetites, and lusts, and cravings 
immortalized. ‘It is sown a natural body,’ 7 rises a 
natural body. ‘It is sown in corruption,’ 7 r?ses in 
corruption. ‘It is sown in dishonour,’ dt rises in dis- 
honour. ‘The resurrection takes it up as death laid it 
down. Can you conceive a picture of future torment, 


IN HIS RESURRECTION. 261 


“surpassing this in its fearfulness and intensity ? With 
every sensual affection perpetuated, the strength of 
every lawless desire still remaining, unbridled appe- 
tites and passions yet existing, with no corresponding 
objects to meet their cravings, will not this constitute 
an clement of hell, an ingredient in your cup of 
trembling of an appalling character? Oh! the 
“resurrection of damnation!’ To rise but to sink! 
To awake but to “shame and everlasting contempt!’ 
To meet the angry God, the frowning Judge,—the God 
you have hated, and the Christ you have rejected! The 
resurrection of your body will be the resurrection of 
your sins. All then will come to light. very trans- 
gression will rise to memory and to judgment, and all 
your secret sins will be placed in the light of God’s 
countenance. Scoffing infidel! polluted sensualist! 
sordid miser! grovelling worldling! proud pharisee! 
deceived professor! thou art to stand before the judg- 
ment-seat of Christ. What will thy scepticism, what 
will thy carnal joys, what will thy money, what will 
thy fame, what will thine own works, and what will 
thy empty lamp do for thee then? Oh, how are you 
bartering your birthright of immortality, and selling 
your soul of priceless worth and deathless existence, 
and choosing death rather than life, and hell rather 
than heaven! Your present existence hath its limit, 
and will soon be over. For the remote and tremendous 
consequence you are unprepared. You have no Saviour 
to trust in, no righteousness to stand in, no refuge to 
hide in, no atonement to build on, no plea wherefore 
you should not be eternally condemned. Is not your 


262 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER, ETC. 


state awful? is not your position perilous? ‘* What 
wilt thou say when he shall punish thee ?”’ 

Oh! by all that is solemn in death, and awful in the 
resurrection, and terrific in judgment, I beseech you, I 
implore you, repent—this moment —REPENT! ‘God 
now commandeth all men everywhere to repent, because 
he hath appointed a day in which he will judge the 
world in righteousness.” Not a moment is to be lost 
— eternity is near at hand. Lay yourself low before 
God. Humble yourself in the dust at His feet. Con- 
fess your sin, acknowledge your iniquity. Flee to the 
Lord Jesus Christ, your only refuge from the wrath to 
come. Seek God’s forgiveness alone through him. 
Renounce all dependence on your own works of right- 
eousness, and implore the Holy Spirit of all grace and 
love, to invest you with the righteousness ‘‘which is 
through the faith of Christ, the righteousness which is 
of God by faith.” Then, living or dying, you will be 
the Lord’s. And when the morning of the ‘first 
resurrection’ dawns in glory upon the tomb, a voice 
soft as angels’ music, shall dissolve your long slumber 
—‘‘ Awake and sing, ye that dwell in dust: for thy 
dew 1s as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out 
the dead.” Then, planting your feet upon the crumb- 
ling tombstone, and the heaving earth, you shall spring 
into life and immortality, swelling as you rise the 
chorus of the noble anthem, which will be chanted by 
every lip, and which will float from every harp— 


“THANKS BE UNTO GOD FOR HIS UNSPEAKABLE 
Girt !” 


CHAPTER VIL. 


THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER IN HIS ASCENSION 
AND EXALTATION. 


“Received up into glory.” —1 Timothy iii. 16, 


—<—$_$—$—$< 


Ir is not surprising that the deeper we go into the 
consideration of the Redeemer’s glory, the greater it 
should appear. It is the glory of the incarnate Jehovah ; 
infinite therefore in its nature it must be, fathomless 
in its depth, and illimitable in its degree, —— leaving 
in the far distance the mightiest powers of man to 
reach it. Who that is not himself infinite, can under- 
stand infinity? ‘No man,” is the emphatic decla- 
ration of Christ, ‘‘knoweth the Son but the Father.” 
It is recorded of Epictetus, that, when his hearers said 
to him, “You have uttered many excellent things of 
God, but we cannot as yet understand what He is,” 
truly and nobly replied, ‘‘Were I able fully to set 
forth God, I should either be a god myself, or God 
himself would cease to be what He is.’”’ What a 
demonstrative testimony does the declaration of the 
Son of God just quoted, bear to his infinite greatness 
and glory! How fatal is this simple passage to the 
doctrine which denies the absolute Godhead of Christ ! 
Honestly and prayerfully considered, it must lead to 


the overwhelming conviction, that he who can only be 
(263) 


264 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


understood by God, must be God himself. “No 
man,” (oudeis, no one — man or angel,) “‘knoweth the 
Son but the Father.” The mightiest created intellect 
cannot grasp him, the loftiest imagination cannot con- 
ceive of him, the most eloquent tongue cannot describe 
him. ‘The principalities and the powers, overwhelmed 
with the greatness of the theme, and the vastness of 
the idea, sink down before the incarnate God, happy if 
permitted but to gaze upon his face, and blessed if but 
irradiated with his smile, or sheltered beneath the 
skirtings of his glory. And yet, infinitely great and 
glorious as he is, he graciously invites us to sit at his 
feet and learn from him. Precious privilege! May the 
Holy Spirit, now that we are about to retire from the 
scene of his dark humiliation, and to follow him to 
the height of his glorious exaltation, strengthen the 
wing of love, and anoint the eye of faith, that thus 
speeding our flight and clearing our vision, we may be 
enabled to approach in spirit very near the King, 
drinking in deep views of his beauty ! 

As in his sufferings, so in his exaltation, there was a 
solemn necessity wherefore he should be advanced to 
a state of supreme glory. In the one case, he could 
not have become the Redeemer but as he became the 
Sacrifice; in the other, he could not have applied his 
redemption, but as he assumed the sovereignty of a 
king. ‘For if, when we were enemies, we were 
reconciled to God by the death of His Son, much 
more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life.” 
Rom. v.10. The reasons which plead for the exaltation 
of Christ are many and powerful. The consideration 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 265 


of a few of the more commanding ones will serve to 
present, in some important points of view, the glory 
and preciousness of this great subject. And, in the 
first place,— 

The truth and glory of the Father were pledged to 
the exaltation of His Son from the scene, and as the 
reward, of his suffering and humiliation. And here 
it is delightful to trace the faithfulness of God to his 
promises. For all that the Father was to His Son, 
He is to them whom His Son represented. Jesus, in 
every step of his life, acted as a public person, as a 
representative. He lived, he laboured, he thought, he 
suffered, he died, he rose from the dead and was 
received up into glory, not in his individual capacity, 
but as the covenant head of his covenant people. So 
that all that the Father was to Jesus, He is now to 
the body of Jesus—the church. Christ revealed the 
Father to his people, and in return, he represented his 
people to the Father. ‘‘He that hath seen me, hath 
seen the Father.’ ‘No man knoweth the Father but 
the Son, and he to whom the Son shall reveal Him.” 
And on the other hand, “If any man sin, we have an 
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous 
One.” Thus gloriously does our adorable Immanuel 
stand between God and the believer—revealing the 
glory of the one, and hiding the deformity of the other. 
Oh, how should this truth heighten our views of his 
glory, and deepen our sense of his love! 

The promise of the Father stood pledged to the 
exaltation of His Son. It was a part and condition of 


the covenant of redemption, that if he obeyed the law 


266 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


and endured its penalty on behalf of His people, he 
should “see of the travail of his soul and be satisfied ;’’ 
that if he went down, he should return again; that if 
he sunk, he should rise again; that if he restored 
honour to the Divine government, reconciling the con- 
flicting attributes of God, in the way of mercy and 
grace to man, the throne, the crown, and the sceptre 
of mediatorial glory and sovereignty should be his 
reward. Thus speak the Divine promises. “ It pleased 
the Lord to bruise him; he hath put him to grief: 
when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he 
shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the 
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.” The 
seed he was to see, and the days that were to be pro- 
longed, were the result of his humiliation, and were to 
follow his exaltation to glory. ‘‘My servant shall be 
exalted, and extolled, and be very high,” Isa. lii. 18. 
Not less explicit and beautiful is that promise re- 
corded by the prophet Ezekiel, “Thus saith the Lord 
God, I will also take of the highest branch of the 
high cedar, and will set it; I will crop off from the 
top of its young twigs a tender one, and will plant it 
upon a high mountain and eminent: in the mountain 
of the height of Israel will I plant it: and it shall 
bring forth boughs and bear fruit, and be a goodly 
cedar.” ch. xvii. 22, 23. ‘To whom can this prediction 
properly refer, and to whom can this promise be fully 
accomplished, but in Jesus? He was the ‘“‘ Branou,” 
the ‘high Branch ;’ he was the ‘ Plant of renown,” 
the plant of the Father’s setting: in his humiliation 
he was the ‘young twig, the tender one;’ in his ex- 


IN IIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 267 


altation he was the ‘goodly cedar, planted upon a high 
mountain and eminent, spreading forth his boughs ;’ 
his unveiled and infinite perfections overshadowing 
his Israel, while supplying them with all manner of 
precious fruits. With this corresponds the happy 
experience of the church, “As the apple tree among 
the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the 
sons. Isat down under his shadow with great delight, 
and his fruit was sweet to my taste,” Sol. Song ii. 3. 
But the exaltation of Jesus by the Father, was as 
much the fruit of His love, as the fulfilment of His 
promise. The Father’s heart yearned over His Son 
with a love which, through all his toil, through all his 
humiliation, faltered not, cooled not, and knew ‘no 
variableness, nor shadow of turning.” Now, if He 
loved his Son in his abasement, he wanted also to 
love him in his exaltation. If He loved him in his 
humiliation, He wanted also to love him in his glory. 
His paternal heart yearned to embrace him once 
more, who, from eternity, had dwelt in his bosom in 
all the infinite strength of filial confidence and 
affection. ‘Thus were the perfections of God pledged 
to the exaltation of the Redeemer to glory. Justice, 
truth, goodness, love, all were concerned in effecting 
the accomplishment of this glorious event. = 

But the plea for his exaltation found its existence as 
much in the etreumstances in which Christ was placed 
as in the purpose and love of the Father. As the 
faithful Servant of the everlasting covenant, it was 
just, it was the reward of his finished work, that his 
deepest humiliation on earth should be succeeded by 


968 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


the highest glory in heaven. “For the joy that was 
set before him,’’—the joy of his exaltation, with its 
glorious fruits,—‘“‘ he endured the cross, despising the 
shame, and is set down at the right hand of the 
throne of God.” On this plea for the exaltation of 
our adorable Lord, we would lay great stress, as one 
deeply unfolding his glory in this stupendous event. 
How proper, how righteous does it appear, that the 
crown of his glory should follow the cross of his 
humiliation! Toilsome and faithful had been his life ; 
ignominious and painful had been his death. From 
both there had acerued to God, is now, and will yet 
be accruing, through the countless ages of eternity,— 
a revenue of glory, such as never had been His 
before. He had revealed the Father gloriously. 
Drawing aside the vail as no other hand could do, 
he caitsed such Divine glory to beam forth, as com- 
pelled every spotless spirit in heaven to cover himself 
with his wings, and fall prostrate in the profoundest 
humility and homage. 

The glorious perfections of God!—never had they 
appeared so glorious as now. ‘The mediatorial work - 
of Jesus had laid a deep foundation on which they 
were exhibited to angels and to men in their most 
illustrious character. Never before had wisdom ap- 
peared so truly glorious, nor justice so awfully severe, 
nor love so:intensely bright, nor truth so eternally 
stable. Had all the angels in heaven, and all the 
creatures of all worlds, become so many orbs of 
Divine light, and all been merged into one, so that 
one should embody and reflect the lustre of all, it 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 269 


would have been darkness itself compared with a 
solitary beam of God’s glory, majesty, and power, 
as revealed in the person and work of Immanucl. 
Now it was fit, it was congruous, that, after this 
faithful servitude, this boudless honour and praise 
brought to God, his Father should, in return, release 
him from all further obligation, lift him from his 
humiliation, and place him high in glory. Therefore 
it was that Jesus poured out the fervent breathings of 
his soul on the eve of his passion, —‘‘I have glorified 
thee on the earth: I have finished the work which 
thou gavest me to do: I have manifested thy name. 
And now, O Father, glorify thou me.” 

His work being finished, the great atonement 
made, and salvation eternally secured to all the 
covenant seed, zt was meet that the Son of God should 
return to glory. Heaven was his original and proper 
place. He was but a stranger and a sojourner here. 
His mission accomplished, earth, which had once 
attracted him to its bosom, attracted him no longer. 
As the field of his labours, and the scene of his 
humiliation, and the theatre of his conflict, he had 
willingly bent his steps towards it. His labours now 
finished, his humiliation now passed, his battle now 
fought, and his victory won, he as readily hastened 
from all below. What stronger ties, what more 
powerful allurements, had earth than heaven for 
Jesus? All to him had been toil and suffering, trial 
and sorrow. Wearisome had been his pilgrimage, 
laborious his life, humiliating its every scene, and 


painful its every incident. Creatures, the best and 
93 * 


270 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


the fondest, had disappointed him,—sources of created 
good the most promising, had failed him, and the 
hour of his deepest necessity and woe found him 
treading the wine-press alone, forsaken by man, 
deserted by God! An atmosphere of sin had en- 
veloped him on every side; forms of suffering and 
pollution each moment flitted before his eyes, and 
sounds of blasphemy and woe fell at each step upon 
his ear. At whatever point he turned, he saw his 
Father’s name dishonoured, his Spirit grieved, his 
own dignity outraged, his teaching despised, his 
Gospel rejected, and his authority trampled under 
foot, by men swearing allegiance to another and a 
rival sovereign. What greater, fonder, and holier 
attractions, then, had earth than heaven for Jesus? 
His resurrrction from the dead was his preparative 
for glory. Leaving the garments of mortality in the 
forsaken tomb, he wrapped around him the robe of 
immortality, and, poised upon the wing, awaited but 
the signal for his heavenly flight. All that now re- 
mained for him to accomplish was to authenticate the 
fact of his risen life, place his church in a position to 
receive the promised Spirit, breathe his parting bless- 
ing and then ascend to glory. Heaven was his home, 
—loved and longed for! How sweet to him were its 
recollections! how hallowed its associations, height- 
ened by their contrast with the scene from which he 
was now retiring! There, no curse; there, no sor- 
row; there, no suffering; there, no tears; there, no 
indignity awaited him. All was one expanse of 
elory, all one elysium of happiness! But far above 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 271 


all, rose in spiritual and surpassing grandeur, the 
seat, the altar, and the throne, which, as our Pro- 
phet, Priest,-and King, he sighed to occupy. A more 
perfect investiture of him in these offices, a more 
complete establishment of his mediatorial domi- 
nion, awaited him. All power in heaven and on 
earth was to be placed in his hands: all things were 
to be put in subjection under his feet: and all beings, 
from the loftiest angel in heaven to the lowest crea- 
ture on earth, were to acknowledge his government, 
-submit to his sovereignty, worship and ‘crown him 
Lord of all.” | 

One more plea for the exaltation of the Redeemer. 
We find its existence in the relation which the church 
sustained to this great event. The ascension of Jesus 
to glory involved the greatest blessing to his saints. 
Apart from his own glorification, the glory of his 
church was incomplete, so entirely, so identically 
were they one. We have already seen that the 
resurrection of Christ from the dead, was the Father’s 
public seal to the acceptance of his work; but the 
exaltation of Christ to glory was an evidence of the 
Father’s infinite delight in that work. Had our Lord 
continued on earth, his return from the grave, though 
settling the fact of the completeness of his atone- 
ment, could have afforded no clear evidence, and 
would have conveyed no adequate idea, of God’s full 
pleasure and delight in the person and work of his 
beloved Son. But in advancing a step farther,—in 
taking his Son out of the world, and placing him at 
His own right hand, far above principalities and 


272 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


powers, He demonstrated his ineffable delight in 
Jesus, and His perfect satisfaction with his great atone- 
ment. Now, it is no small mercy for the saints of 
God to receive and to be well established in this 
truth, namely, the Father’s perfect satisfaction with 
and His infinite pleasure in, His Son. For all that 
which He is to His Son, He is to the people accepted 
in His Son; so that this view of the glorification of 
Jesus becomes exceedingly valuable to all who are 
‘accepted in the Beloved.” So precious was Jesus 
to His heart, and so infinitely did his soul delight in 
him, He could not allow of his absence from glory a 
moment longer than was necessary for the accomplish- 
ment of His own purpose and the perfecting of His 
Son’s mission. ‘That done, he showed His Beloved 
the “path of life,” and raised him to His “ presence, 
where is fulness of joy,” and to “His right hand 
where there are pleasures for evermore.” 

The descent of the Holy Spirit upon the church in 
his most enlarged degree, and for the highest and 
most gracious ends, rendered the glorification of the 
Head necessary and expedient. Holding in his hands 
not only the keys of hades and of death, but of all 
the fulness of God, all the riches of the covenant, all 
the treasures of his Father, he could only dispense 
these blessings in his exalted state. As it was neces- 
sary in the case of Joseph—a personal type of our 
glorious Redeemer — that he should be exalted to the 
office of prime minister in Egypt, in order to possess 
dignity, authority, and power to dispense the riches of 
Pharaoh, so was it expedient that the great Antitype 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 273 


should assume a mediatorial exaltation, with the view 
of scattermg down mediatorial blessings upon his 
people. The delay of this event was the only barrier 
to the out-pouring of the Spirit upon the church. 
“The Holy Spirit was not yet given, because that 
Jesus was not yet glorified.” John vii. 89. His own 
words confirm this statement of the evangelist: ‘‘It 
is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not 
away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but if I 
depart, I will send him unto you.” John xvi. T. 
Now here, second to himself, was the gift of gifts — 
the donation of the Holy Spirit, the greatest God 
could give, the richest man could receive,—-suspended 
upon the single fact of the Redeemer’s ascension to 
glory. It would seem as if the baptism of the church 
by the Spirit was an event especially reserved to 
signalize the enthronement of the Son of God in 
his mediatorial kingdom. God would demonstrate 
how great was the glory of Jesus in heaven, how 
perfect was the reconciliation which he had effected 
between Himself and man, how spiritual was that 
kingdom which he was about to establish in the earth 
—the foundation of which his own hand had laid — 
and how full, and immense, and free, were the bless- 
ings ready to be bestowed upon all who, in poverty of 
spirit, and sincerity of heart, and fervency of soul, 
should seek them, by opening the windows of heaven, 
and pouring down the Holy Spirit in all his convert- 
ing, life-giving, sanctifying, and comforting grace. 
And oh, how must this Divine and Eternal Spirit, 
—occupying as he did a personal existence in the 


OTA THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


glorious Trinity, possessing equal glory, honour, and 
love with the Father and the Son, as equally engaged 
in securing the salvation of the chosen people, — how 
must he have rejoiced at the consummation of an 
event which permitted him to give full vent to the 
overflowing fountain of his heart’s grace and love over 
the church which he was about to renew, sanctify, and 
dwell in through eternity! “The love of the Spirit” 
pleaded eloquently for the exaltation of Jesus. 

To take possession of heaven in behalf of his people, 
and to perpetuate his office as their intercessory High 
Priest, it was necessary that he should, at the termina- 
tion of his sufferings, enter into his glory. ‘TI go,” 
says he, “‘to prepare a place for you.” ~ ‘Which 
hope,”’ says the apostle, ‘‘ we have as an anchor of the 
soul, both sure and stedfast, and which entereth into 
that within the veil; whither the forerunner is for us 
entered, even Jesus.”” Heb. vi. 19, 20. Thus is the 
kingdom of heaven secured to all believers. Thus is 
a mansion in our Father’s house made ready for every 
adopted son. Jesus has gone before to make ready 
for the glorification of his church. ‘I go to prepare 
a place for you.” Oh, sweet words! A place pre- 
pared—a mansion set apart for each individual be- 
liever! ‘In my Father’s house are many mansions.” 
A mansion in His heart, a mansion in His kingdom, 
a mansion in His house, for the weakest babe in 
Christ. The Forerunner is for us entered, even 
Jesus! How sure is heaven! How certain the 
eternal happiness of every pardoned and justified 
soul ! 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 275 


But Jesus took not merely a passive, but also an 
active possession of glory for his people. He is there, 
not only as the Forerunner, but also as the Intercessor. 
‘For Christ is not entered into the holy places made 
with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into 
heaven itself, Now to appear in the presence of God 
for us.” Heb. ix. 24. And with what did he enter? 
‘“‘ By his own blood he entered in once into the holy 
place, having obtained eternal redemption for us.” 
verse 12. ‘Wherefore he is able to save them to the 
uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever 
liveth to make intercession for them.’ These points 
will recur to our notice, in the further unfolding of 
the subject. 

Thus much for the necessity of the Redeemer’s 
exaltation to glory. It behoves now to consider the 
ascension itself, and the nature of that glory into 
which he entered. 

The circumstance of the Lord’s ascension and exalt- 
ation meets with frequent and marked allusion in the 
word of God. The Holy Spirit has attached to the 
fact the greatest weight. The writings of the Old 
Testament frequently and distinctly speak of it. Thus 
in Psalm xlvii. 5: “God is gone up with a shout: the 
Lord with the sound of a trumpet.’’ It is impossible 
to misunderstand the obvious allusion of these words. 
He came down as God, he went up as ‘God manifest 
in the flesh.”” The ascension was worthy of his deity. 
It was royal and triumphant. He went up as the 
“‘oreat King,” and as the mighty Conqueror, ‘lead- 
ing captivity captive.’ Attended by a celestial escort, 


276 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


and amidst the shouts and acclamations of all the 
heavenly hierarchy, he passed within the portals of 
glory. The demand was made, the challenge was 
given, the answer was returned: ‘“ Lift up your 
heads, O ye gates; and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting 
doors; and the King of glory shall come in.’’ Who 
is this King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, 
the Lord mighty in battle. Lift up your heads, O 
ye gates; even lift them up, ye everlasting doors; 
and the King of glory shall come in. Who is this 
King of glory? The Lord of hosts, he is the King 
of glory? Psal. xxiv. 7—10 Yes, our Immanuel, 
God with us, is “‘gone up with a shout; the Lord, 
JEHOVAH JuEsus, “with the sound of a trumpet.” 
And although no echo of the heavenly minstrelsy 
was heard on earth, and the cloud which received 
him veiled his receding form from the gaze of his 
disciples, hiding from the view the deepening glory 
which encircled his ascending flight, yet all heaven 
reverberated with the song, and grew resplendent 
with the majesty of his entrance within its gates. 

If possible, a still more direct reference to this 
glorious event is found in Psal. Ixvii. 18. “Thou 
hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity cap- 
tive: thou hast received gifts for men! yea, for the 
rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among 
them.” All question as to the reference of this pro- 
phecy to the Lord Jesus, is set at rest by the apostle, 
who, in his Hpistle to the Ephesians, iv. 8—10, 
quotes and applies it to him. How perfectly does 
each particular harmonize with the ascension of the 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 277 


Redeemer! ‘He ascended up on high,” “far above 


? 


all heavens,’’ where no mere creature has ever en- 
tered, or can enter, — even within the hallowed pavi- 
lion of the Divine Majesty itself. ‘‘He led captivity 
captive,’ chaining to his triumphal car the princi- 
palities and the powers,—Satan conquered, hell 
defeated, sin condemned, death vanquished, and the, 
grave dismantled. ‘‘He received gifts for men,” and 
to men he gave them; ‘to some, apostles; and 
some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, 
pastors and teachers ;”’ “‘yea, for the rebellious also,”’ 
for those who, with no plea of worthiness. springing 
from themselves, received the ‘gifts’ as the gratui- 
tous expressions of God’s love, the free and sovereign 
bestowments of His grace. “That the Lord God 
might dwell among them,” even in the midst of His 
saints, formed into distinct Gospel churches, “builded 
together for a habitation of God through the Spirit.” 
The scene and the circumstances of his ascension 
were of thrilling interest, and deeply spiritual in their 
-meaning. The period, which it is important dis- 
tinctly to specify, was just forty days after his resur- 
rection; thus affording ample time to establish, by 
the most irrefragable proof and tangible evidence, this 
master-fact of his history. Not only did he take this 
occasion to answer all the reasonings, and resolve all 
the doubts of his still incredulous disciples, but he 
crowded into this brief space of time, instructions the 
most needed, precious, and momentous to the well- 
being of his church. Drawing closer around him, as 


if by the new and more powerful attraction of his 
24 


278 -THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


risen body, his devoted apostles — the future builders 
of his spiritual temple—he proceeds to renew their 
Divine commission to preach the Gospel, widening it 
to the exigencies of the world that Gospel was in- 
tended to bless. Opening their understandings more 
perfectly to understand the Scriptures, he cleared and 
enlarged their view of his Divine nature, the spiritual 
character of his kingdom, and the offices, ordinances, 
and discipline which were to be observed in each 
Gospel-constituted section of his church. Thus, even 
after his atoning work was finished, and the great seal 
of heaven was affixed to it, our adorable Lord was 
still engaged in his Father’s business, still intent 
upon promoting His glory, and the eternal welfare of 
His people. Oh, what love was the love of our 
Immanuel! It was no selfish, indolent, inoperative 
principle; but a love of the purest benevolence, 
deepest tenderness, and ceaseless action. It was a 
love ever thinking, ever planning, ever acting, ever 
seeing, ever speaking, and ever yearning, in behalf of 
the church which he carried each moment in the 
very centre of his heart. 

And now let us approach the spot whence the 
Redeemer ascended. It was from the Mount Olivet, 
near to Bethany; so that the two accounts of Christ’s 
ascension recorded by Luke, the one in his gospel, 
xxiv. 50, and the other in his Acts of the Apostles, 
i. 12, perfectly agree. How full of great, and holy, 
and solemn, yea, awful associations would be that 
spot to Jesus! It was no strange, unfamiliar, un- 
trodden ground to him. At the foot of that mount, 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 279 


from whose summit he entered into glory, he had 
been wont to resort with his disciples for holy medi- 
tation and prayer. There, too, his sufferings con- 
menced. There he endured the fearful conflict, when 
his soul was ‘exceedingly sorrowful, even unto death.’ 
It was there, prostrate in the dust, the cup of trem- 
bling in his hand, the sweat of blood falling to the 
ground, he thrice poured out his soul in that touching 
prayer —“‘O my Father! if it be possible, let this 
cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as 
thou wilt.”’ Yes, it was from the Mount Olivet, the 
scene of his deep mental agony, and near to Bethany, 
(which signifies the house of affliction,) our blessed 
Lord took his flight to his Father and his God, to 
enjoy his presence for ever, and to drink deeply and 
eternally of the pleasures which are at His right hand. 

And so must it be with all his members. As if to 
heighten, by contrast with the sufferings of earth, the 
glories of heaven; as if to give deeper melody to 
their song, and a richer sweetness to their joy, and a 
higher character to their ecstasy, and a profounder 
sense of the grace that brought them there, it often 
pleases the Lord that affliction, in various forms, 
should throw its deepest gloom around the path of the 
children of God, when just on the eve of translation 
to glory. And when, in anticipation ~-of a smooth 
descent, and a cloudless sunset, they have said, with 
Job, “I shall die in my nest,” God, their Father, has 
seemed to have reserved the bitter dregs of affliction’s 
cup for the dying lips; and, like Jacob, they have 
been constrained to anticipate, that ‘with sorrow their 


280 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


grey hairs will be brought down to the grave.’ Thus, 
“through much tribulation, they enter the kingdom;”’ 
out of the house of affliction, and, as it were, from the 
Mount Olivet, they ascend to the Mount Zion, borne 
up as in a chariot of fire. Be it so; “He doth all 
things well.”’ Compared with the sufferings of Jesus, 
it is, in its heaviest form, but a “light affliction;” 
and, measured with an eternity of bliss, in its longest 
duration, is “‘but for a@ moment.” 

How touching and instructive was the parting in- 
terview! ‘‘And he led them out as far as to Bethany, 
and he lifted up his hands, and blessed them. And 
it came to pass, whzle he blessed them, he was parted 
from them, and carried up into heaven.’’ Oh, how 
worthy of himself was this his final blessing! How 
harmonious with every previous act of his life, was 
this its closing one! Blessing to the last, and while 
with outstretched hands, that blessing was yet breath- 
ing from his lips, ‘‘received up into glory.”’ Oh how 
full of grace and love is our adorable Immanuel! 
What a heart of overflowing tenderness and blessing 
is his! Knowing this, knowing it from observation 
and from experience, supported by the innumerable 
proofs which crowd every page of the New Testament, 
is it not a marvel that we should seek our blessing 
from any other source than Jesus, or that we should 
breathe our sighs, or pour our sorrows, or repose our 
aching head, on any other bosom than his? Ah! our 
acquaintance with him—our best, our dearest, our 
most loving Friend—is so limited, we walk with him 
so coldly, we follow him so distantly, we believe in 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 281 


him so feebly, the greatest wonder is, that in the 
midst of all, his long-suffering, forbearance, tender 
and unchangeable love towards us should still be so 
unwearied and so great. 

But who can describe the parting interview and the 
last blessing? Clustering around him a lonely, timid 
band, saddened as they must have been by the 
thought that they were about to separate for ever 
on earth from him whom they loved—as many of 
them afterwards proved — better than life itself; to 
whom they had been wont to look for guidance, on 
whom they had leaned for strength, and to the 
asylum of whose bosom they had fled in danger and 
in sorrow, they needed his blessing—they needed that 
which none but Jesus could give to them. They 
were ‘oppressed,’ and he only could ‘undertake’ for 
them. ‘They were in sorrow, and he only could com- 
fort them. They were tried and perplexed, and he 
only could sustain and counsel them. And what, 
may we suppose, would that blessing contain, which 
he now breathed over them ?— The richer anointing 
of the Spirit to fit them for their work —a larger 
measure of grace to shield them in temptation, and 
to uphold them in trial—increased light in the under- 
standing respecting the spiritual nature of his king- 
dom, and the meaning of the holy. Scriptures of 
truth ; and, what to them at that moment would be 
of unspeakable preciousness, —a deeper discovery of 
his own pardoning love, a fuller assurance of their 
personal acceptance in himself, and a richer bestow- 


ment of the “peace of God which surpasseth all 
24 * 


982, THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


understanding.” ‘Thus blessing, he was “parted from 
them, and carried up into heaven,’ to intercede for 
them there; and thus blessed, “they worshipped him, 
and returned to Jerusalem with great joy,” to spread 
the fragrance, and to manifest the power of his name 
through all the world. 

Let us now ascend in spirit with Jesus, and con- 
template the glory of his exaltation. ‘That his ascen- 
sion into heaven was his introduction to a condition 
of pre-eminent dignity, power, and glory, the Scrip- 
tures of truth clearly affirm. Two quotations will be 
sufficient in proof of this. Thus the apostle speaks 
of the working of God’s “‘mighty power, which he 
wrought in Christ, when He raised him from the 
dead, and set him at His own right hand in the 
heavenly places, far above all principality, and power, 
and might, and dominion, and every name that is 
named, not only in this world, but also in that which 
is to come; and hath put all things under his feet, 
and gave him to be the head over all things to the 
church, which is his body, the fulness of him that 
filleth all in all.”’ Hph. i. 19—238. Again, in another 
place, passing from a most affecting description of the 
humiliation of Jesus, the same apostle proceeds to 
draw aside, as it were, the veil of his exalted and 
glorified state. — ‘‘ Wherefore God also hath highly 
exalted him, and given him a name which is above 
every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee 
should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, 
and things under the earth; and that every tongue 
should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 283 


of God the Father.” Phil. ii. 9—11. How forcible 
and expressive are these declarations of the high 
position in heaven to which the Son of God was 
advanced ! 

In the first place, he entered fully and manifestly 
into the glory of his Deity. We may not for a mo- 
ment suppose that his exaltation added aught to his 
essential Godhead. This could necessarily undergo 
no change. His humiliation could not take from, 
nor his exaltation add to, it. We can suppose the 
sun pouring light upon a stagnant pool, and yet 
remain as essentially unsullied as though its beams 
had but played upon the surface of the most pure 
and polished lake. Now what was the revelation of 
Jesus, but the pouring down of the beams of the Sun 
of Righteousness upon a sin-accursed and sorrow- 
stricken world? Yet the contact of our Lord with 
this vast mass of pollution and iniquity, was no detri- 
ment to his essential and personal holiness and dignity. 
His beams of light and glory extracted and absorbed 
no poison from this stagnant pool, but rather—O 
sovereign virtue of his grace !— exerted so Divine, so 
cleansing, and so purifying an influence, that myriads 
once sunk beneath its pollutions, have emerged cleansed, 
sanctified, and saved. 

Now the exaltation of Jesus was the full, clear, and 
manifest revealing of his Deity. He entered into the 
glory of his Godhead, so long suspended and eclipsed. 
He was reinstated ‘in his original dignity, and rein- 
vested with his former glory. O how magnificently 
glorious did the beams of that Sun now shine, which 


284 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


but a little before had set in darkness and in blood! 
Yes, our Immanuel entered fully into his Divine 
glory when he entered into heaven! There it had 
been from everlasting; there it existed during the 
period of his humiliation; and there, as a robe of 
dazzling light, it awaited to invest him the moment 
he should pass within the vail of the heavenly sanc- 
tuary, and enter the portal of the celestial and eternal 
palace. ‘Then came the coronation! Then the en- 
thronement! O what hallowed imagination can form 
an adequate conception of that scene? What tongue 
describe the splendour of that moment? Attended 
by a celestial retinue, each angel’s harp strung and 
tuned for a higher strain of melody than that which 
broke in the stillness of night upon the plains of 
Bethlehem, he passed within the golden portal, file on 
file of adoring spirits lining the path that conducted 
him to his throne. Then rose the loud acclaim of 
welcome, as ten thousand times ten thousand struck 
their golden harps, louder than seven thunders rolling 
and reverberating along the dome of heaven. Falling 
prostrate upon their faces, all the celestial host, che- 
rubim and seraphim, and ‘spirits of just men made 
perfect,’ would worship at his feet, while every hand 
would be extended to place the crown upon his head, 
and every tongue assist to swell the coronation an- 
them,—‘‘ Worthy is the Lamb that was slain to 
recelve power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, 
and honour, and glory and blessing.” O let us 
catch their thrilling note, and echo back their lofty 
song :— . 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 285 


‘* All hail the power of Jesus’ name! 
Let angels prostrate fall, 
Bring forth the royal diadem, 
And crown him Lord of all. 


“Let every kindred, every tribe, 
On this terrestrial ball, 
To him all majesty ascribe, 
And crown him Lord of all! 


“Oh that with yonder sacred throng, 
We at his feet may fall: 
We'll join the everlasting song, 
And crown him Lord of all!” 


This exaltation would also include the full induction 
of the Redeemer in his mediatorial glory. This had 
but in a measure developed itself on earth. Our 
blessed Lord lived in great obscurity as to his per- 
sonal glory when below. As the Prophet, Priest, and 
King, how partially was he recognized, how small 
a portion of his dignity, majesty, and power, was 
visible! It was perfectly congruous with the whole 
economy of his kingdom, that it should be so. That 
kingdom was purely spiritual; its nature, its laws, its 
subjects, its progress, and its ultimate and certain 
triumph, purely and perfectly from heaven, spiritual 
and Divine. By the early demonstration of this 
truth, our Lord sought to rebuke the lofty ambition, 
and earthly hopes, and visionary expectations of the 
proud and haughty nation, who, pluming themselves 
upon their national election of God, their miraculous 
history, their early conquests and former greatness, 
and sighing for release from the Roman yoke, were 
dreaming of the pomp and glory, and conquest of a 


286 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


temporal Messiah. Now it was proper, that even the 
spiritual glory of our Lord, seen, as it would be, 
through material objects, and liable thus to be secu- 
larized, should be but partially and cautiously de- 
veloped. Too full a discovery of his glory, and too 
great a demonstration of his power, might have but 
strengthened the expectation and fostered the views 
which he sought so earnestly and yet so gently, to cor- 
rect. Kven his church, in consequence of the limited 
bestowment of the Spirit, was not yet prepared for a 
full disclosure of his personal and official greatness. 
Therefore he said to his disciples, ‘‘I have yet many 
things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear them now.” 

His entrance into heaven was the signal for the full 
development of his mediatorial power and glory. 
This was the promise of his Father, and this the re- 
ward of his death. ‘I have set my King upon my 
holy hill of Zion.” ‘Unto the Son he saith, Thy 
throne, O God, is for ever and ever.” Heb. i. 8. 
‘‘T appoint unto you,” says Christ, ‘a kingdom, as 
my Father hath appointed unto me!’’ ‘When thou 
shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see 
his seed. He shall see of the travail of his soul, and 
shall be satisfied.” Isa. li. 10,11. Thus his ex- 
altation at the right hand of the Father was his full 
induction into the mediatorial: kingdom. Now was 
he exalted “heir of all things’—now were “all 
things put under his feet,”—--now “ all power in 
‘heaven and on earth was given to him;” and from 
that moment that he touched the crown and grasped 
the sceptre, and the government was placed upon his 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 287 


shoulder, his truth was to advance, and his kingdom 
widen, with ever-growing power, until, supplanting 
all error, and subduing all kingdoms, he was to reign 
‘King of kings and Lord of lords.’ 

But we have yet to consider an essential, and, to 
the church of God, a most blessed part of the 
Redeemer’s exaltation—the glory into which his human 
nature entered on his ascension into heaven. The 
Divine and the human nature once united, were 
united for ever. Now there was an honouring, 
but not a glorifying of our humanity, when the 
Son of God assumed it. Its union with the Deity 
—its fulness of the Spirit—its spotless holiness 
—its deep knowledge of, and intimate fellowship 
with, God—conspired to invest it with a dignity and 
honour such as no creature had ever before, or ever 
shall again attain. But not until its ascension into 
heaven was it glorified. Oh, through what humilia- 
tion did it pass, what indignity did it endure, when 
below! What sinless weaknesses, imperfections, and 
frailties, clung to it! It hungered, it thirsted, it 
laboured, it sorrowed, it wept, it suffered, it bled, it 
died! The poor man’s scorn, the rich man’s con- 
tumely, what indignities did it endure—it was 
scourged, it was bruised, it was mocked, it was smit- 
ten, it was spitten upon, it was nailed to the tree, it 
was pierced, it was slain! Oh, what eye but that of 
faith, can, through all this degradation, behold the 
person of the incarnate God? 

But now “we see Jesus, who was made a little 
lower than the angels for the suffering of death, 


288 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


crowned with glory and honour.’ Even after his 
resurrection, it must be acknowledged that a change, 
approximating to that state of glory, had already 
passed over him. So spiritualized was he, that his 
disciples, when they saw him, knew him not. What, 
then, must be the glory that encircles him now that 
he has passed within his kingdom, and is exalted at - 
the right hand of God, “far above all heavens, that 
he might fill all things!’ John, during his banish- 
ment in Patmos, was favoured with a view of his 
glorified humanity, and thus describes its dazzling 
appearance: “I saw seven golden candlesticks; and 
in the midst of the seven candlesticks one like unto 
the Son of man, clothed with a garment down to the 
foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle. 
His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white 
as snow; and his eyes were as a flame of fire, and his 
feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a fur- 
nace; and his voice as the sound of many waters. 
And he had in his right hand seven stars; and out 
of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword; and his 
countenance was as the sun shineth in his strength. 
And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. And 
he laid his right hand upon me, saying unto me, Fear 

not, I am the first and the last: I am he that liveth, | 
and was dead; and, behold, I am alive for evermore, 
Amen; and have the keys of hades and of death.” 
Rev. i. 12—18. Sublime description of the ‘ glory 
and honour’ which now crown the exalted humanity 
of our adorable Redeemer! Did the awe-stricken 
and prostrate evangelist entertain any doubt of the 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 289 


glorious Person who thus appeared to him ?—that 
doubt must all have vanished the moment he felt the 
‘right hand’ of Jesus laid upon him, and heard his 
own familiar voice saying unto him, ‘Fear not.” 
Oh, what a tangible evidence, and what a near view, 
did he now have of the exalted and glorified humanity 
of his Lord! At that instant, he saw him to be 
Divine, and he felé him to be human! 

Yes! the very tabernacle of flesh in which he 
dwelt, the identical robe of humanity that he wore, 
he carried up with him into heaven, and sat down 
with it upon the throne. There it is, highly exalted ! 
There it is, above angels, and higher than saints, in 
close affinity and eternal union with Godhead. There 
it is, bathing itself in the ‘fulness of joy,’ and drink- 
ing deeply of the satisfying ‘pleasures’ which are at 
God’s ‘right hand for evermore.’ Oh, what must be 
the holy delight which the human soul of Jesus now 
experiences! Sin presses upon it no more: sorrow 
beclouds it no more: the hidings of God’s face dis- 
tress it no more: infirmity clings to it no more: it 
exults in the beams of God’s unveiled glory; and it 
swims in the ocean of his ineffable love. If the 
vision upon the Mount Tabor was so glorious,—if the 
splendours then encircling that form which yet had 
not passed through the scenes of the crucifixion, the 
resurrection, and the ascension, were so overpower- 
ing—if the attractions of that spot were so great, and 
the ecstasy of that moment was so ravishing,—what 
oh, what must be the glory, the joy, the bliss of 

25 


od 


290 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


heaven, where we shall no longer see him “‘through a 
glass darkly,’ but ‘‘as he is,” and “face to face!” 

The blessings which flow to the church of God 
through the channel of the Redeemer’s exaltation, are 
varied andimmense. <A brief reference to some of them 
will conduct us to the close of this chapter. 

We place in the foremost the greatest of all, and 
the parent of all spiritual blessings thus accruing to 
the believer — the baptism of the church by the Holy 
Spirit. Our adorable Lord, as he approached the 
termination of his sojourn on earth, went more fully 
into the work of the Spirit, than at any former 
period of his ministry, laying especial stress on this 
truth, that his own personal residence on earth in per- 
manent conjunction with the presence of the Spirit, 
was a union not to be expected by the church. Why 
such an arrangememt might not have been made, we 
proceed not to inquire. Sufficient should be the 
answer to this, as to all questions involving the sove- 
reignty of the Divine will, ‘“‘Even so, Father, for so 
it seemed good in thy sight.’’ But the promise to 
which he directed the eye of his disciples, and with 
which he sought to soothe their sorrow in the pros- 
pect of his personal withdrawment from the church, 
was the descent of the Holy Spirit in an enlarged 
degree, and in continuous outpouring, to the end of 
the Christian dispensation. This event, dependent 
upon, and immediately to follow, that of his inaugu- 
ration in his heavenly kingdom, is thus alluded to: — 
“The Holy Spirit,” says the evangelist John, “was 
not yet given, because that Jesus was not yet glori- 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 291 


fied.” “Nevertheless,” says Christ, “I tell you the 
truth: it is expedient for you that I go away; for if 
I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto 
you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you.” In 
a former part of this work, we have already alluded 
to the instantaneous fulfilment of this gracious promise 
in the glorification of Christ, tracing some of its re- 
markable results, as seen on the day of Pentecost. 
That day, with its hallowed scenes, cannot be too 
frequently brought before the mind. Were there a 
more simple looking to Christ upon the throne, and 
a stronger faith in the promise of the outpouring of 
the Spirit, and in the faithfulness of the Promiser to 
make it good, that blessed day would find its proto- 
type in many a similar season enjoyed by the church 
of God to the end of time. The effects of the descent 
of the Spirit on that day upon the apostles themselves 
are worthy of our especial notice. What a change 
passed over those holy men of God, thus baptized 
with the promised Spirit! A new flood of Divine 
light broke in upon their minds. All that Jesus had 
taught them while yet upon earth, recurred to their 
memory with all the freshness and glory of a new re- 
velation. The doctrines which he had propounded 
concerning himself, his work, and his kingdom, 
floated before their mental eye like a newly-discovered 
world full of light and beauty. A newness and a 
freshness invested the most familiar truths. They saw 
with new eyes; they heard with new ears; they un- 
derstood as with re-created minds: and the men who, 
whilst he was with them, teaching them in the most 


992 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


sinsple and illustrative manner, failed fully to compre- 
hend even the elementary doctrines and the most 
obvious truths of the Gospel, now saw as with the 
strength of a prophet’s vision, and now glowed as 
with the ardour of a seraph’s love. Upon the as- 
sembled multitudes who thronged the temple, how 
marvellous, too, the effects! Three thousand as in 
one moment were convinced of sin, and led to plunge 
in the ‘Fountain opened to the house of David and 
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and unclean- 
ness.” And how does the apostle explain the glorious 
wonder ?— “This Jesus,” says he, “hath God raised 
up, whereof we all are witnesses. Therefore, being by 
the right hand of God exalted, and having received of 
the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he hath 
shed forth this which ye now see and hear.” Acts ii. 
32, 33. 

This, and this only, is the blessing which the 
church of God now so greatly needs—even the baptism 
of the Holy Spirit. She needs to be confirmed in the 
fact that Jesus is alive and upon the throne, invested 
with all power, and filled with all blessing. The 
simple belief of this would engage her heart to desire 
the bestowment of the Spirit; and the Spirit largely 
poured down would more clearly demonstrate to her 
the transcendent truth in which all her prospects of 
glory and of happiness are involved, that the Head of 
the church is triumphant. Oh, let her but place her 
hand of faith simply, solely, firmly, on the glorious 
announcement — Jesus is at the right hand of the 
Father, with all grace and love in his heart, with all 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 293 


authority in his hand, with all power at his disposal, 
with all blessings in his gift; waiting to open the 
windows of heaven, and pour down upon her such a 
blessing as there shall not be room enough to receive 
it — prepared so deeply to baptize her with the Holy 
Spirit as shall cause her converts greatly to increase, 
and her enterprises of Christian benevolence mightily 
to prosper; as shall heal her divisions, build up her 
broken walls, and conduct her to certain and tri- 
umphant victory over all her enemies; —let her, I 
say, but plant her faith upon the covenant and essen- 
tial union of these two grand truths — THE EXALTED 
REDEEMER, AND THE DESCENDING SPpiIrir—and a day 
far brighter than that of the Pentecost shall dawn—a 
day on which, not three thousand only, but a nation 
shall turn to the Lord, and all flesh shall see his 
glory ! | 
Oh never did the church of God more need the 
baptism. of the Spirit than now she needs it! The 
days in which we live are fearful. The signs that are 
around us are significant and portentous. The fore- 
casting shadows of approaching events of the greatest 
magnitude are darkening upon our path. We cannot 
be blind or indifferent to the fact, that the elements 
of evil are combining and consolidating their force for 
a vigorous and determined onset. The ‘enemy’ has 
already come in ‘like a flood.’ Popery is increasing 
—infidelity is triumphing — formalism is abounding— 
God-dishonouring, Christ-denying, Bible-rejecting, 
and soul-destroying doctrines in rank and rampant 
growth, are springing forth on every side. ‘The 
25 * 


294. THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


demon of heresy has mapped the world, resolved to 
possess it for himself. His agents, numerous and 
disguised, subtle and persevering, are in the field, re- 
sisting every opposition, employing every instrument- 
ality, and rushing with a promptitude that is mar- 
vellous, and a zeal that is appalling, into every 
new-made opening. What now should be the 
posture, and wherein lies the true strength of Christ’s 
church? How is she to rise to the true dignity and 
responsibility of her position? Shall she look to her 
marshalled hosts? Shall she repose upon her stores 
of wealth, her former conquests, her arsenals of 
learning, and her titled warriors? Alas! trusting in 
these alone, her ruin is inevitable. Where, then, 
shall she turn, and on whom shall she fix her eye? 
Upwards, where sits her Lord upon his throne,— 
exalted, triumphant, and glorified. Tell her that 
Jesus is at the right hand of God; assure her that 
he loves her still—that he wears her name on his 
heart, and has engraven her upon the palms of his 
hands—that he is ready to pour down upon her the 
Holy Spirit, in all the plenitude of his reviving 
teaching, and sanctifying grace,—and you have un- 
locked to her the secret of her salvation. Yes, 
nothing but the baptism of the Holy Spirit can bring 
up the church to her right position, and prepare her 
for the approaching conflict. And this, thzs is the 
blessing the great Head of the church is exalted and 
waits to give. - 

And why have we it not? What hinders the 
blessing? We live under the dispensation of the 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 295 


Spirit—we hold in our hands the promise of the 
Spirit—we have seen in the history of God’s Ameri- 
can Israel—in the dispensations of His grace in some 
favoured parts of Scotland—in the almost miraculous 
progress of Christianity in the islands of the South 
Sea, as well as the extraordinary triumphs of the 
Gospel and the planting of churches in Burmah 
and among the Karens, that there are seasons in 
which the exalted Head of the church pours down his 
Spirit in an especial and remarkable way, converting 
sinners, reviving saints, and more eminently qualify- 
ing ministers for their great work of preaching the 
Gospel. Why, then, should we disbelieve the doc- 
trine, and limit the Holy One of Israel? We have 
not because we ask not; we ask not because we be- 
lieve not. Oh for the outpouring of the Spirit upon 
our pastors, upon our churches, upon our congrega- 
tions, upon our seats of learning, upon our rising 
ministry! Oh for the powerful descent of the Holy 
Ghost, lifting up an effectual standard against the 
enemy now coming in like a flood! 

What the church of God needs as a church, we 
equally need as individual Christians—the deeper 
baptism of the Holy Spirit. Reader, why is it that 
you are not more settled in the truth— your feet. 
more firm upon the Rock? Why are you not more 
rejoicing in Jesus Christ, the pardoning blood more 
sensibly applied to the conscience, the seal of adop- 
tion more deeply impressed upon your heart, ‘ Abba, 
Father,’ more frequently and with stronger, sweeter 
accent, on your lips? Why are you, perhaps, so 


296 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


yielding in temptation, so irresolute in purpose, so 
feeble in action, so vacillating in pursuit, so faint in 
the day of adversity? Why is the glory of Jesus so 
dimly seen, his preciousness so little felt, his love so 
imperfectly experienced? Why is there so little 
close, secret transaction between God and your soul 
—so little searching of heart, confession of sin, deal- 
ing with the atoning blood? Why does the con- 
science so much lack tenderness, and the heart 
brokenness, and the spirit contrition? And why is 
the throne of grace so seldom resorted to, and prayer 
itself felt to be so much a duty, and so little a privi- 
lege; and when engaged in, so faintly characterized 
with the humble brokenness of a penitent sinner, the 
filial boldness of an adopted child, the rich anointing 
of a royal priest? Ah! let the small measure in 
which you have received the Holy Spirit’s influence 
supply the answer. ‘‘Have you received the Holy 
Ghost since ye believed ?’’—have you received him as 
the Witness, as the Sealer, as the Teacher, as the 
Indweller, as the Comforter, as the Spirit of adop- 
tion? But, rather, have you not forgotten that your 
Lord was alive, and upon the throne, exalted to give 
you the Holy Spirit, and that more readily than a 
father is to give good gifts to his child? That he is 
prepared now to throw open the windows of heaven 
and pour down upon you such a blessing as shall con- 
firm your faith, resolve your doubts, annihilate your 
fears, arm you for the fight, strengthen you for the 
trial, give you an unclouded view of your acceptance 
in the Beloved, and assure you that your ‘name is 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 297 


written among the living in Jerusalem?” Then, as 
you value the light of God’s countenance, as you 
desire to grow in the knowledge of Christ, as you 
long to be more ‘‘steadfast, unmoveable, always 
abounding in the work of the Lord,” O seek to enjoy, 
in a larger degree, the presence, the love, the anoint- 
ing of the Holy Spirit! Christ has gone up on high 
to give to you this invaluable blessing ; and says for 
your encouragement, ‘Hitherto have ye asked 
nothing in my name: ask, and ye shall receive, that 
your joy may be full.” 

Another blessing, springing from the exaltation of 
Jesus, is the view it gives us of his ever-living and 
unchanging Priesthood. 'The work of our Lord as 
Priest was twofold, atonement and intercession. The 
one he accomplished upon the cross, the other he now 
transacts upon the throne. ‘‘When he had by him- 
self purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of 
the Majesty on high.” Heb.i. 8. The high priest, 
under the law, after he had slain the sacrifice, took 
the blood, and, passing within the vail, sprinkled it 
on the mercy seat, so making intercession for the 
people. ‘The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the 
way into the holiest of all was not yet made manifest, 
while as the first tabernacle was yet standing.” ‘‘ But 
Christ being come a high priest of good things to 
come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not 
made with hands, that is to say, not of this building ; 
nor by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own 
blood, he entered in once into the holy place, having 
obtained eternal redemption for us.”’ And what is 


298 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


he now doing? What is his present and high em- 
ployment ?— Presenting his own blood each moment 
before the mercy-seat on behalf of his redeemed 
people! ‘He ever liveth to make intercession for 
us.” © forget not this, dear saint of God! “If any 
man sin, we have an advoeate with the Father, Jesus 
Christ the righteous.” This is spoken for the com- 
fort of the mourners in Zion—for those who, knowing 
the plague of their own hearts, and deploring its 
constant tendency to outbreak, are humbled in the 
dust with deep godly sorrow. Look up! does sin 
plead loud against you? the blood of Jesus pleads 
louder for you. Do your backslidings, and rebellions, 
and iniquities committed against so much light and 
love, call for vengeance? the blood of Jesus ‘“speak- 
eth better things.” Does Satan stand at your right 
hand to accuse you? Your Advocate stands at God’s 
right hand to plead for you. All hail! ye mourning 
souls! Ye that smite on the breast, ye broken- 
hearted, ye contrite ones, “‘who is he that con- 
demneth? it is Christ that died, yea, rather, that is 
risen again; who is even at the right hand of God, 
who also maketh intercession for us.” Jesus is the 
glorious and the successful Advocate. He has never 
lost a cause entrusted to his advocacy, and never will. 
He pleads powerfully, he pleads eloquently, he pleads 
prevalently, because he pleads in behalf of a people 
unspeakably dear to his heart, for whom he ‘loved 
not his own life unto the death,” and presses his suit, 
on the ground of his own most precious blood and 
accepted person, and with his Father and their Father, 
with his God and their God. 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 299 


“Jesus, the King of glory, reigns 
On Sion’s heavenly hill, 
Looks like a Lamb that has been slain, 
And wears his priesthood still. 


‘“‘ He ever lives to intercede 
Before his Father’s face ; 
Give him, my soul, thy cause to plead, 
Nor doubt the Father’s grace.” 


In the Redeemer’s exaltation we have the strongest 
pledge of his continued sympathy, support, and deliver- 
ance in allour trials and temptations. Itis delightful 
to the believing mind to reflect, that in passing from 
the scene of his humiliation to that of his glory, and 
in the spiritual change which his body must have un- 
dergone, thus to fit it for the region which flesh and 
blood cannot inherit, his humanity lost none of the 
tender sympathies of our nature which so closely 
clung to him when upon earth. The same compas- 
sionate nature—the same loving heart—the same 
deep sympathy with all our sorrows, and the same 
outstretched hand to relieve, them, distinguish the 
glorified state of the precious Son of God! Think 
you, that though dwelling in yonder region of light, 
and holiness, and joy, and glory, he has forgotten the 
days of his humiliation—the ‘strong cry and the 
tears’ —— the ‘wormwood and the gall?’ Nay, he has 
them still in remembrance. And can he forget the 
church in the wilderness—his tried and suffering 
people? Never! Hark how he prays for them — 
‘‘Now I am no more in the world, but these are in 


300 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep 
through thine own name those whom thou hast given 
me.” “TJ pray not that thou shouldest take them out 
of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them from 
the evil.” ‘As thou hast sent me into the world, 
even so have I also sent them into the world.” John 
xvii. 11, 15, 18. Yes, he forgets not that his church 
is yet in the world— a polluting, persecuting, harass- 
ing world, demanding all the infinite resources of his 
sympathy, grace, and might. Oh how sweet and 
holy is the thought, that having passed within the 
vail though he has, there is still a chain of the closest 
sympathy suspended from the glorified Redeemer on 
the throne, touching the most lowly and tried of the 
redeemed on earth. How can Jesus forget that he 
still bears our nature,.a part of our very being? The 
‘head so full of bruises,’ the body so scarred, remind- 
ing him of the suffering state of the church below, 
and pleading with a power which Omnipotence itself 
cannot resist, for the succour, comfort, and deliver- 
ance of every tried and tempted member of that 
body. ‘Seeing, then, that we have a great High 
Priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son 
of God, let us hold fast our profession. For we have 
not a high priest which cannot be touched with the 
feeling of our infirmities.”” Heb. iv. 14, 15. 

Thus, through the channel of our glorified Re- 
deemer, what immense and varied blessings may the 
believer expect and receive! ‘‘Exalted a Prince and 
a Saviour, to give repentance unto Israel, and for- 
giveness of sins,” will he not with these costly 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 3801 


mercies, freely give us all things? What an open 

door is here for a humble supplicant, bowed with 
sorrow and pressed with want! Think you that he 

can close his heart, or withdraw his hand, or falsify 

his promise? Ah no! our Jesus, in his exaltation, is 
more mindful of his people in their low state, than 
the chief butler, in his advancement, was of Joseph, 
imprisoned in the dungeon. He thinks of us still 

—he speaks a good word for us to his Father—bends 
upon us each moment a glance of the most ineffable 
love, with whose expression infinite compassion 
sweetly blends. Nor is there a moment in which he 
is not exerting himself on our behalf, hedging up the 

way of one believer, and opening the way of another ; 

strengthening the tried faith of some saints, and 
soothing the deep sorrows of others. Oh, see what 
costly blessings are bound up in the exaltation of 

Jesus! All sanctification to make us holy—all love 
to make us happy—all wisdom to guide—all grace to 

uphold—and all glory to crown. ‘‘ Let us therefore 
come boldly unto the throne of his grace, that we 

may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of 

need.” 

The exaltation of Jesus is the pledge of the full glo- 
rification of every believer. The certain glorification 
with Jesus of every believer is a truth as much in- 
volving the honour of God, as it does the present 
comfort and future happiness of the church. The 
opposite sentiment — the possibility of a child of God 
falling short of eternal glory, (a doctrine, let it be 


observed, at total variance with the entire Scriptures 
26 


302 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


of truth,) by unhinging the soul from God, and 
throwing it back completely upon itself, must neces- 
sarily lead to low and dishonouring views of the Divine 
character; while it begets in the mind a spirit of 
bondage, and a sense of the most painful apprehension, 
both equally inimical to a fruitful Christianity. But 
the most solemn, I may say awful, light in which the 
doctrine of the believer’s final insecurity presents 
itself is, that it casts a thick veil over the glory of 
Immanuel. It touches every perfection of his being. 
Oh, could the dear saints of God, thus tossed in the 
troubled sea of doubt, and thus agitated with a 
‘fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indigna- 
tion,” but be brought to see how the Jesus whom 
they love is wounded, dishonoured, and shorn of his 
glory by this unscriptural tenet, would they not 
unhesitatingly renounce it as leading to a result so 
fearful? Can that, I earnestly ask, be a doctrine of 
Divine revelation, which tends in the slightest degree 
to shade the glory of Christ? If one of those given 
to him by his Father,—one whose sins he carried, 
whose curse he bore, whose soul he has renewed by 
the grace of his Spirit, were permitted finally and. 
eternally to perish, where would be his glory? where 
the glory of his truth? where the glory of his power ? 
where the glory of his love? where the glory of his 
work? Gone! Every perfection of his Divine being 
would be impeached, and every beam of his Divine 
glory would be tarnished. 

But all shall be brought safely to heaven. Hark 
how distinctly and authoritatively he pleads for this 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 3803 


their crowning blessing, when on the eve of his 
mysterious passion, and about to spring from his 
cross to his throne. — ‘‘ Father, I will that they also 
whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; 
that they may behold my glory.” John xvi. 26. 
Sublime prayer! Comprehensive and tender petition ! 
How did the Head long to have with him, where he 
was, each member of his body! Having had fellow- 
ship with him in his humiliation, it was his desire 
that they should have fellowship with him in his glory. 
And this he asks, not as a gift, but claims as a right. 
In virtue of his covenant engagement with the Father, 
his full satisfaction to Divine justice, his perfect obe- 
dience to the Divine law, his finished redemption of 
his people, he reverently bows at the mercy-seat, and 
pours out his full soul, and unburdens his loving 
heart, in the sublimest petition that ever ascended 
from mortal lip; ‘‘Father, I witu that they also 
whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am.” 

But mark the reason why,—“ that they may behold 
my glory.’ Consummation of glory! Overflowing 
cup of bliss! Height of perfect holiness! Was it 
_ the parting charge of Joseph to his brethren—“ Ye 
shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of 
all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring 
down my father hither ?”’— Our Joseph, with love in- 
finitely more intense, desires that all his brethren may 
be brought to heaven, that they may behold his glory 
there,—the glory of his unveiled deity,—the glory 
of his glorified humanity,—and the glory to which, 
as Mediator, his Father had advanced him. Who 


804 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


can fully tell of all the Redeemer’s glory in heaven ? 
Or, were it fully revealed, what power to grasp, what 
faculties to comprehend, what eye to behold, and 
what tongue to describe so lofty a theme, and so 
sublime a spectacle as this have we? But we shail 
behold it! We, too, shall be glorified. The mind 
shall be adjusted to the mightiness of the theme, and 
the eye shall be strengthened for the dazzling mag- 
nificence of the spectacle. very physical, and men- 
tal, and moral faculty perfectly developed and sancti- 
_ fied, we shall be a glorified church, placed in the 
presence and contemplating through eternity the 
glory of our glorified Head. We shall behold the 
Redeemer’s glory. ‘Shall J see the King in his 
beauty? What! my eye behold his glory?’ Yes! 
if thou dost see beauty in Jesus now, if thine eye 
beholds glory in Immanuel, feeble and dim though 
the view may be, so surely shall you be with 
him where he is, and wander over the ceaseless 
unfoldings of his unclouded glory, and that through 
all eternity. 

But the ungodly, the impencient, and the wnbeliev- 
ing! Ah! they, too, shall see his glory. But it 
will be the glory of his yustece, in burning wrath, in 
quenchless flames. Unconverted reader! Thou dost 
see no glory in Jesus, no beauty that you should 
desire him. You see an imaginary glory in the 
world, a fancied beauty in self; and this blinds your 
eye to the real glory and true beauty that are in 
Christ. Ob, in what a dream do you live! What 
madness do you cherish! What phantoms do you 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 805 


pursue! What a vain show in which you live! You 
can see beauty in your estate, and loveliness in your 
family, and attraction in the world, and glory in 
yourself, and. yet sce no beauty, no loveliness, no 
attraction, no glory in Jesus! Oh, what a dark veil 
is over your mind, and what thick scales are upon 
your eyes! And thus darkened and blinded, your 
feet are sthmbling over the mountains of death. 
Soon, the beauty that now delights, and the glory 
that now attracts you, will have passed away. Fickle 
and fleeting is it ! The ploughshare of ruin will raze 
its foundation; the flood of desolation will sweep 
it into nothingness. A fleeting ship,—a floating 
vapour,—a passing cloud,—a broken cistern,—a fail- 
ing spring,—a withering flower,—these are its just 
emblems. Not more unstable the sand of the desert, 
—nor more uncertain the wind of heaven, nor more 
helpless. before the storm, the chaff of the threshing- 
floor, than the glory with which you have linked your 
eternal destiny. Death has marked you for its own, 
and the Judge standeth at the door. What will rank, 
—and beauty, —and estate, —and friends, — and 
money, —and this poor world, avail you now? See! 
how they vanish away, —all like a gorgeous day-dream, 
their glory departing like the setting sun at even, and 
you are encircled by the dark spirits, and the gloomy 
scenes, and the appalling solemnities, and the dread 
realities of Erernity! Erernity! Eternity! 

And now you find yourself without God, and with- 
out Christ, and without hope. You have pampered 


the body, but have neglected the soul. You have 
26 * 


306 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


unheeded warnings, and despised providences, and 
stifled convictions, and neglected sermons, and have 
desecrated Sabbaths, and have blasphemed God, and 
have hated the saints, and have despised and rejected 
Jesus. God, in the plenitude of His long-suffering 
and patience, has ‘called, and you have refused: He 
has stretched out His hand, you have not regarded, 
but have set at nought all His counsel, and would 
none of His reproof: now, He laughs at your ca- 
lamity, and mocks at your fear; your fear which has 
come as a desolation, and your destruction as a 
whirlwind; now that distress and anguish are upon 
you.” | 

But yet there is hope. The bow of covenant 
mercy is round about the throne. The cross still 
stands! The fountain is still open! The ark has 
not left the shore! The city of refuge is accessible! 
In a word, Jesus died upon the cross to save the 
vilest sinners. And now he lives upon the throne, 
‘‘exalted a Prince and a Saviour, to gzve repentance 
and forgiveness of sins.’’ Then, haste to him, haste! 
From a sinful, polluting, and doomed world, on 
which the fire of God is so soon to descend, ‘‘ escape 
for thy life; look not behind thee, nor stay thou in 
all the plain, lest thou be consumed.” Beseech the 
Holy Spirit to discover to you your pollution, and 
Christ’s blood; your sinfulness, and his atonement; 
your deformity, and his righteousness; your poverty 
and emptiness, and his sufficiency and grace. And 
let this be your prayer — urged with agonizing and 
ceascless wrestling, until in the personal and happy 


w 


IN HIS ASCENSION AND EXALTATION. 807 


‘experience of the blessing, the prayer is answered, — 
‘‘ Lord, show me thy glory!” For, oh, be it known 
unto you, that if you see not the Redeemer’s glory by 
faith on earth, you will never see it in its unveiled 
effulgence by sight in heaven. But Balaam’s mourn- 
ful prophecy and fearful doom will find its fulfilment 
in you: “TI shall see Him, but not now; I shall behold 
him, but not nigh.” Far in the dim distance, cur- 
tained within the beams of his own majesty, the 
Redeemer will be seen upon the throne of his glory, 
surrounded by his church,—the white-robed and 
palm-bearing saints, now fully redeemed from all 
sorrow and sin, beholding the glory and entering into 
the joy of their Lord. A great and impassable gulf 
separates you from their companionship; and while 
you are torn from their view,—the gloom and the 
darkness of hell gathering and deepening around you 
as you recede — exclaiming, “Lost! lost! eternally 
lost !”’ they will be striking their harps, and waving 
their palms, and casting down their crowns at Jesus’ 
feet, uttering their ascription in strains of overpower- 
ing sweetness, gratitude, and love— 


“THANKS BE UNTO GOD FOR HIS UNSPEAKABLE 
Girt !” 


CHAPTER VIII. 


THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER IN HIS PEOPLE. 


“T am glorified in them.” — John xvii. 10. 


UPBoRNE on the pinion of faith, we have been soaring 
to the third heaven, contemplating for awhile the glory 
of our Immanuel within the vail. Sweet and ravishing | 
sight! Soon, oh! so soon to be seen without a glass; 
and seen but to be transformed into the same glory! 
The further consideration of our subject, recalls us 
again to earth, to behold yet another manifestation of 
the glory of the Redeemer —even Ais glory in his 
saints. The unfolding of this truth, will be found to 
confirm and illustrate another equally important one; 
namely, the perfect oneness of Christ and his church, 
and the consequent reciprocity of interest and affection 
which exists: thus showing, that while Christ 
represents the church above, the church represents 
Christ below; while she is glorified wth him in heaven, 
he is glorified zn her on earth. Holy, blessed, and 
indissoluble unity ! 

The manifested glory of Christ in his church is 
clearly and emphatically stated in the sublime prayer 
of our dear Lord, to which we have already had 
occasion more than once to allude. Addressing his 


(808) 


THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER, ETC. 809 


Father, he claims with Him —what no mere creature 
could do—a conjunction of interest in the church, 
based upon an essential unity of nature. “All mine 
are thine, and thine are mine, and I am glorified in 
them.’ What angel in heaven could adopt this lan- 
guage, what creature on earth could present this 
claim — “All thine are mine!” It would be an act 
of the most daring presumption; it would be the very 
inspissation of blasphemy: but when our Lord asserts 
it — asserts it, too, in a solemn prayer, addressed on 
the eve of his death to his Father—what does it 
prove, but that a unity of property in the church 
involves a unity of essence in being? There could be 
no perfect oneness of the Father and the Son in any 
single object, but as it sprang from an oneness of 
nature. We think this demonstratively true. Two 
things equal to a given thing, must be equal to each 
other. The axiom will apply with equal force to the 
truth before us. Convincing evidence of his deity! 
O reject it not! He that liveth and dieth in the dis- 
belief of the absolute Godhead of Jesus is lost for 
ever. I assume not the office of his judge: I pro- 
nounce not the sentence of his condemnation. He 
who shall judge him in the last day has already fore- 
doomed him — “If ye believe not that I AM he, ye 
shall die in your sins.” 

The mutual interest, then, which Christ thus claims 
with his Father, refers, in this instance, specifically 
to the church of God. And it is delightful here 
to trace the perfect equality of love towards the 
church as of perfect identity of interest in the church. 


y 


810 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER © 


We are sometimes tempted to doubt the perfect 
sameness, as to degree, of the Father’s love with the 
Son’s love; that, because Jesus died, and intercedes, 
the mind thus wont to familiarize itself with him 
more especially, associating him with all its comfort- 
ing, soothing, hallowing views and enjoyments, we 
are liable to be beguiled into the belief that his love 
must transcend in its strength and intensity the love 
of the Father. But not so. The Father’s love is of 
perfect equality in degree, as it is in nature, with the 
Son’s love; and this may with equal truth be af- 
firmed of the “love of the Spirit.”” ‘He that hath 
seen me,’ says Jesus, “hath seen the Father.” 
Then he that hath seen the melting, overpowering 
expressions of the Redeemer’s love,—he that has 
seen him pouring out his deep compassion over the 
miseries of a suffering world; he that has seen his 
affectionate gentleness towards his disciples; he that 
has seen him weep at the grave of Lazarus; he that 
has followed-him to the garden of Gethsemane, to 
the judgment-hall of Pilate, and from thence to the 
cross of Calvary, has seen in every step which he 
trod, and in every act which he performed, a type of 
the deep, deep love which the Father bears towards 
his people. He that hath thus seen the Son’s love, 
hath seen the Father’s love. Oh, sweet to think, the 
love that travailed,— the love that toiled, — the love 
that wept, —the love that bled, —the love that died, 
is the same love, in its nature and intensity, which is 
deep-welled in the heart of the TrrunE Gop, and is 
pledged to secure the everlasting salvation of the 


IN HIS PEOPLE. 811 


church. ‘All mine are thine, and thine are mine, 
AND I AM @LORIFIED IN THEM.” ) 

We are now to show in what particulars the Re- 
deemer is glorified in his church. — 

He is glorified in being the covenant Head of all 
blessing to his people. How distinctly has the Holy 
Spirit declared this precious truth, — ‘“‘ Blessed be the 
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath 
blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly 
places (things) in Christ.”’ Eph.1i.8. Here is our 
true Joseph with all the treasures which a Father's 
love can bestow, or which the covenant of grace pro- 
vides, placed in his hands and at his disposal. It has 
‘pleased the Father’ to constitute him the Head of 
the church, and that in him, as such, ‘all fulness 
should dwell.’ Here, too, is our true spiritual El- 
akim, of whom it is sweetly prophesied, “And they 
shall hang upon him all the glory of his Father’s 
house, the offspring and the issue, all vessels of small 
quantity, from the vessels of cups even to all the ves- 
sels of flagons.”’ Isa. xxi. 24. Who sustains, as ‘a 
nail fastened in a sure place,’ all the glory of the 
church, but Jesus? In Christ the church is chosen: 
Eph. i. 4. In Christ it is preserved: Jude 1. In 
Christ it Uves: Colos. iii. 4. In Christ it is pardoned: 
Eph. i. 7. In Christ it is Justified: Rom. iii. 24. In 
Christ it is sanctified: 1 Cor. 1. 80. In Christ it will 
be glorified: Rom. vui. 17. Thus, does all the glory 
of the spiritual house hang on Christ, — he is its foun- 
dation, he is its corner-stone, in him, ‘‘fitly framed 
together, it groweth up a holy temple in the Lord,” 


7 


$12 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


and he will be the top-stone, which shall be brought 
forth on the day of its completion, amid the shoutings 
of ‘Grace, grace unto it!” | 
On him, too, hang all the ‘vessels’ of the house, 
the ‘vessels of cups and the vessels of flagons ;’ the 
small and the great, the young and the old, the feeble 
and the strong, all the saints hang on Jesus, and 
Jesus supports and supplies all. See, how the ‘ves- 
sels of cups, the vessels of small quantity,’ hang upon 
him, and how he supplies them. ‘And, behold, 
there came a leper, and worshipped him, saying, 
Lord, if thou welt, thou canst make me clean. And 
Jesus put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I 
will; be thou clean. And immediately his leprosy 
was cleansed.” Matt. viii. 2, 3. ‘‘And one of the 
multitude answered and said, Master, I have brought 
unto thee my son, who hath a dumb spirit.... and 
ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire, and into the 
waters, to destroy him: but if thou canst do any- 
thing, have compassion on us, and help us. Jesus 
rebuked the foul spirit, saying unto him, Thou dumb 
and deaf spirit, I charge thee come out of him, and 
enter no more into him.” Mark ix. 17, &. “And, 
behold, a woman, who was diseased with an issue of 
blood twelve years, came behind him, and touched 
the hem of his garment: for she said within herself, 
If I may but touch his garment I shall be whole. 
But Jesus turned him about; and when he saw her, 
he said, Daughter, be of good comfort; thy faith 
hath made thee whole. And the woman was made 
whole from that hour.”’ Matt. ix. 20—22. “And he 


IN HIS PEOPLE. 313 


said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when thou 
comest into thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him, 
Verily I say unto thee, To-day shalt thou be with me 
in Paradise.’’ Luke xxiii. 42, 43. 

“‘And, behold, a woman of Canaan came out of 
the same coasts, and cried unto him, saying, Have 
merey on me, O Lord, thou Son of David; my 
daughter is grievously vexed with a devil. But he 
answered her not a word..... Then came she and 
worshipped him, saying, Lord, help me. But he 
answered and said, It is not meet to take the chil- 
dren’s bread, and to cast 1t to dogs. And she said, 
Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which 
fall from their masters’ table. Then Jesus answered 
and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith: be it 
unto thee even as thou wilt.” Matt. xv. 22, &e. 
Behold, how these ‘vessels of small quantity’ hang 
on Jesus; and behold, how he sustains and fills them. 
They are but as ‘vessels of cups’ — their knowledge is 
defective, their grace is limited, their experience but 
shallow, their faith but small, and they themselves 
but little, —oh! how little, who can tell? —in their 
own eyes; yet, coming thus to Jesus’ grace, exclaim- 
ine; 

‘Other refuge have I none, 
Hangs my helpless soul on thee,” 


he receives them, he welcomes them, he bears them 
up, he supplies them, he fills them; he rejoices in 
their feeble grace, he despises not their little strength, 
he crowns their weak faith, he grants them the ut- 


27 


914 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


most desires of their hearts. Oh, what a Jesus is our 
Jesus! Were ever such gentleness, tenderness, and 
skill manifested towards the ‘“‘ bruised reed and the 
smoking flax ?” 

Dear reader, art thou a ‘vessel of small quantity ?’ 
It may be that, through the infirmities that en- 
compass thee, the trials that oppress thee, the tempt- 
ations that assail thee, the clouds that surround thee, 
thou canst receive Christ’s fulness but in a limited 
degree; truth is understood but partially, there being 
doctrines, perhaps, hard to be understood, and pre- 
cepts still harder to be obeyed. Light beams in upon 
the mind but faintly, the Scripture statement of the 
heart’s deep subtlety and desperate wickedness is but 
slowly, cautiously, doubtingly received; the daily 
cross imposed by Christian discipleship, sometimes 
taken up, as often laid down; the rough way wound- 
ing the feet, the strait way causing them to stumble. 
Christ’s grand atonement, his one, perfect obedience, 
his great and finished work, the sprinkling of his 
blood upon the conscience, the completeness of a be- 
lieving soul in his righteousness, and the consequent 
“peace and joy in the Holy Ghost,” but little known. 
These, it may be, are some of the features that 
mark thy case. Yet, feeling thine own vileness, and 
Christ’s sufficiency and preciousness, and constrained 
to hang on him solely and exclusively, as all thy sal- 
vation and all thy desire; though thou canst receive 
but a ‘small quantity’ of knowledge, of grace, and of 
love, thou art yet a ‘vessel of gold’ in his house, and 
Jesus bears thee on his heart, sets thee as a seal upon 


IN HIS PEOPLE. 315 


his arm, and presents thee each moment before God 
complete in himself. 

But there are also in this house “vessels of fla- 
gons,’’— the larger vessels,—saints of a deep grace, of 
gigantic faith, of profound knowledge. Hear one of 
them exclaim, “1 am crucified with Christ: never- 
theless, I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in the: 
and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by 
the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave 
himself for me.” Oh how abundantly did this be- 
loved apostle drink of “the river of God! How 
deeply did he sink into the ocean of Christ’s fulness! 
How high did he soar into the beatific presence of 
God, till, sweeping the heavens with his expanded 
pinions, all the treasures that sparkle there seemed 
gathered into his soul. Yet, a large vessel though it 
was, in himself he was poor, vile, and empty ; count- 
ing himself as the ‘chief of sinners,’ esteeming 
himself ‘less than the least of all saints,’ and 
ascribing all that he was as a renewed man to ‘the 
grace of God.’ In this his poverty, vileness, and 
emptiness, he hung with the small vessel, solely, 
entirely on Christ. The thief saved at the last mo- 
ment, and Paul, the great apostle of the Gentiles, 
side by side hung on Jesus. ‘‘ Of his fulness have all 
we received, and grace for grace.” Both were par- 
doned with the same blood, both were justified by the 
same righteousness, both were filled from the same 
source, and both are now in glory, chanting the same 
song, and together casting their crowns before the 
throne. Thus is Jesus made the ‘Head over all 


316 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


things to his church; and his church becomes in all 
its members, be they small or great, ‘the fulness of 
him that filleth all in all.” Thus is Christ glorified 
in them. And oh, what infinite mind can compute 
the revenue of glory thus accruing to the Redeemer 
through his saints ? 

In the conversion of his people —their translation 
from nature to grace, the Redeemer is glorified. 
This is the first step to a manifest glorifying of Christ 
in his called saints. Conversion is the commence- 
ment of an endless revenue of glory to Christ. To 
behold a poor sinner living a life of practical enmity 
to God, hatred to Jesus, rebellion against the Divine 
government, and wilful and determined hostility to 
the one glorious plan of salvation; perhaps a blas- 
phemer, a persecutor, and injurious; now changed, 
now conquered, now sitting at the feet of Jesus, 
‘clothed and in his right mind,’ oh, is there no glory 
thus brought to the grace of Christ Jesus? To see 
him translated out of darkness into God’s marvellous 
light; emancipated from the power of sin and Satan, 
and made the Lord’s free man; the rebellious will 
conquered, the hard heart subdued, the proud spirit 
humbled, the hatred turned into love, and the long 
roving mind now finding its centre of rest and foun- 
tain of happiness in the reconciled God, oh! is there 
no crown of glory placed on the head of Jesus in all 
this? Say, ye angelic spirits, bending over the 
mercy-seat in deep contemplation of its awful mys- 
terles of incarnate grace and dying love,— whose eyes 
glisten, and whose bosoms expand with new effulgence 


IN HIS PEOPLE. Slt 


and joy over one sinner that repenteth, do ye see no 
glory deepening around the Son of God, as each 
vessel of mercy is called in, emptied of self, and filled 
with Jesus? Yet not to angels, but to saints them- 
selves, we appeal. Hear the testimony of one— 
‘“‘ Afterwards I came into the regions of Syria and 
Cilicia; and was unknown by face unto the churches 
of Judea which were in Christ: but they had heard 
only, that he who persecuted us in times past, now 
preacheth the faith which once he destroyed. And 
they glorified God in me. Gal. i. 21—24. Oh, how 
are the power, the wisdom, the grace, the love of the 
Redeemer glorified, and God through him, by every 
new accession thus made to the number of the re- 
deemed! Aim to be instrumental in bringing one 
soul to receive the Lord Jesus as all its salvation, and 
you bring more glory to his name than were a 
thousand worlds like this to start into being at your 
fiat. ‘They that are wise shall shine as the bright- 
ness of the firmament; and they that turn many to 
righteousness as the stars for ever and ever.” 

But how is he glorified in God’s acceptance of his 
people through him! Who can entertain a doubt of 
this, that has any experimental knowledge of the 
great work of the Lord Jesus? . Look at this for one 
moment. God’s justification of the believing sinner 
through the righteousness of His Son, is His seal to 
the perfection, and efficacy, and worth of Christ’s 
obedience and death. What glory, suppose you, 
would encircle the form of Gabriel, were it possible 
for Jehovah to accept a poor sinner in his righteous- 


318 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 

ness! How high would this act advance him in 
dignity, and honour, and praise above all celestial 
intelligences! But oh! we stand, beloved, in a 
better and a diviner righteousness than that of angel 
or archangel: we stand in the righteousness of the in- 
carnate God! and that God, the holy Lord God 
should accept a poor sinner in the righteousness of 
His Son, places that Son in the ascendant of all 
creatures ‘dwelling in light,’ the full effulgence of 
which ‘“‘no man hath seen, nor can see.’’ This truth: 
unfolded to his soul by the Holy Spirit, constrained 
an eminent saint of God to exclaim, ‘‘ Had I all the 
faith of the patriarchs, all the zeal of the prophets, all 
the good works of the apostles, all the holy suffering 
of the martyrs, and all the glowing devotion of the 
seraphs; I would disclaim the whole, in point of 
dependence, and count all but dross and dung when 
compared with the infinitely precious death and the 
infinitely meritorious righteousness of Jesus Christ 
my Lord.” But one yet more eminent for his deep 
experience of this truth, has thus recorded his testi- 
mony: “‘What things were gain to me, those I 
counted loss for Christ. Yea, doubtless, and I count 
all things but loss for the excellency of the knowledge 
of Christ Jesus my Lord: for whom I have suffered 
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, 
that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not 
having mine own righteousness which is of the law, 


but that which is through the faith of Christ, the — 


righteousness which is of God by faith.’”’ Who can 
compute the glory brought to Jesus by God’s full 


IN HIS PEOPLE. 819 


justification of the poor believing sinner through the 
righteousness of His beloved Son? 

He is glorified in the progressive holiness of his 
people. “The kingdom of God is within you,” says 
Christ. The increase of this kingdom is just the 
measure and extent of the believer’s advance in sanc- 
tification. This is that mternal righteousness, the 
work of God the Holy Spirit, which consists in the 
subjugation of the mind, the will, the affections, the 
‘desires, yea, the whole soul, to the government and 
supremacy of Jesus, “bringing into captivity,” says 
the apostle, ‘every thought to the obedience of 
Christ.”” Oh, ye who are “ striving against sin,”’ long- 
ing to be “conformed to the image of God’s Son,” 
panting to be more ‘pure in heart,” “ hungering and 
thirsting for righteousness,” think that in every step 
which you take in the path of holiness, in every cor- 
ruption subdued, in every easy-besetting sin laid aside, 
in every holy desire begotten, Christ is glorified in 
you! But you perhaps reply, ‘the more I strive for 
the mastery, the more I seem to be conquered. The 
more strongly I oppose my sins, the stronger my sins 
seem to be.’’ But what does this prove? it proves that 
‘“‘ God is working in you both to will and to do of his 
good pleasure,” — that the kingdom of God is invading 
the kingdom of Satan, —that the Spirit dwelling in the 
heart is warring with the flesh. It is truly remarked 
by Owen, that “‘if a believer lets his sins alone, his 
‘sins will let him alone.” But let him search them 
as with candles, let him bring them to the light, 
oppose, mortify, and crucify them, they will to the 


e 


320 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


last struggle for the victory. And this inward 
warfare, so graphically and touchingly described in 
the seventh chapter of the epistle to the Romans, 
undeniably marks the inhabitation of God the Holy 
Spirit in the soul. 

But to see one advancing in holiness, thirsting for 
God, the heart fixed in its solemn purpose of entire 
surrender; cultivating higher views, and aiming for a 
loftier standard; to behold him, perhaps, carving 
his way to the throne through mighty opposition, 
‘without, fightings; within, fears;’’ striving for the 
mastery of some easy-besetting sin, sometimes foiling, 
and sometimes foiled, sometimes with the shout of 
victory on the lip, and sometimes with painful con- 
sciousness of defeat bowing the heart; yet still 
onward —the needle of the soul with slow and tremu- 
lous, but true and certain movement, still pointing to 
its glorious attraction, God;—faith that can never 
fail, and hope that can never die, and love that can 
never be quenched; hanging amidst their warfare and 
in all their weakness upon the ‘nail fastened in a 
sure place.’’ — How is Christ, our sanctification, glori- 
fied in such a saint! 

O to be like Jesus! meek, and lowly, and gentle, 
and kind, and forgiving ; without guile, without deceit, 
without malice, without revenge, without one temper, 
or thought, or feeling, or look, that is unlike him! 
Beloved, mistake not the nature and the evidence 
of growth in sanctification. In all your self-denial 
in this great work, be cautious of grace-denial. You 
will need much holy wisdom here, lest you overlook 


IN HIS PEOPLE. 821 


the work of the Spirit within you. You have thought, 
it may be, of the glory that Christ receives from 
brilliant genius, and profound talent, and splendid 
gifts, and glowing zeal, and costly sacrifices, and 
even extensive usefulness. But have you never 
thought of the glory, the far greater, richer glory, 
that flows to him from the contrite spirit, the broken 
heart, the lowly mind, the humble walk; from the 
tear of godly repentance that falls when seen by no 
human eye, and the sigh of godly sorrow that is 
breathed when heard by no human ear; and the sin- 
abhorrence, and self-loathing, and deep sense of vile- 
ness, and poverty, and infirmity that takes thee to 
Jesus with the prayer, — ‘Lord, here I am; I have 
brought to thee my rebellious will, my wandering 
heart, my worldly affections, my peculiar infirmity, 
my easily-besetting and constantly overpowering sin. 
Receive me graciously, put forth the mighty power of 
thy grace in my soul, and subdue all, and rule all, and 
subjugate all to thyself! Will it not be for thy glory, 
the glory of thy great name, if this strong corruption 
were subdued by thy grace, if this powerful sin were 
nailed to thy cross, if this temper so sensitive, and 
this heart so impure, and these affections so truant, 
and this mind so dark, and these desires so earthly, 
and these pursuits so carnal, and these aims so selfish, 
were all entirely renewed by thy Spirit, sanctified by 
thy grace, and made each to reflect thine image? Yea, 
Lord, it would be for thy glory, through time and 
through eternity.” 

Especially is the Lord Jesus glorified in the life of 


- 


327, THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


faith which his saints live upon him. The experience 
of every believer is, in a limited degree, the experience 
of the great apostle of the Gentiles, the tip of whose 
soaring wing, we, who so much skim the earth’s 
surface, can scarcely touch, —‘‘ The life which I now 
live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of 
God.” ‘Like precious faith’ with his, dwells in the 
hearts of all-the regenerate. Along this royal high- 
way it is ordained by God, that all His people should 
travel. It is the way their Lord travelled before 
them; it is the way they are to follow after him. The 
first step they take out of the path of sense, is into 
the path of faith. And what a mighty grace do they 
find it, as they journey on! Do they live? i ts by 
faith. Heb. x. 88. Do they stand? 7 is by faith. 
Rom. xi. 20. Do they walk? zt cs by faith. 2 Cor. 
v. 7. Do they fight? i¢zs by faith. 1 Tim. vi. 12. 
Do they overcome? zt 2s by faith. 1 John v. 4. Do 
they see what is invisible? dt is by faith. Heb. xi. 27. 
Do they receive what is incredible? zt zs by faith. 
Rom. iv. 20. Do they achieve what is impossible ? 
at ts by faith. Mark ix. 23. Glorious achievements 
of faith ! 

And, oh, how eminently is Jesus thus glorified in 
his saints! Was it no glory to Joseph that, 
having the riches of Egypt in his hands, all the 
people were made, as it were, to live daily and hourly 
upon him? Was no fresh accession of dignity 
brought to his exaltation, by every fresh acknow- 
ledgment of his authority, and every renewed appli- 
cation to his wealth? And is not Jesus glorified in 


IN HIS PEOPLE. O28 


his exaltation, and in his fulness, and in his love, and 
in his grace, by that faith, in the exercise of which, 
‘a poor and an afflicted people,” the needy and the 
tried church, are made to travel to, and live upon, 
him each moment? Ah, yes! every corruption taken 
to his sanctifying grace; every burden taken to his 
omnipotent arm; every sorrow taken to his sympa- 
thizing heart; every want taken to his overflowing 
fulness; every wound taken to his healing hand; 
every sin taken to his cleansing blood; and every de- 
formity taken to his all-covering righteousness, swells 
the revenue of glory, which each second of time 
ascends to our adorable Redeemer from his church. 
You may have imagined,—-for I will now suppose 
myself as addressing the seeking soul, —that Christ 
has been more glorified by your hanging back from 
him, — doubting the efficacy of his blood to cancel 
your guilt, and the power of his grace to mortify 
your corruption, and the sufficiency of his fulness to 
supply your need, and the sympathy of his nature to 
soothe your grief, and the loving willingness of heart 
to receive and welcome you as you are, empty, vile, 
and worthless; little thinking, on the contrary, how 
much he has been grieved, and wounded, and dis- 
honoured, and robbed of his glory, by this doubting 
of his love, and this distrusting of his grace, after all 
the melting exhibitions of the one, and all the con- 
vincing evidences of the other. 

But, is it by the desire of your inmost soul that 
Christ should be glorified by you? then forget not 
the grand, luminous truth of the Bible, that he is the 


324 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


Saviour of sinners, and of sinners, as sinners ; — that 
in the great matter of the soul’s salvation, he recog- 
nizes nothing of worthiness in the creature; and that 
whatever human merit is brought to him with a view 
of commending the case to his notice, — whatever—be 
it even the incipient work of his own Spirit in the 
heart— is appended to his finished work, as a ground 
of acceptance with God, is so much detraction from 
his glory as a Redeemer, — than which, of nothing he 
is more jealous, —and, consequently, places the soul 
at a great remove from his grace. But like Bartimeus, 
casting the garment from you, be that garment what 
it may, pride of merit,— pride of intellect, — pride of 
learning, — pride of family, — pride of place, — yea, 
whatever hinders your entering the narrow way, and 
prevents your receiving the kingdom of God ‘as a 
little child, —-and coming to Jesus to be saved by him 
alone, brings more real glory to him, than imagi- 
nation can conceive, or words can describe. 

If, then, Jesus is especially glorified in the faith of 
his people, let yours be a life of faith in all its minute 
detail. Live upon him for spiritual supplies; live 
upon him for temporal supplies. Go to him in dark 
providences that you may be kept from sinking: go 
to him in bright providences, that you may be kept 
from falling. Go to him when the path is rough, 
that you may walk in it contentedly : go to him when 
the path is smooth, that you may walk in it surely. 
Let your daily history be a travelling to Jesus empty, 
and a coming from Jesus filled. Keep the truth con- 
stantly and prominently before your eye, “ The just 


IN HIS PEOPLE. $25 


shall live by faith.’’ If this be so, do not expect that 
God will ever permit you to live by sight. Bend 
your whole soul submissively to Him in this matter. 
Let His will and yours be one. If, in the course of 
your wilderness journeyings, He has brought you into 
a great strait, yea, to the very margin of the sea, still 
at His bidding, ‘go forward,’ though it be into that 
sea. ‘Trust Him to cleave asunder its waters, making 
a dry passage for your feet, and causing those very 
waves that threatened to engulf you, now to prove as 
a cloud canopying you above, and as walls of strength, 
fencing you in on every side. Remember, too, that 
it 18 one peculiar exercise and precious privilege of 
faith, to “‘ watt patiently for the Lord.’’ The Divine 
exhortation is, “‘Commit thy way unto the Lord; 
trust also in Him; and he will bring it to pass.” 
“Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for Him.” | 
This patience of the soul is the rest of faith, on the 
faithful God; it is a ‘standing still, to see his salva- 
tion.’ And the Divine encouragement is, that in this 
posture will be found the secret of your real power. 
“In quietness and in confidence shall be your 
strength.” ‘Their strength is to sit still.’ Be 
watchful against everything that would mar the sim- 
plicity of your faith, and so dim the glory of Jesus. 
Especially guard against the adoption of unlawful or 
doubtful measures, with a view to disentanglement 
from present difficulties. Endure the pressure, sub- 
mit to the wrong, bear the suffering, rather than sin 
against God, by seeking to forestall His mind, or to 
28 


326 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


antedate His purpose, or by transferring your inte- 
rests from His hands to your own. 


‘Beware of desperate steps: the darkest day, 
Wait but to-morrow, will have passed away.” 


Oh, the glory that is brought to Jesus by a life of 
faith! Who can fully estimate it? Taking to Him 
the corruption, as it is discovered,—the guilt, as it 
rises, —the grief, as it is felt,—the cross, as it is ex- 
perienced,—the wound, as it is received; yea, simply 
following the example of John’s disciples ; who, when 
their master was slain, took up his headless body, 
and buried it, and then went and poured their 
mournful intelligence into the ear of Jesus, and laid 
their deep sorrow on his heart; this is to glorify 
Christ! Truly is this “precious faith,” and truly is 
the “‘trial of our faith precious,” for it renders more 
precious to the heart ‘‘his precious blood,” who, in 
his person, is unutterably “precious to them that 
believe.” 

By a patient endurance of suffering for his sake, 
the Redeemer is greatly glorified in his saints. The 
apostle — and few drank of the bitter cup more deeply 
than he — presents suffering for Christ in the soothing 
light of a Christian privilege. ‘Unto you 7% is given 
in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, 
but also to suffer for his sake.” 1 Pet. iv. 14. And 
how touchingly did the experience of the disciples 
correspond with this: “‘ They departed from the pre- 
sence of the council rejoreing that they were counted 


IN HIS PEOPLE. 327 


worthy to suffer shame for his name.’’ Acts iv. 41. 
Has it pleased the Lord, dear reader, to place you in 
a somewhat similar position? Ah! is it no suffering 
to stand up in the midst of one’s loved family, sur- 
rounded by irreligion, and worldliness, and a total 
disregard of the fear of God, a lone and a despised 
witness for Jesus ?—-none to thread with you the in- 
tricate and narrow way, or to run with you the 
Christian race, in the domestic circle— no eye beam- 
ing with holy love, no voice responding in cheering 
accent, no hand to guide, no arm to lean upon, no 
bosom to weep upon, no kindred spirit, no second 
self; to see one’s God denied, one’s Saviour rejected, 
one’s religion scoffed, one’s principles trampled under 
foot, and one’s privileges curtailed; to have one’s 
name cast out as evil, to be counted a fool, an en- 
thusiast, or mad; to endure the loss of temporal 
interest, and domestic happiness, and earthly pros- 
pects, and in a sense to ‘forsake house, or brethren, 
or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, 
or lands, for Christ’s sake ;’ — is this no path of trial 
and suffering? ‘But if ye be reproached for the 
name of Christ, happy are ye,’’ for thereby Christ is 
glorified in you. He is glorified in your patient 
endurance of suffering, in your meek submission to 
reproach, in your overcoming evil with good, your 
return of prayer for cursing, of blessing for railing, 
and of love for hatred. Believer, suffering for Christ ! 
rejoice, yea, rejoice that you are counted worthy to 
suffer shame for his sake! What distinction is 
awarded you! What honour is put upon you! 


328 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


What a favoured opportunity have you now of bring- 
ing glory to his name! for illustrating his sustaining 
grace, and upholding strength, and almighty power, 
and infinite wisdom, and comforting love! By the 
firm, yet mild maintenance of your principles, by the 
dignified, yet gentle spirit of forbearance, by the un- 
compromising, yet kind resistance to allurement, let 
the Redeemer be glorified in you! In all your per- 
secution for righteousness’ sake, let your eye be im- 
movably fixed on Jesus. In him, and in this pecu- 
liar path, you have a bright example. ‘ Consider 
him that endured such contradiction from sinners 
against himself, lest ye be wearied and faint in your 
mind.’”’ Remember how, for your redemption, he 
‘“‘endured the cross, despising the shame;’’ and for 
your continual succour, is set down at the right hand 
of the throne of God.” ‘ Wherefore lift up the hands 
which hang down, and strengthen the feeble knees,” 
‘“‘for the Spirit of glory and of God resteth upon 
you.” 

Great, too, is the glory brought to our incarnate 
God by the sanctified afflictions of his saints. How 
deep these often are, let many testify; and yet the 
deeper the affliction, the deeper the glory. Behold 
the glory brought to God by Daniel in the den of 
lions; by Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, in the 
fiery furnace; and by Paul and Silas in the prison. 
And what is their history, but a type of all the 
afflicted members of God’s family? The Lord will 
be glorified in his people, — therefore does he afflict, 
and try, and chasten them. ‘The Lord trieth the 


IN HIS PEOPLE. 329 


righteous.” He has his den, his prison, his furnace, 
He has his own mode, his appointed way of proving 
his work in their hearts; and whether by the lions’ 
den, or the prison, or the furnace, He is glorified in 
them. To see how Christ can shut the mouth of the 
lion, and can temper the devouring flame, and can 
unbar the doors of the prison-house, how glorious 
thus appears his power! To mark the resigned will, 
the subdued spirit, the mute submission, the cheerful 
acquiescence in the deepest affliction, how glorious 
thus appears his grace! ‘To behold the daily strength 
imparted, the precious promises applied, the soothing 
consolation experienced, how glorious thus appears 
his love! ‘Tio see the chaff scattered, and the dross 
consumed, and the mind brought into perfect har- 
mony with God’s will, to say with David, “My soul 
is even as a weaned child,” how glorious thus appears 
his wisdom! Oh, if these are the blessings which 
blossom upon the rod, then welcome the rod! If 
this is the glory brought to the name of Jesus by a 
process of sanctified affliction, then welcome the 
affliction! Only see that he is truly glorified in you 
by it. See that he is glorified while you are in the 
furnace, by your passzve graces; see that he is glori- 
fied when you have come forth from the furnace, by 
your active graces. ‘Wherefore glorify ye the Lord 
in the fires, even the name of the Lord God of Israel,”’ 
‘When he hath tried me, I shall come forth as gold.” 

Nor must we overlook that path walking in which 
the Redeemer is so manifestly glorified in his saints 


— even the way of a holy and cheerful obedience to his 
28 * 


cod 


330 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


commands. Were we to select a single word from 
the Bible which we would desire to be distinctly, 
prominently, and constantly before the eye of the 
believer, it would be —oBEDIENCE. The stress which 
the Holy Spirit has laid upon the duty is great, and 
the blessing and honour which the Lord has attached 
to its observance, is immense and encouraging. It 
involves every covenant mercy, and it is the great 
secret of all holiness, and therefore of all happiness. 
What the Lord once spoke to his ancient people, he 
speaks at the present to all his spiritual Israel, — 
““Now, therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, 
and keep my covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar 
treasure unto me above all people, for all the earth is 
mine. And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, 
and a holy nation.” Exod. xix. 5,6 And who does 
not trace the blessing which the Lord has attached to 
obedience in the history of Abraham, when at God’s 
command, he bound his son as a sacrifice upon the 
altar — ‘And in thy seed shall all the nations of the 
earth be blessed, because thou hast obeyed my voice ?” 
Gen. xxii. 18. And see how the Lord confirmed the 
fact of his obedient walk, and fulfilled the promise of 
blessing to his son Isaac, to whom he said, ‘‘ Sojourn 
in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless 
thee ; for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will give all 
these countries, and I will perform the oath which I 
sware unto Abraham thy Father, . . . because that 
Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my 
commandments, my statutes, and my laws.” Gen. 
xxvi. 8, 5. Rich, too, is the blessmg annexed to the 


IN HIS PEOPLE. 881 


promise, “If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall cat 
of the good of the land.’ And solemn and searching 
the word addressed by the holy prophet to the tem- 
porizing king, “Hath the Lord as great delight in 
burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice 
of the Lord? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, 
and to hearken than the fat of rams.” 

As King in Zion, our adorable Lord Jesus delights 
to reign over a loving and an obedient people. Thus 
he has made their obedience to his commands a test 
of their love to his person — ‘‘If ye love me, keep my 
commandments: “Teaching them to observe all 
things whatsoever I have commanded you,” was the 
last charge given to his disciples. Now it is this 
keeping of his commandments, this observance of what 
he has enjoined, that glorifies him in his saints. 
Coming to him in our ignorance glorifies him as our 
Prophet ; coming to him with our guilt, glorifies him 
as our Priest; and walking obediently to his pre- 
cepts, glorifies him as our King. It places the crown 
upon the head of his sovereignty, it recognizes the 
spiritual nature of his kingdom, and it upholds the 
purity, majesty, and authority of his laws. It be- 
comes, then, the solemn and imperative duty of every 
believer to search the will and testament of his 
dying, risen, and exalted Lord, to ascertain ail that 
he has enjoined upon his obedience in the way of pre- 
cept and command. For how can he be a good and 
an obedient subject, if he understands not the laws of 
Christ’s kingdom? Then, when the precept is clearly 
revealed, and the command is distinctly made known, 


332 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


immediate, self-denying, and cheerful obedience is to 
follow, as that path which, while it insures the 
sweetest peace to the soul, brings the highest glory to 
Christ. Let yours be an obedient walk, dear reader ! 
Let your obedience be the fruit of faith, the dictate 
of love. Permit no reserve in your obedience! let 
it be full, honest, ‘and complete. Search the New, 
Testament Scripture, and examine closely your own 
walk, and ascertain in what particular your obedience 
to Christ is deficient. Be upright, honest, and sin- 
cere in your inquiry. Let your fervent prayer be, 
‘Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? Is there 
any precept of thy word slighted, any command dis- 
obeyed, any cross not taken up? Is there any desire 
to withhold my neck from thy yoke, or to withdraw 
my shoulder from thy burden, or to mark out a 
smoother path than that which thou hast chosen and 
bid me walk in? Is there any secret framing of ex- 
cuse for my disobedience, any temporizing, any car- 
nal feeling, any worldly motive, any fear of man, any 
shrinking from consequences? Lord, thou knowest 
all things, thou knowest that I love thee. Thou art 
precious to my soul, for thou hast borne my sins, en- 
dured my curse, carried my cross; and in return dost 
only ask, as an evidence of how much I owe, and 
how much I love, that I should keep thy command- 
ments, and follow thy example. Now, Lord, take my 
poor heart, and let it be thine, thine only, and thine 
for ever. Let thy sweet love constrain me to ‘run in 
the way of thy commandments,’ for this will I do 
‘when thou shalt enlarge my heart.’”’ Then will fol- 


IN HIS PEOPLE. "BOO 


low the precious fruits of obedience, even as the bud 
expands into the blossom, and the blossom ripens into 
the fruit. There will be a growth, a delightful ex- 
pansion of the life of God in the soul! and with the 
increase of the Divine life, there will be an increase 
of all the precious ‘fruits of the Spirit.’ ‘Thus saith 
the Lord, thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel! I 
am the Lord thy God, who teacheth thee to profit, who 
leadeth thee by the way that thou shouldest go. O 
that thou hadst hearkened to my commandments! then 
had thy peace been as ariver, and thy righteousness 
as the waves of the sea.”’ Isa. xlviii. 17, 18. See that 
your Redeemer is glorified in your obedience; that for 
the happiness of your soul, and for the honour of Christ, 
you “stand complete in all the will of God!” 

The branch of our subject, thus imperfectly placed 
before the reader, is deeply practical. In what a 
solemn and responsible position it places every be- 
liever! ‘Ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord.” “I 
have created him for my glory.” “Thou art my ser- 
vant, O Israel, mn whom I will be glorified.” Then, 
how ‘“‘ very jealous for the Lord God of hosts,” should 
we be! How vigilant, lest in any degree, or in any 
way, we withhold from Christ the glory due unto him! 
There are many ways by which we may be betrayed 
into this grievous sin — a careless walk, — unmortified 
sin, — self-indulgence, —a light and volatile spirit, —a 
neglect of means, —a distant walk with God, — cold- 
ness of love towards the saints. But especially mix- 
ing up with, and indulging in, a sinful conformity to 
the world, —its fashions, its pleasures, its literature, 


834 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


its religion. Christian professor! Can you rigidly 
conform to these fashions — can you spend your hours 
over that novel —can you attend that ball—can you 
move in that dance—can you embark in that enter- 
prize, and glorify Jesus by wt? Put the question 
fairly, honestly, and closely to your conscience,— 
“Do I bring glory to Christ by this? Is my Re- 
deemer thus magnified in me before the world, and 
the church?” Oh, aim for a high standard! Be 
not a common-place professor. Be not an ordinary 
Christian. Shun not to be singular. Dare, for the 
glory of Christ, to come out of the world, not to 
touch the unclean thing, and to be separate, set apart 
for God alone. ‘‘ Herein is my Father glorified, that 
ye bear much fruit! so shall ye be my disciples.” 
Thank God for the little, but, oh, aim for the ‘much 
fruit !’— Strong faith, ardent love, self-consuming 
zeal, undeserved obedience, holy, and entire, and su- 
preme surrender. ‘From me is thy fruit found.” 
Your union with Christ, your living in Christ, your 
close adherence to Christ, your constant drawing 
from Christ, will be found to involve the happy secret 
of that great fruitfulness which brings most glory to 
the Triune God. Come,—drawn by grace, constrained 
by love, attracted by the glory and the preciousness 
of Jesus,— come now to that one ‘altar which sanc- 
tifies both the giver and the gift,’ and as you lay 
yourself upon it, body, soul, and spirit, exclaim with 
the apostle, ‘Christ shall be magnified in my body, 
whether it be by life or by death.” The solemn vow 
is taken! The holy surrender is made! It is seen, 


IN HIS PEOPLE. 335 


it is heard, it is ratified in heaven. May you be so 
strengthened from above, ‘that the name of our 
Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you, and ye in 
him, according to the grace of God, even the Lord 
Jesus Christ,’ is the devout and fervent desire of one 
who, with you, through time and through eternity, 


hopes to unite in the grateful, adoring, and never- 
ceasing hallelujah,— 


‘““THANKS BE UNTO GOD FOR HIS UNSPEAKABLE 
Girt!’ 


CHAPTER IX. 


THE HOLY SPIRIT GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 


“He shall glorify me.” — John xvi. 14. 


How replete with the deepest instruction, and how 
Copious with the richest comfort, is the chapter which 
embodies the great truth, on the unfolding of which 
we have now entered! We have before observed, 
that it was a marked characteristic of the valedictory 
discourse of our blessed Lord to his disciples, that he 
then went more fully into the character and official 
work of the Holy Spirit than at any former period of 
his ministry. There is an air of solemnity and a force 
of affirmation in the manner and in the terms with 
which he proceeds to enunciate the great truth of the 
Spirit’s descent, as an immediate and necessary con- 
sequent of his own departure, which not only awaken 
on its behalf the deepest interest, but which evidence 
that, in the mind of the glorious Promiser himself, 
the gift was identical with the most enlarged, costly, 
and enduring blessing to the church: ‘ Nevertheless, 
I tell you the truth; it is expedient for you that I 
go away; for if I go not away, the Comforter will not 
come unto you: but if I depart, I will send him unto 
( 336 ) 


* 
. 


THE HOLY SPIRIT, ETC. 337 
you.” Thereby implying, that the permanent pre- 
sence and indwelling of the Spirit as the Comforter, 
was even more than an equivalent for his bodily ab- 
sence; and would fully indemnify the church for any 
loss it might sustain from his departure. Ah, it is the 
mercy of the believer to know that he is not only a 
temple of the Holy Spirit, but that through all his 
pilgrimage, he shall be gladdened with the presence, 
and cheered with the smile, of Jesus, too. 

Our Lord then proceeds to advance another reason 
for the gift which he was about to bestow. “I have 
yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear 
them now.” We are not to understand, that by this 
he meant to convey the idea that he had kept back 
any doctrines or precepts of the Gospel, to be after- 
wards revealed to, and more fully promulged by, 
the apostles: far from it; for in his frequent dis- 
courses, on various suitable occasions, he had fully 
expounded to his disciples all the great leading truths 
and doctrines of his Gospel, leaving them nothing to 
conjecture or to doubt. Hence, on a previous occa- 
sion, he declares, ‘‘I have called you friends; for all 
things that I have heard from my Father, I have 
made known unto you.” But we are to interpret his 
meaning as referring, among other things, to the en- 
largement of his kingdom, by the accession of the 
Gentiles to it; to the nature of the Gospel church, 
of which they as yet were imperfectly informed, if 
informed at all; to the dispersion of the Jewish 
nation, and their final restoration to their own land; 
to the entire abrogation of the Mosaic economy, and 

29 Lm 


* 


338 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


to the rise and progress of Antichrist; the full dis- 
closure of these things, they could not then bear, in 
consequence of their Jewish prejudices, which yet 
existed,—the earthly conceptions of Christ’s kingdom, 
which they still cherished, and the scanty measure — 
the mere earnest—of the Holy Spirit, which they had 
as yet but received. 

There is yet another declaration of our Lord con- 
cerning the Spirit, to which we would refer, vindi- 
cating it from a misinterpretation, which it has re- 
ceived, —‘“*He will not speak of himself.” This 
passage has led many to suppose, that the Spirit does 
not speak of, or witness to, his own work! But this 
is, obviously, not the true meaning of the words. 
“‘He will not speak of (or, from) himself,” that is, in 
opposition to, or independently of, the Father and the 
Son. Thus our Lord, referring to himself, says, “I 
have not spoken of (or, from) myself;” and again, 
“The words that I speak unto you, I speak not of 
myself,’’ evidently meaning, “I come not in my own 
name, I come to do my Father’s will; I have no 
separate authority of my own; I act in concert with 
Him that sent me.’”’? And in this obvious sense, our 
Lord says of the Spirit, “‘he shall not speak of (or, 
from) himself ;’’ not, that he shall not speak of or 
witness to his own work in the soul, but that he shall 
not speak of his own self, as separate from the 
Godhead. The misinterpretation which we have thus 
‘endeavoured to correct, has led those who entertained 
it, to question the absolute deity of the Spirit; as if 
the text implied inferiority of nature. But we an- 


GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 339 


swer, Did not our Lord come as a servant, and not — 
in his own name; and did that inferiority of office, 
prove an inferiority of nature? Surely not. Is the 
King’s Son less a prince royal, because he bears a 
‘commission from his Father? He may be inferior to 
‘his Father in office, yet equal to him in all the 
personal and essential attributes of royalty. When 
Christ affirmed, ‘‘My Father is greater than I,” he 
alluded to a subordination of office, not to an 
inequality of nature. Thus the Spirit is as much a 
procession from the Father as the Son, and is as 
much the messenger of Christ, as Christ is of the 
Father. The Spirit leads us to the Son, and the Son 
conducts us to the Father. ‘For through him (the 
Son) we both Jew and Gentile) have access by one 
Spirit unto the Father.” The Father is Gop, —the 
Son is Gop, —and the Holy Spirit is Gop, and these 
three constitute the ONE TRIUNE JEHOVAH. 

But the great work of the Spirit is to glorify 
Christ. To the devout and solemn consideration of 
this precious and important branch of our great 
subject, let us now direct our thoughts. Thus does 
our Lord affirm the truth, — ‘‘ He will glorify me: for 
he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you.”’ 
Viewed in relation to this truth, the work of the 
Holy Spirit appears in a light of immeasurable great- 
ness and glory. It would scem to be the pivot on 
which turned the entire work of Jesus,—the source 
which supplied its life, its power, and its. efficacy. 
Not for a moment would we hazard the idea, that the 
testimony and grace of the Spirit imparted any 


340 TIE DOLY SPIRIT 


intrinsic efficacy to the atoning work of Jesus. The 
entire completeness of that work, its full acceptance 
in the court of justice, the legal discharge of the 
church on its ground, and the Father’s approval of it 
by the resurrection and exaltation of His Son, as we 
have shown at some length. ‘The sacrificial work of 
Jesus, therefore, receives no measure of intrinsic 
value, or efficacy, from any part of the work of 
the Spirit: and yet there is a connexion, and a 
dependence. As far as the work of our dear Lord 
becomes available in the personal salvation of the 
believer, it depends solely upon the life-giving in- 
fluence of God the Holy Spirit. Complete as is the 
righteousness, efficacious as is the blood, and all- 
sufficient as is the grace of Christ, yet apart from the 
especial, effectual, and Divine operation of the Spirit 
upon the heart, they would remain to us as a robe 
‘unworn, a fulness untouched, a ‘fountain sealed.’ 
Thus, there is a beautiful relation, a sweet harmony, 
between the atoning work of Jesus and the official 
work of the Holy Spirit.—“ He will glorify me.” 

We have already alluded to the day of Pentecost. 
We recur to it again, because on that memorable day 
the Spirit first glorified Christ, openly, visibly, mant- 
festly. It would seem as if the curtain of eternity 
were parted, and the windows of heaven were opened, 
and eyes that saw nought but meanness, and poverty, 
and degradation in Jesus before, now were permitted 
to behold him inaugurated in his throne, a Prince and 
a Saviour, encircled with glory, and with gifts of 
grace in his hand, ready to shower them profusely 


GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 341 


upon the rebellious. Three thousand souls pierced to 
their heart, made to sce the plague within, stretched 
out their hands of faith, and welcomed ‘these gifts, 
adoring the grace, extolling the love, crowning the 
Prince, and lauding the Saviour, from whence, and 
through whom, they proceeded. Oh, how illustriously 
did the Spirit now outwardly glorify Jesus! How 
glorious did he appear to those who now saw nought 
but deformity in themselves! How precious to those 
whose hearts were never before stricken with godly 
grief! What compunction, what sadness, what 
sorrow must have bowed their hearts to the dust, as 
they thought,—“ This is he whom we called a 
Nazerene, whom we stigmatized as a glutton and a 
wine-bibber, whom we bound, whom we _ scourged, 
whom we spat upon, whom we mocked, and whom we 
crucified.” But how glorious to their eye would he 
now appear, returning them good for evil, blessing 
for cursing, cherishing them on the bosom they had 
wounded, and causing pardon, acceptance, present 
hope and future glory, to flow to them through that 
very blood in the shedding of which their hands had 
been embrued. What an open, visible glorifying of 
Christ by the Eternal Spirit was this ! 

The Spirit glorifies Jesus in the Word. The Word 
of God is full of Christ. He is the sun of this Divine 
system, the fountain of its light and beauty. How 
emphatically does he himself declare this truth, and 
we know that his witness is true, —‘‘Search the — 
Scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal 
life: and they are they which testify of me.’ The 

29 * | 


342 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


Scriptures testify of Jesus. Every doctrine derives 
its substance from his person, every precept its force 
from his work, every promise its sweetness from his 
love. Is it not to be feared, that in the study of the 
Scriptures, it is a much-forgotten truth, that they 
testify of Jesus? Are they not read, searched, and 
examined, with a mind too little intent upon adding 
to its wealth, by an increased knowledge of his person, 
and character, and work? And thus it is we lower 
the character of the Bible. We may read it as a 
mere uninspired record; we may study it as a book 
of human literature. Its antiquity may interest us, 
its history may inform us, its philosophy may instruct 
us, its poetry may charm us; and thus, while skim- 
ming the surface of this Book of books, the glorious 
Christ, who is its substance, its subject, its sweetness, 
its work, —and but for whom there had been no Bible, 
—has been deeply and darkly veiled from the eye. 

But it is the office of the blessed and eternal Spirit 
to unfold, and so to glorify, Jesus in the Word.» All 
that we spiritually and savingly learn respecting him, 
through this revealed medium, is by the sole teach- 
ing of the Holy Spirit, opening up this word to the 
mind. He shows how all the luminous lines of Serip- 
ture truth emanate from, return to, and centre in, 
Christ, — how all the doctrines set forth the glory of 
his person, how all the promises are written in his 
heart’s blood, and how all the precepts are embodied 
in his life. 

To the question often earnestly propounded, “‘ What 
is the best method of reading, so as to understand, 


GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 343 


the Scriptures?’’—I would, in this connexion of 
our subject, reply, — Read them with the one desire 
and end, of learning more of Christ, and with earnest 
prayer for the teaching of the Spirit, that Christ 
may be unfolded in the Word. With this simple 
method persevered in, you shall not fail to compre- 
hend the mind of the Holy Spirit, in portions which 
previously may have been unintelligible and obscure. 
Restrict not yourself to fixed rules, or to human 
helps. Rely less upon dictionaries, and maps, and 
annotations. With singleness of aim, with a specific 
object of research, and with fervent prayer for the 
Holy Spirit’s teaching, “ye need not that any man 
teach you;’ but collating Scripture with Scripture, 
‘‘comparing spiritual things with spiritual,’ you may 
fearlessly enter upon the investigation of the greatest 
mysteries contained in the sacred Volume, assured 
that the Saviour, for whose glories and riches you 
search, will reveal himself to your eye, ‘‘full of 
grace and truth.” Precious Bible! so full of a 
precious Jesus! How do all its clouds and darkness 
melt into light and beauty, as he, the Sun of Right- 
eousness, rises in noontide glory upon its page! 
Search it, my reader, with a view of seeing and know- 
ing more of your Redeemer, compared with whom, 
nothing else is worth knowing or making known. 
Love your Bible, because it testifies of Jesus ; because 
it unfolds the great Saviour, the almighty Redeemer; 
because it reveals the glory of the sin-pardoning God, 
in the person of Jesus Christ. Aim to unravel Jesus 
in the types, to descry him amidst the shadows, to 


844. THE HOLY SPIRIT 


trace him through the predictions of the prophcts, 
the records of the evangelist, and the letters of the 
apostles. All speak of, and all lead to, Jnsus. ‘They 
are they which testify of me.” 

And not only thus, but by employing the truth 
. which especially testifies of Jesus, as the grand instru- 
ment of producing that holiness in the soul of which 
he is the Divine Author, he confers unspeakable 
honour on Christ in the word. The Spirit of God 
undertakes the achievement of a stupendous, work. 
He enters the soul, and proposes to restore the empire 
of grace, the reign of holiness, and the throne of God. 
He engages to form all things anew —to create a 
revolution in favour of Christ and of heaven. He 
undertakes to change the heart, turning its enmity 
into love; to collect all the elements of darkness and 
confusion, educing from them perfect light and perfect 
order: to subdue the will, bringing it into harmony 
with God’s will; to explore all the recesses of sin, 
turning its very impurity into holiness;— in a word, 
to regenerate the soul, restoring the Divine image, 
and fitting it for the full and eternal enjoyment of 
God in glory. Now, in accomplishing this great 
work, what instrmentality does he employ?  Pass- 
ing by all human philosophy, and pouring contempt 
upon the profoundest wisdom and the mightiest 
power of man, he employs, in the product of a work, 
in comparison with which the rise and the fall of 
empires were as infants’ play, simply and alone, the 
‘‘truth as it is in Jesus.” With this instrument he 
enters the soul, -— the seat of the greatest revolution 


- 


GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 345 


that ever transpired. He moves over the dark chaos, 
without form and void, and in a moment, a world of 
immortal beauty bursts into view. He overshadows 
the soul, and a vital principle is imparted, whose 
stream of existence, once commenced, flows on with 
the eternity of God himself. How Divine, yet how 
natural, too, the process! In the illapses of human 
thought, in the overtasked power of the human in- 
tellect, how often is the mind impaired and shattered 
by the severe process through which it passes! But 
here is a revolution which touches every faculty of 
the soul, which changes all the powers of the mind; 
and yet, so gentle, so persuasive, and so mild, is the 
Spirit’s operation, that so far from deranging the 
power, or disturbing the balance of the intellect, it 
develops resources, awakens energies, and inspires 
strength, of which, until now, it knew not its pos- 
session. ‘The entrance of thy word giveth hght; it 
giveth understanding unto the simple.” 

And to what shall we turn for the secret of this? 
To the Gospel, so replete with the glory of Jesus. 
That Gospel, the substance of which is the incarnate 
God; the theme of which is Christ crucified. That 
Gospel which testifies of his Godhead, which declares 
his manhood, which unfolds the union of both in the 
person of the glorious Redeemer; and which holds 
him up to view, mighty and willing to save to the 
uttermost. Well may the great apostle of the Gen- 
tiles exclaim, ‘I am not ashamed of the gospel of 
Christ: for it 1s the power of God unto salvation to 
every one that believeth.” 


346 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


In the further work of sanctification by the truth, 
the Divine Spirit equally magnifies Christ. Still 
does he employ the truth, that speaks of Jesus. 
Does he quicken? it is by a Gospel precept. Does 
he establish? it is by a Gospel doctrine. Does he 
comfort? it is by a Gospel promise. Does he 
sanctify? it is by a Gospel admonition. Thus is 
Jesus honoured through the word, in every step of 
our way to heaven. And oh, how sanctifying and 
comforting is the truth which testifies of Jesus! It 
has but to point to him, and, clothed with the energy 
of the Spirit, the strongest corruption is subdued, 
the deepest grief is soothed. ‘‘ The law of the Lorp 
is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the 
LorD is sure, making wise the simple. The statutes 
of the Lorp are right, rejoicing the heart: the com- 
mandment of the Lorp is pure, enlightening the 
eyes.” And this it does, by unfolding Jesus in the 
word. Oh, of what value or efficacy is all our 
knowledge of the truth, if it lead us not to Jesus; if 
it expand not our views of his glory; if it conform 
not our minds to his image; if it increase not our 
love to his person, and if it quicken not our obedience 
to his commands, and our zeal for his cause;. and 
mature us not, by a progressive holiness, for the enjoy- 
ment of his beatific presence ? 

But here let us vindicate the honour of the Divine 
Spirit against the view of some, calculated greatly to 
affect it. There are those who deny any other opera- 
tion of the Holy Spirit, than that which exists in the 
written word ;—thus restricting his influence solely 


GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 847 


to the letter of the truth, and thereby limiting his 
power and detracting from his glory. 

But is not this an exalting of the instrumental 
above the efficient cause of regeneration? Divine as 
is the record, and precious as is the revelation it 
affords of Jesus, it yet is but an instrument, and 
nothing more. Unaccompanied with the power of 
the Holy Spirit, it is inactive, inoperative, a mere 
dead letter. It quickens not, it sanctifies not, it 
comforts not. It may be read constantly, and 
searched deeply, and known accurately, and under- 
stood partially, and quoted appropriately; yet, left 
to its own unassisted power, ‘it comes but in word 
‘only,’ producing no hallowing, no abiding, no saving 
results. If there be no other, especial and invincible, 
influence of the Divine Spirit operating upon the 
mind, how comes it to pass that all who read the 
word are not instantly converted by the word ? — that 
wherever these healing leaves are borne, wherever 
this precious seed is scattered, broad-cast upon the 
world, man’s moral malady is not arrested, and a 
harvest of happiness to the creature, and of glory to 
God, springs not forth? Let those who insist upon 
no other extraneous, and superior operation of the 
Holy Spirit, in the spiritual creation of the soul, than 
exists in the mere letter of the word, reply. 

But the truth itself shall testify. See how it dis- 
claims all such glory, ascribing it to Him to whom 
it of right and alone belongs, — God the Holy Ghost. 
‘‘Our Gospel came not unto you in word only, but 
also in power, and in the Holy Ghost.” 1 Thes. 1. 5. 


348 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


Here, evidently, are the word and the Spirit, the 
instrument and the Agent, co-operating together. 
The apostle, in another place, speaks of the truth, 
as the “sword of the Spirit, which is the word of 
God.” Of what real service can the sword be, if not 
used? Its surface may be polished, and its edge may 
be keen, yet if there is no powerful arm to wield it, it 
can do no execution,—none feel, none fear it. But it 
is the ‘‘sword of the Spirit,’—he employs it: then it 
is that the “word of God is quick and powerful, and 
sharper than any two-edged sword,’’—then it separates, 
then it wounds, then it slays. ; 

“The word declares Christ, and the Spirit excites 
the heart to accept him. The word shows his excel- 
lency, and the Spirit stirs up strong cries after him. 
The word declares the promises, and the Spirit helps 
us to plead them. The word administers reasons 
against our reasonings, and the Spirit edgeth them. 
The word shows the way, the Spirit enables us to 
walk in it. The word is the seed of the Spirit, and 
the Spirit is the Quickener of the word. The word 
is the graft, and the Spirit is the Hngrafter. The 
word is the pool of water, and the Spirit stirs it to 
make it healing.” * : 

In the clear and decided testimony which he bears 
to the Godhead of the Redeemer, the Spirit especially 
glorifies him. We have seen in the preceding pages, 
that the great glory of our Immanuel, is his essential 
glory. When our faith can firmly grasp the Deity 
of our adorable Lord, —and on this precious doctrine 


* Charnock, 


GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 849 


may it never waver!—there is a corresponding con- 
fidence and repose of the mind, in each particular of 
his sacrificial work. Then it is we talk of him as a 
Mediator, and love to view him as the Great Sin- 
bearer of his people. In vain do we admire his 
righteousness, or extol his death, if we look not upon 
him in the glory which belongs to him as essentially 
God. From this truth, as from a fountain of light, 
beams forth the glory which sheds its soft halo 
around his atoning work. Oh, when, in the near 
view of death, memory summons back the past, and 
sin in battle array passes before the eye, and we think 
of the Lord God, the Holy One, into whose awful 
presence we are about to enter, how will every other 
support but this smk beneath us! And as the Holy 
Spirit then glorifies Christ in his essential glory, 
testifying that the blood and righteousness—the 
soul’s great trust — are from the incarnate God, we 
shall rise superior to fear, smile at death, and pass in 
peace and triumph to glory. Yes, reader, we shall 
be satisfied with nothing short of absolute Deity 
when we come to die. And in proportion as you 
find this great truth the substance of your life, you 
will experience it the support of your death. Thus 
does the Spirit glorify Christ in his Godhead. 

But especially in the experience of all his saints, 
does the Holy Spirit magnify Christ. ‘He shall 
glorify me, for he shall take of the things of mine, 
and show them unto you.” We would not have you 
forget, that the first step which the Spirit takes in 


glorifying Christ in the creature is, to lay that crea- 
30 


350 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


ture low in the dust. He uncrowns, and humbles 
the pride of man, before he glorifies Jesus in the 
soul’s experience. Oh, what a mighty work is this— 
what a great preparation for the entrance of Christ’s 
glory in the soul! A preparation performed, not by 
the creature, but by the Spirit in the creature. And 
in what does the Spirit’s preparation consist? Not 
in bettering the condition, but in exposing the 
depravity of ouf fallen nature. Not in concealing, 
but in uncovering the leprosy within. He goes 
before the Lord, to prepare his way, by discovering 
to the soul its extreme emptiness, poverty, and vile- 
ness. He creates a felt-necessity for Christ’s en- 
trance. He brings the soul into such a position, 
that none but Christ can meet its case. He inflicts 
a wound, which Christ alone can heal: he awakens 
grief, which Christ only can assuage: he creates a 
- void, which Christ only can fill. Oh, what is the 
spectacle that fills God with delight, and heaven 
with gladness? Not the palace, rising in stately 
grandeur; not the monarch, ascending his throne in 
imposing royalty; not the cathedral, with its long- 
drawn aisle, and fretted roof, and pealing music, and 
burning incense, and fluttering robes. Nor is it the 
splendid but empty ‘form of godliness,’ which dis- 
tinguishes the religion of the many. All is not gold. 
Many a man has been applauded for his benevolence, 
and the Lord has said, ‘‘ I saw no benevolence in -it!’’ 
And many a man has been extolled for his prayers, 
and the Lord has said, “I heard no prayer!’ What 
then! It is a poor sinner laid low before the cross, 


GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 851 


uncrowning himself, and crowning Jesus. And ag 
Jehovah looks down upon the spectacle,—despised by 
man, honoured by God, for “to this man will I look, 
who is of a humble and a contrite spirit,’’—he seems 
to say, ‘I see a broken heart; I see a holy trembling 
at my word; I see one smiting on his breast, I hear 
a cry,—oh, it is the voice of my Spirit,—‘ God be 
merciful to me a sinner!’ I behold my own image 
reflected in that lowly, contrite soul.” 

Now the Spirit proceeds to glorify Christ, by re- 
vealing what Christ is to such an emptied, lowly, 
penitent, soul. And this he does, by unfolding the 
great truth of the Bible,—that Jesus died for sinners. 
Not for the righteous, not for the worthy, but for 
sinners, as sinners; for the unrighteous, for the 
unworthy, for the guilty, for the lost. Precious 
moment, when the Eternal Spirit, the great Glorifier 
of Jesus, brings this truth with power to the heart! 
‘JT had believed,” exclaims the transported soul, 
that Jesus died only for those who were worthy of 
so rich a sacrifice, of such immense love. I thought 
to bring some price of merit in my hands, some self- 
preparation, some previous fitness, something to 
render my case worthy of his notice, and to pro- 
pitiate his kind regard. But nowI see his salvation 
is for the vile, the poor, the penniless. I read, that 
‘when we were without strength, Christ died for the 
ungodly, —that ‘while we were yet sinners, Christ 
died for us,’ —that ‘when we were enemies, we were 
reconciled to God by the death of His Son’ — that ‘it 
is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, 


352 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


that Christ Jesus came into the world to save 
sinners, —that it 1s ‘without money and without 
price,’ —that it is ‘by grace we are saved,’—and that 
it is ‘of faith, that it might be by grace.’” This 
good news, these joyful tidings, this glorious message 
of free mercy for the vilest of the vile, believed, 
received, welcomed, in a moment the clouds all vanish, 
the fogs all disappear, the face of God beams in mild 
and softened lustre, and amidst light and joy, gladness 
and praise, the jubilee of the soul is ushered in. Oh, 
what glory now encircles the Redeemer! That soul 
venturing upon him with but the faith of reliance, 
travelling to him in all weakness, and in the face of 
all opposition, brings more glory to his name, than 
all the hallelujahs of the heavenly ministrelsy ever 
brought. 

Having conducted the soul to a sweet rest in 
Christ, the Spirit carries on his work, by keeping that 
soul perpetually within the influence of Christ's grace. 
The planets revolving round the sun, each moment 
liable to wander from their orbit, yet kept by the 
power of the sun’s attraction, illustrates the position 
of every true believer. The Lord is the sun, —in his 
orbit of light and glory every believer moves. Nor is 
there a moment in which there is not a tendency in 
that believer to start off, like a shooting star, or a 
wandering comet. The apostle has his eye upon this 
truth, when he thus sounds the note of tender warn- 
ing — ‘‘Take heed, brethren, lest there be in any of 
you an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the 
living God.’”’ And observe to what cause he traces 


GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 858 


all departure from God — unbelief. This is the sin 
which, in another place, he exhorts the Christian to 
‘lay aside,’ as “the sin which doth so easily beset us.” 
What is the easily besetting sin of every child of 
God? Let any believer testify. Ask him to point 
to his most subtle, constant, powerful, and dangerous 
foe. Ask him what has the most easy access to his 
mind; what most entangles his feet, and so impedes 
him in the race that is set before him; what has 
most easily and frequently vanquished him; what has 
brought most distress to his soul, and dishonour to 
God,—and he will unhesitatingly reply, “My evil 
heart of unbelief.” He may have constitutional in- 
firmities, and be assailed by peculiar temptations, and 
may yield to ‘presumptuous sins,’ and these, in secret 
and close transaction with God, may cause him the 
deepest bitterness and humiliation of soul. But the 
sin which doth so easily and so perpetually beset him, 
is the sin of unbelief, the fruitful cause of all other 
sin. Jor as faith is the parent of all holiness, so is 
unbelief the parent of all unholiness. ‘It is always 
present with us,’’ as Owen says, speaking of the rest- 
less workings of this evil heart of unbelief, ‘“‘and so 
never wanting with any occasion. It stands in need 
of no help nor furtherance from any outward advan- 
tages to tempt our minds. Dwelling in us, abiding 
with us, cleaving unto us, it is always ready to clog, 
to hinder, and to disturb us. Doth any difficulty or 
danger appear in the way? It is at hand to cry, 
‘Spare thyself,’ working by fear. Is any sinful com- 


pliance proposed unto us? It is ready to argue for its 
30 * 


354 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


embracement, working by carnal wisdom. Doth the 
weariness of the flesh decline perseverance in neces- 
sary duties? It wants not arguments to promote 
its inclination, working by the dispositions of remain- 
ing enmity and vanity. Doth the whole matter and 
cause of our profession come into question, as in a 
time of severe persecution? It is ready to set all its 
engines on work for our ruin,—fear of danger, love 
of things present, hope of recovery, reserves for a 
better season, the example of others esteemed good 
and wise, shall all be put into the hands of unbelief, 
to be managed against faith, patience, constancy and 
perseverance. It hath this advantage, because it hath 
a remaining interest in all the faculties of our souls. 
It is not in us as a disease that attempts and weakens 
one single part of the body, but is an evil habit that 
infects and weakens the whole. Hence it hath a 
readiness to oppose all the actings of grace in every 
faculty of the soul. The flesh always, and in all things, 
‘“‘lusteth against the soul.” 

This being the power of repulsion, so innate and so 
strong in the heart of a child of God, by what 
counteracting power is it opposed? By what other 
and mightier influence is the soul so kept within its 
Divine orbit, that it becomes not as a ‘‘ wandering 
star, to whom is reserved the blackness of darkness 
for ever?” By what but the Sun’s perpetual and 
never-failing attraction? Jesus, by the ceaseless 
energies of his grace, upholds, restrains, and restores 
the believer. Ob, the mighty power of the Lord 
continually exerted on behalf of his people! See, 


GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 355 


how he wins them by his attraction, — “‘ Draw us, and 
we will run after thee!” See, how he upholds them 
by his power, — ‘I have prayed for thee that thy 
faith fail not.” See, how he checks them by his 
grace, — “I kept thee from sinning against me.” See, 
how he restores them by his love, —‘‘And Jesus 
turned and looked upon Peter, and he went out and 
wept bitterly.”” Oh, wonderful patience, that bears 
with all our departures! Oh, surpassing love, that 
endures all our imperfections! Oh, powerful grace, 
that heals all our backslidings! Less than this never 
could meet our case. We want Derry from first to 
last in our salvation. We want the power that faints 
never! the love that changes never! the long-suf- 
fering that wearies never! the tenderness that fails 
never! the sympathy that flags never! We want 
Jesus in all that he is. We want the Sun that draws 
back the roving star. We want the Shepherd that 
goes after the stray sheep. We want the Fountain 
that perpetually cleanses from all sin. We want the 
righteousness that constantly imparts perfect peace. 
Oh, how does the Spirit glorify Jesus, as he thus 
unfolds him in the experience of the believer !—and 
this he does by keeping the soul each moment within 
the influence of his grace. 

‘‘Ffe shall take of the things of mine, and shall 
show them unto you.” ‘The Spirit is the Great Con- 
veyancer of Christ to the soul. Placing himself 
between the Fountain and the believer, he purposes 
to convey all blessing, to supply all need, by taking 
the things of Christ’s mediatorial fulness, bringing 


356 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


them into our blessed and holy experience. Having 
gone before to prepare the soul for the blessing, by 
discovering its poverty of state, and creating its 
poverty of spirit, he now takes of the atoning blood, 
and applies it to the conscience; and the justifying 
righteousness, and wraps it around the soul; and the 
sanctifying grace, and conducts it into the heart. In 
a word, he reveals Jesus to the mind, testifies of Christ’ 
to the soul: how Divine he is, therefore able to save: 
how loving he is, therefore as willing as he is able; 
how gracious he is, therefore stooping to our lowest 
circumstance; how tender he is, therefore trampling 
not upon our weak faith, nor despising our little 
grace; how sympathising he is, therefore turning not 
away his ear, and withdrawing not his heart from our 
tale of sorrow or our burden of grief. Oh, what a 
glorifier of Christ is the Divine Spirit! All that we 
truly know of Jesus, all that we have inwardly ex- 
perienced of his grace, has been from his teaching and 
conveyance. He has conducted us to the Fountain, 
—he has led us to the robing-chamber of the King, 
—he has anointed us with the ‘ oil of gladness,’— he 
has caused our “garments to smell of myrrh, and 
aloes, and cassia, out of the ivory palaces,’”’— he has 
opened the treasury, taking of the precious, glorious 
things of the precious, glorious Christ, spreading 
them out in all their vastness, suitableness, and 
freeness, before our longing eye. How often, when 
the soul has hungered, he has broken up to us the 
bread that came down from heaven! when it has 
thirsted, he has smitten the Rock, and satiated us 


GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 30T 


with its life-giving stream! How often, when guilt 
has distressed us, he has sprinkled anew the peace- 
speaking blood; and when sorrow has oppressed, and 
difficulties have embarrassed, and dependences have 
failed, and resources have become exhausted, and 
creatures most deeply loved have most deeply wounded 
us, he, the tender, loving Comforter, he, the blessed 
Teacher, he, the great Glorifier of Jesus, has given to 
us some new, and appropriate, and precious view of 
our Immanuel; and in a moment the storm has 
passed, the waves have stilled, and peace, serenity, 
and joy, have shed their lustre on the soul. One 
glimpse of Jesus in deep tribulation, one glance in 
heart-rending bereavement, one discovery of his 
countenance when all is dark and dreary, and 
desolate, one surprisal of his love, when the heart 
sinks into loneliness, one touch of his cross when it is 
depressed, and bowed, and broken by sin: oh, it is as 
though heaven had expanded its gates, and we had 
passed within, where neither tribulation, nor bereave- 
ment, nor darkness, nor loneliness, nor sin, is known 
any more for ever ! 

In placing before the renewed mind the Lord Jesus, 
as the model by which it is to be moulded and 
fashioned in all godliness, the Spirit glorifies him. 
Every soul re-cast into this model, every mind con- 
formed to this pattern, and every life reflecting this 
image, is an exalting and a glorifying of the Son of 
God. Now there is no single practical truth in the 
word of God, on which the Spirit is more emphatic 
than the example which Christ has set for the imita- 


308 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


tion of his followers. The church needed a perfect 
pattern, a flawless model. It wanted an imper- 
sonation, a living embodiment of those precepts of 
the Gospel so strictly enjoined upon every believer. 
To whom should it look? ‘To the holiest of mere 
men? Hear what one says who yearned to be a pat- 
tern of all that was noble and magnanimous in the 
Christian character, and whom some would have 
claimed as their master: ‘“‘Be ye followers of me, 
even as I also am of Christ,’—“ only as I follow 
Christ, only as I am conformed to him as my copy, 
my pattern, my example.” But God has graciously 
set before us our true model. ‘“‘ Whom he did fore- 
know, He also did predestinate to be conformed to the 
emage of His Son.” And what says Christ himself? 
‘“‘ My sheep follow me.’ Now, in laying stress upon 
this great practical truth, we concede that much 
heavenly wisdom and caution are here required. We 
allow that there are points in which we cannot, and 
are not required literally and strictly to follow Christ. 
We cannot lay claim to his infallibility. He who 
sets himself up as infallible in his judgment, spot- 
lessly pure in his heart, and perfect in his attain- 
ments in holiness, deceives his own soul. Jesus. did 
many things too as our surety, which we cannot do. 
We cannot drink of the cup of Divine trembling 
which he drank ; nor can we be baptized with the bap- 
tism of blood with which he was baptized. He did 
‘many things as a Jew—was circumcised, kept the 
passover, &c., which things are not obligatory upon 
us. And yet in all that is essential to our sancti- 


GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 859 


fication, to our holy, obedient, God-glorifying walk, 
he has “‘left us an example, that we should follow his 
steps.” 

In his lowly spirit, meek, humble deportment, and 
patient endurance of suffering; ‘Learn of me, for I 
am meek and lowly in heart.’’ In the disintercsted- 
ness of his love, his pure benevolence, the unselfish- 
ness of his religion: “Look not every man on his 
own things, but every man also on the things of 
others; let this mind be in you, which was also in 
Christ Jesus.” “We then that are strong, ought to 
bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please 
ourselves. For even Christ pleased not himself.” 
Look not every man on his own circle, his own 
family, his own gifts, his own interests, comfort, and 
happiness; upon his own church, his own community, 
his own minister. Let him not look upon these ez- 
elusively. Let him not prefer his own advantage to 
the public good. Let him not be self-willed in mat- 
ters involving the peace and comfort of others. Let 
him not form favorite theories, or individual opinions, 
to the hazard of a church’s prosperity, or a family’s 
happiness. Let him yield, sacrifice, and give place, 
rather than carry a point to the detriment of others. 
Let him, with a generous, magnanimous, disinterested 
spirit, in all things imitate Jesus, who “pleased not 
himself.’’ Let him seek the good of others, honour- 
ing their gifts, respecting their opinions, nobly yield- 
ing, when they correct and overrule his own. Let 
him promote the peace of the church, consult the 
honour of Christ, and seek the glory of God, above 


360 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


and beyond all private and selfish ends. Oh, this is 
to be conformed to the image of God’s dear Son, to 
which high calling we are predestinated! But as 
the preceding pages have frequently alluded to the 
example of Christ, on this point we need not further 
enlarge; only adding, that in any feature of resem- 
blance which the Holy Spirit brings out in the Holy 

life of a follower of the Lamb, Christ is thereby 
- glorified before men and angels. “These are they who 
follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth.”’ 

The Spirit glorifies Christ in the death of the believer. 
In that last, closing, trying moment, when life is 
brought to a fine point, and on that point is suspended 
an eternal world of glory, Jesus stands by the depart- 
ing soul. Heart and flesh are failing—the world fades 
upon the eye—reason wanders—the hand returns not 
affection’s last grasp—the cheek feels not the scalding 
tear of grief that falls upon it—external objects, once 
so fond and pleasing, affect no more; but Jesus is 
there, walking through the dark valley, side by side 
with the receding spirit. Yea, he is bearing it up in 
his arms, and is carrying it over the flood gently and 
safely in his bosom. How many saints in dying, have 
been privileged, with all the strength of their powers, 
to testify, ‘Christ is with me in the valley!” The 
Eternal Spirit in this awful moment has applied 
afresh the atoning blood—he has wrapped around 
the spotless righteousness—he has fed with the 
hidden manna—he has spoken the comforting pro- 
mise —in a word, he has testified of Jesus. Oh what 
anticipations of heaven, what transporting joys, what 


GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 361 


~ untold glory, what visions of God have now burst 
upon the soul! How one has longed to die with 
them! “Death is not terrible,’ said Halyburton, 
when dying in an ecstasy; “it is unstinged, the 
curse of the holy law is done away: I bless his name, 
I have found him; I am taken up in blessing him; 
I am dying, rejoicing in the Lord: I long to be in 
the promised land! I wait for thy salvation, how 
long? Come, sweet Lord Jesus, take me by the 
hand; what means he to stay so long? I am like 
to faint for delay; I could not believe that I could 
have borne, and borne cheerfully, this rod so long. 
This is a miracle, pain without pain; and this is not 
a fancy of a man disordered in his brain, but of one 
lying in full composure. Oh, blessed that ever I was 
born! Oh, if I were where he is! and yet for all 
this, God’s withdrawing from me would make me 
weak as water. I am wonderfully helped, beyond 
the power of nature; though my body be sufficiently 
afflicted, yet my spirit is untouched. In the Mediator, 
Christ Jesus, there is all the fulness of the Godhead, 
and it will never run out. When I fall so low that I 
am not able to speak, I’ll show you a sign of triumph, 
when I am near glory, if I be able.”” This he did by 
elevating his hands, and clapping them together when 
speechless, and just departing. Janeway declared in 
his last sickness, “I am through mercy quite above 
the fears of death, and am going unto him whom 
I love above life. Oh that I could let you know 
what I now feel! Oh that I could show you what I 
see! Oh that I could now express the thousandth 


31 


362 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


part of that sweetness which I now find in Christ! 
You little think what a Christ is worth upon a death- 
bed. Oh, the glory, the unspeakable glory that I 
behold! My heart is full, my heart is full! Christ 
smiles — would you keep me from my crown? The 
arms of my blessed Saviour are open to embrace me, 
the angels stand ready to carry my soul into his 
bosom! You would not have the heart to detain 
me, if you could but see what I see!’ Dr. Goodwin 
said, “‘I am going to the three Persons with whom I 
have held communion: they have taken me, I did not 
take them. I shall be changed in the twinkling of an 
eye; all my corruptions I shall be rid of in a mo- 
ment!’ Then alluding to the eleventh of the Hebrews, 
he said, “‘ All these died in faith; I could not have 
imagined I should ever have had such a measure of 
faith in this hour; no, I could never have imagined 
it; my love abides in strength. Is Christ divided? 
No, I have the whole of his righteousness; Christ 
cannot love me better than he doth; I think I ean- 
not love Christ better than Ido; I am swallowed up 
in God: soon I shall be for ever with the Lord!” 
John Knox thus spoke in dying: ‘“‘That day is now 
at hand, which I have so often and intensely longed 
for, in which I shall be dissolved, and be with Christ. 
O my friends, wait on the Lord, and death will not 
be terrible! I have a certain persuasion in my own 
breast, that Satan shall not be permitted to return, 
or molest me any more in my passage to glory; but 
that I shall soon, without any pain of body or agony 
of mind, sweetly and peacefully exchange this 


GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 363 


wretched life for that which is through Christ 
Jesus.” Rutherford said, ‘‘I shall shine! I shall 
see him as he is, and all the fair company with him, 
and shall have my large share. I have gotten the 
victory; Christ is holding forth his arms to embrace 
me: I have had my fears and faintings, but as sure 
as ever he spake to me in his word, his Spirit wit- 
nessed to my heart, saying, ‘Fear not.’” <A few 
moments before breathing his last, he exclaimed, 
‘““Now I feel, I believe, I enjoy, I rejoice, I feed on 
manna, I have angels’ food; my eyes shall see my 
Redeemer: ‘I know that he shall stand at the latter 
day upon the earth!’’’ and then expired, saying, 
“Glory, glory dwelleth in Emmanuel’s land!” Mr. 
Holland, overwhelmed with a vision of glory on his 
death-bed, asked whether the candles had been 
lighted: he was told it was the sunshine. ‘ Sun- 
shine!’ said he, “nay, it is my Saviour’s shine. 
Oh! tell at my funeral God deals favourably with 
man; whether in the body or out of the body I 
cannot tell, God knoweth; but I see things unutter- 
able ;” and in this rapture he fell asleep. And how 
shall we describe the last moments of the seraphic 
Payson? ‘To go and stand by his dying bed seems 
more like a visit to the land of Beulah than to the 
place where the ‘king of terrors’ was waging his last 
conflict. It is to stand ‘quite on the verge of 
heaven.’ Listen to the dying saint: “The celestial 
city is full in my view. Its glories beam upon me, 
its breezes fan me, its odours are wafted to me, its 
sounds strike upon my ears, and its spirit is breathed 


364 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


into my heart. Nothing separates me from it but 
the river of death, which now appears but an insig- 
nificant rill, that may be crossed at a single step, 
whenever God shall give permission. The Sun of 
Righteousness has been drawing nearer and nearer, 
appearing larger and brighter as he approached, and 
now he fills the whole hemisphere, pouring forth a 
flood of glory, in which I seem to float like an inscct 
in the beams of the sun, exulting, yet almost trem- 
bling, while I gaze on this excessive brightness, and 
wondering, with unutterable wonder, why God should 
deign thus to shine upon a sinful worm.” ‘Oh! 
if ministers only saw the inconceivable glory that 
is before them, and the preciousness of Christ, they 
would not be able to refrain from going about, 
leaping and clapping their hands for joy, and ex- 
claiming, ‘I’m a minister of Christ! I’m a min- 
ister of Christ !’”’ ‘I can find no words to express 
my happiness. I seem to be swimming in a river of 
pleasure, which is carrying me on to the great Foun- 
tain.” ‘I find no satisfaction in looking at anything 
I have done; I want to leave all this behind— it is 
nothing —and fly to Christ, to be clothed in his right- 
eousness.”’ ‘I have done nothing myself. I have not 
fought, but Christ has fought for me; I have not run, 
but Christ has carried me; I have not worked, but 
Christ has wrought in -me;— Christ has done all!’ 
‘‘ Tt seems as if the promise, ‘God shall wipe away all 
tears from their eyes,’ were already fulfilled to me, as 
it respects tears of sorrow. I have no tears to shed 


~ @LORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 365 


now, but those of love, and joy, and thankfulness.” 
“‘Peace! peace! Victory! victory!” 

Thus to life’s closing scene, the Spirit glorifies 
Jesus in the experience of the believer. And thus 
will he take of Christ’s, and show them unto you, 
Christian reader, in the final hour. You shall not 
want your Christ when you most need him. He who 
has been with you through all your earthly pilgrim- 
age, will be with you in its last step. The Shepherd 
who has guided you through the wilderness will not 
leave you when just emerging from it into the pro- 
mised land. The Pilot who has conducted you across 
the stormy main, will not resign the government just 
as the vessel enters the haven of rest. The Captain 
who has conquered for, and conquered in you, will 
not leave you when on the eve of the final conflict, 
and the certain victory. Oh no! Jesus will be with 
you to the last. Be not painfully anxious about your 
dying hour. Let all your solicitude be how you may 
best glorify him in your life, —he will glorify himself 
in your death. All grace, all strength, all glory is 
laid up for you against that moment. And when it 
comes, and not until then, will Jesus unlock the 
treasury, and bring it forth. But oh, to lve to 
him! To be able to say, ‘To me to ve is Christ !” 
‘Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it 
be by life or by death.” Strive for this. Whatever 
opposes it, take it to his grace, lay it beneath, yea 
fasten it to his cross. Oh! let Christ be everything 
to you in life, then will he be everything to you in 


death. 
31 * 


366 THE HOLY SPIRIT 


Does the ear of some dear departing saint of God 
lend itself to the recital of these closing words? 
Beloved of the Lord, beloved in the Lord, what a 
blessed opportunity have you now of leaning the 
entire weight of your soul, with all its sins, and 
sorrows, upon the finished work of Jesus, your 
Almighty Saviour, your Goel, your Redeemer! The 
great debt is cancelled. Justice exacts not a second 
payment, the first from your Surety, the second from 
you. No! justice itself is on your side; every per- 
fection of God is a wall of fire round about you. 
You stand complete in the righteousness of the in- 
carnate God. The blood of Jesus Christ, the Father’s 
own Son, cleanseth you from all sin. Many and 
ageravated you now see to have been your flaws, your 
derelictions, your departures, your backslidings, your 
stumblings; sin appears now as it never did before; 
the sense of your utter unworthiness presses you to 
the earth. Well, who is on the eager watch for the 
first kindlings of godly sorrow in the heart of the 
prodigal? Who welcomes his return with joy, with 
music, with honours? Whose heart has not ceased to 
love, whose eye has not ceased to follow, amidst all 
the waywardness and wanderings of that child? Oh, 
it is the Father! ‘‘When he was yet a great way off, 
his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and 
fell on his neck, and kissed him.” Behold thy God, 
thy covenant God and Father in Christ Jesus! This 
reconciled Father is yours. Throw yourself into His 
arms, and He will fall on thy neck, and will seal upon 
thy heart afresh the sense of His free forgiveness, and 


GLORIFYING THE REDEEMER. 367 


His pardoning love. Heaven is before you. Soon 
you will be freed, entirely and for ever freed, from all 
the remains of sin. Soon the last sigh will heave 
thy breast, and the last tear will fall from thine eye, 
and the last pang will convulse thy body. Soon, oh 
how soon, will you ‘see the King in his beauty,’ the 
Jesus who loved you, died for you, ransomed you, and 
loves you still! Soon you will fall at his feet, and be 
raised in his arms, and be hushed to rest in his bosom. 
Soon you will mingle, a pure and happy spirit, with 
patriarchs and prophets, apostles and martyrs, and 
with all who sleep in Jesus, who have gone but a little 
before you. See how they line the shores on the other 
side, and wait to welcome you over! See how they 
beckon you away! Above all, sweetest and most 
glorious of all, behold Jesus standing at the right 
hand of God, prepared to receive you to himself! 
Then, may you not sing — 


‘“‘What’s this that steals, that steals away my breath? 

Is it death? Is it death? 

That soon will quench, will quench this vital flame? 
Is it death? Is it death? 

If this be death, I soon shall be 

From all my sins and sorrows free, 

I shall the King of glory see! 
All is well; all is well! 


“Weep not, my friends, dear friends, weep not for me, 
All is well, all is well! 
For I am pardoned, pardoned. I am free; 
All is well, all is well! : 
' There’s not a cloud that doth arise 
To hide my Jesus from mine eyes; 
I soon shall mount the upper skies! 
All is well, all is well! 


368 THE HOLY SPIRIT, ETC. 


“Tune, tune your harps, your harps, ye saints in glory, 

All is well, all is well! 

I will rehearse the pleasing story, 
All is well, all is well! 

Bright angels are from glory come 

They’re round my bed, they’re in my room; 

They wait to waft my spirit home! 
All is well, all is well! 


‘Wark! hark! my Lord, my Lord and Master calls me! 

All is well, al! is well! 

I soon shall see his face in glory! 
All is well, all is well! 

Farewell, loved friends, adieu, adieu, 

I can no longer stay with you! 

My glittering crown appears in view! 
All is well, all is well! 


“ Hail, hail, all hail, all hail, ye blood-washed throng, 

Saved by grace, saved by grace! 

I soon shall join, shall join your rapturous song, 
Saved by grace, saved by grace! 

All, all is peace and joy divine, 

And heaven and glory now are mine! 

O hallelujah to the Lamb, ‘ 
All is well, all is well!” 


With this song of joy may you wade the swellings 
of Jordan, until, landing on the other side, you drop 
it, to join the triumphant hymn— 


‘THANKS BE UNTO GOD FOR HIS UNSPEAKABLE 
Girt!” 


CHAPTER X. 


THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER IN HIS SECOND 
COMING. 


“ Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great 
God, even our Saviour Jesus Christ.” — Titus ii. 13. 


IF it were true, that the abuse or the perversion of 
a good thing, formed a valid argument against its 
truth, or were a proper objection to its utility, then 
how soon should we be compelled to abandon all our 
strong-holds of truth, tamely relinquishing into the 
hands of the sceptic and the caviller the power of 
controlling our opinions, and legislating for our con- 
sciences! If the advocates of Christianity were 
responsible for all the flaws, mistakes, and incon- 
sistencies, with which its professed disciples were 
chargeable; and if it were demanded from them to 
concede a doctrine or an institution, because that 
doctrine or that institution had been made the in- 
strument of unrighteousness, then how little would 
be left to us of the “glorious Gospel of the blessed 
God!” To what a mere skeleton of truth would 
this sublime, life-inspiring system be reduced! Take, 
for example, the Scripture doctrine of justification by 

1G * (369) 


= 


370 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


faith in Christ. To the urgent and faithful expositor 
of this cardinal truth, laid deeply and pressed home 
upon the conscience with earnestness and power, how 
ready is the opponent of this truth with the remon- 
strance, ‘You are teaching a doctrine which has 
proved most injurious to the best interests of the 
Christian church —-.a doctrine which undermines the 
foundations of morality, and which weakens the 
obligation to practical holiness!’’ Suppose that the 
believer, admitting the truth of this allegation, were 
in consequence to abandon the doctrine altogether — 
what would he be relinquishing? one of the essential 
corner-stones of the great fabric of the Gospel; one of 
the main pillars of Christianity ; one of the most sancti- 
fying, God-glorifying truths of the Bible; yea, a truth 
which has well been denominated the doctrine of a — 
standing or a falling church. 

Now the subject of this closing chapter is one of 
those Scripture doctrines against which the prejudices 
of many Christian minds have been formed, in con- 
sequence of the speculative and fanciful views with 
which it has been associated by many of its advocates. 
The same mode of reasoning which we have applied 
in the vindication of the great doctrine of justifica- 
tion, will with equal force apply here. Is the 
doctrine of Christ’s second appearing less a doctrine 
of Divine revelation —is it less glorious in its nature 
and holy in its tendency, because some have abused 
it? Assuredly not. But separated fron human 
speculation, disentangled from the errors with which 
men have interwoven it, and made to stand out dressed 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 371 


in its own native sweetness and sublimity, it will be 
found to be one of the most precious, holy, and influ- 
ential truths revealed in God’s holy word. 

The doctrine of a coming Saviour was to the early 
church a fully received, most endearing, and practical 
truth. They are represented as “ waiting for his Son 
from heaven; as “‘loving his appearing ;’” as ‘look- 
ing for the blessed hope and the glorious appearing of 
the great God, even our Saviour Jesus Christ.” The 
great apostasy, however, dimmed this star of hope, 
on which the eye was wont to gaze so intently and 
so fondly. And as it waned, with it waned her true 
spirituality. The church of Rome, ‘the mother of 
abominations,’ the great extinguisher of all evangeli- 
cal light, by the introduction of doctrines more 
palatable to the taste of a declining church, drew 
off its mind from the great truth, and the expectation 
of the Lord’s coming became almost entirely extinct. 
A purgatory after death, which might allow a longer 
period and an easier atonement to cleanse the souls 
of the wicked, was far more agreeable to such a 
system, than the sure and near approach of the 
Almighty King, “coming to take vengeance on 
them that knew not God, and that obeyed not the 
Gospel of his Son.” ‘To the Reformation we are 
indebted for the recovery of this, as of many other 
glorious truths of the Bible, so long buried beneath 
the rubbish of the great apostasy. The reformers, 
returning to the principles of the early Christians, 
returned to the ‘blessed hope’ of the church, and 
once more pointed her eye to this bright constellation, 


~ 


872 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


which, though darkened and lost to view for a while, 
now shone forth as if robed with new and richer 
effulgence ; and again the Bride was brought into 
the holy posture of an anxious expectant of her 
Lord. 

The great subject which has for some time occu- 
pied our attention, I trust to the endearing of his 
name to our hearts, has been the glory of Jesus. 
Imperfectly as it has been discussed, I am reluctant to 
conduct it to a close without directing the eye of my 
reader to one more view of the Redeemer’s glory — 
the last, the crowning one of all—the glory of his 
second appearing. Let it be premised, however, that 
with the spiritual and practical bearing of the doctrine 
as it is laid down in God’s word, we have alone to do. 
It comes not within our scope or design to meet the 
objections which have been alleged against it, or to 
touch upon those controverted prophetic points with 
which, in the minds and in the writings of many, it 
has been connected. This would divert our attention 
from the grand topic before us. May the Holy Spirit 
descend upon us while investigating this great truth! 
May He unfold it deeply to our minds, and lay it 
closely upon our hearts, that we may awake out of 
sleep, gird up afresh the loins of our minds, trim 
anew our lamps, and be found waiting, watching, and 
looking for the coming of the Bridegroom, that thus 
we may be prepared to go forth and meet him, when 
he shall “appear the second time without sin unto 
salvation.” 

We shall first endeavour to place the doctrine of the 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 373 


second coming of the Redeemer upon a scriptural 
basis; and then proceed to unfold his glory in con- 
nexion with the grand event. If it be found to be a 
truth revealed by God the Holy Spirit, then it be- 
comes us with all teachableness, humility, and joy, to 
receive it —all prejudices and objections yielding be- 
fore —‘‘ Thus saith the Lord.” 

We commence the Scripture proof with adducing a 
few of the more prominent predictions of the Old 
Testament, quoting an observation of Sir I. Newton, 
that ‘‘there is scarcely a prophecy in the Old Testa- 
ment which does not in something or other relate to 
the second coming of Christ.’’ The first promise of 
mercy to fallen man must be regarded as containing 
an intimation of the second advent of our Lord, 
for the events of the first advent did not fulfil all that 
is contained in this prediction. ‘And I will put 
enmity between thee and the woman, and between 
thy seed and her seed: he shall bruise thy head, and 
thou shalt bruise his heel.’’ Gen. iii. 15. Now, the 
incarnation of our adorable Lord has taught us who 
is the ‘‘woman’s seed;” his death has fully explained 
the prophecy of the “bruising of his heel ;” but that 
part which relates to the bruising of the serpent’s 
head must be considered as yet an unfulfilled prophecy. 
Christ did indeed defeat and overcome Satan upon the 
cross; chaining him to his car, thus ‘leading captivity 
captive.” But the fatal blow aimed at the head, can- 
not be said to have been inflicted until Christ comes 
the second time to take full possession of his kingdom, 
to raise his saints, and chain down Satan, so that he 


O¢ 
o2 


374 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


Shall never go forth again to deceive the nations that 
are upon the earth. The head, or the power of the 
serpent, is not yet fully bruised nor destroyed; but it 
will be when the descending Redeemer shall place his 
foot upon him, trampling him to the earth in complete 
and glorious triumph. 

Restored to its chronological order, the remarkable 
prophecy of Enoch, the seventh generation from Adam, 
as preserved by the apostle Jude, is worthy of our next 
consideration. “And Enoch also, the seventh from 
Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord 
cometh with ten thousand of his saints to execute judg- 
ment upon all,’ &c. Jude 14,15. That this refers 
not to the first, but to the second coming of Christ, is 
unquestionable, from the fact that the former was an 
errand of mercy, whereas the latter is here represented 
as one of judgment. 

We must be content to present in a single group, 
and without comment, the remaining prophetic testi- 
monies. ‘Thus the patriarch Job, in the strength of a 
far-reaching faith, testifies, ““I know that my Re- 
deemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter 
day upon the earth: and though after my skin worms 
destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God.” 
Job xix. 25, 26. -Thus the prophet Daniel: “I be- 
held till the thrones were cast down, and the Ancient 
of days did sit, whose garment was white as snow, 
and the hair of his head like the pure wool: his 
‘throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheels as 
burning fire. A fiery stream issued and came forth 
from before him; thousand thousands ministered 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. oto 


unto him, and ten thousand. times ten thousand stood 
before him: the judgment was set, and the books 
were opened.” vii. 9, 10. Thus, too, speaks the 
prophet Haggai: “Thus saith the Lord of hosts ; 
Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the 
heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land ; 
and I will shake all nations, and the Desire of all 
nations shall come.” ii. 6, 7. Malachi, in a similar 
strain, closes the prophetic testimony: ‘The Lord, 
whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, 
even the Messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight 
in: behold, he shall come, saith the Lord of hosts. 
But who may abide the day of his coming? and who 
shall stand when he appeareth? for he is like a 
refiner’s fire, and like fullers’ soap.” ii. 1, 2. Thus 
clearly, as a golden thread, does the great truth run 
through the prophecies of the Old Testament. We 
pass to the proof afforded by the New Testament 
writings. ; 

Intimations of a second appearing are clearly dis- 
coverable in the angel’s annunciation to Mary. ‘“ Be- 
hold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring 
forth a Son, thou shalt call his name Jesus. And he 
shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the 
Highest: and the Lord God shall give unto him the 
throne of his father David: and he shall reign over 
the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom 
' there shall be no end.” Luke i. 831—33. Surely the 
subsequent history of our suffering Lord forbids the 
application of this angelic prediction to the era of his 
humiliation in the flesh. The Son of David at that 


376 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


time found no throne; the scene of his humiliation 
was the ignominious cross; thorns the only crown 
which he wore; and a reed, mocking in his dying 
agonies the claims of his majesty, the only sceptre 
which he swayed. But we look for its full accomplish- 
ment at a period of far greater visible glory, when he 
shall part the heavens asunder, and appear in great 
_and acknowledged majesty. 

While upon the testimony of the angels, we may 
refer to the period of his ascension, when, for aught 
that we know, the same ‘ministering spirits’ thus 
proclaimed his second coming: ‘And while they 
looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went up, be- 
hold, two men stood by them in white apparel; who 
also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing 
up into heaven? this same Jesus, which is taken up 
from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner 
as ye have seen him go into heaven.” Acts 1.10, 11. 

We pass on to our Lord’s own testimony to the 
doctrine. Comprehending two distinct predictions, 
the one the destruction of his temple, and the other 
his coming again, when the nation now rejecting him 
should gladly welcome and acknowledge him their 
Redeemer and their King, he thus addresses the 
Jews: ‘* Behold your house is left unto you desolate. 
For I say unto you, Ye shall not see me henceforth, 
till ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the 
name of the Lord.” Matt. xxiii. 88,89. Again, in- 
timating that the time of his appearing would be a 
season for which his church would long have to wait, 
thus rebuking the received opinion that it was then 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. S7T 


nigh at hand: “‘ He said unto the disciples, The days 
will come, when ye shall desire to see one of the days 
of the Son of man, and ye shall not see it.”” He then 
presents an emblem of his manifestation: ‘As the 
lightning, that lighteneth out of the one part under 
heaven, shineth into the other part under heaven, 
so shall also the Son of man be in his day.” He 
then proceeds, in the following verses, to describe 
the wnexpected manner in which the day of his ap- 
pearing will burst upon an ungodly and unprepared 
world ; illustrates it by the sudden surprisal of Sodom 
and Gomorrah by the Divine judgments, leaving not 
a moment to loiter upon worldly possessions; and 
then, to rebuke a hankering spirit after earthly glory, 
now fading upon the view, pointed to the case of 
Lot’s wife, who, casting a lingering look upon the 
doomed city she had left, became instantly a monu- 
ment of God’s indignation. 

It only remains that we adduce the proof found to 
exist in the writings of the apostles. Here the doc- 
trine of the second coming is inscribed as with a sun- 
beam. How solemnly and emphatically are we re- 
minded of this great and grand event, on each return 
of the ordinance of the Lord’s supper! ‘As often 
as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show 
the Lord’s death tid he come.” 1 Cor. xi. 26. Thus 
fitly is this precious truth entwined with our most 
solemn rites, and blended with our most hallowed 
scenes. Wellis it that we keep in mind, when par- 
taking of the sacred emblems, the speedy return of 
him, the elements of whose dying love are at that mo- 

32* 


372 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


ment, melting upon our lips, and the splendour of whose 
personal appearing will soon burst upon our view. 

With this same truth the apostle seeks to soothe 
the sorrow of those who were mourning over the 
‘pious dead.’ ‘‘I would not have you to be igno- 
rant, brethren, concerning them which are asleep, 
that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no 
hope. For if we believe that Jesus died and rose 
again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will 
God bring with him. For this we say unto you by 
the word of the Lord, that we which are alive and 
remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not pre- 
vent (or rise before) them which are asleep.” 1 Thess. 
iv. 183—15. Mark the certainty which he attaches 
to the second coming: ‘If we believe that Jesus died 
and rose again.” As surely as Christ has atoned for 
our sins, and has risen again for our justification, so 
surely will he come again for our glorification. The 
three great facts form so many links in one golden 
indissoluble chain. 

Yet again. ‘Our conversation is in heaven, from 
whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus 
Christ.” ‘‘When Christ who is our life shall appear, 
then shall we also appear with him in glory.” “It 
doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we know 
that when he shall appear we shall be like him, for 
we shall see him as he is.” ‘‘ Waiting for the coming 
of our Lord Jesus Christ.” ‘‘ Christ the first fruits, 
afterward they that are Christ’s at his coming.” ‘To 
the end he may establish your hearts unblameable in 
holiness before God, even our Father, at the coming 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 379 


of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saints.” “We 
beseech you, brethren, by the coming of our Lord 
Jesus Christ, and by our gathering together unto 
him.” ‘The coming of the Lord draweth nigh.” 
What further testimony need we? The doctrine 
stands upon the impregnable basis of Divine revela- 
tion, and happy and holy is he that receives and em- 
braces it as the “‘ blessed hope” of the church. 

Let us now contemplate the glory of the Redeemer 
as connected with this great event. It is called the 
“glorious appearing of the great God our Saviour.” 
Surpassing in glory all that the eye has ever seen, 
or the imagination has ever conceived, will be the 
second personal appearing of the Son of God. A 
perfect contrast will it present to his first advent. 
Then he appeared a king, but disguised in the form 
of a servant, without a retinue, without the insignia 
of royalty, without visible glory, his throne a cross, 
his crown the thorns, his sceptre a reed. But his 
second coming will be in perfect contrast with this. 
He will now have thrown off the garment of humili- 
ation, and will appear clad with the robe of majesty, 
the King acknowledged and adored. 

In the first place, he wzll appear in the glory of his 
Father. ‘‘The Son of man shall come in the glory of 
his Father.’”? As the representative of the Father, he ° 
appeared in the flesh: ‘‘ He that hath seen me hath 
seen the Father.” But when he appears the second 
time, it will be with a clearer, brighter manifestation 
of the Father’s glory. He will come as the Father’s 
equal — as his own beloved Son, and with all the glory 


380 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


which the Father gave him as the Mediator of his 
church. This will contribute immensely to the splen- 
dour of the scene. The Father’s glory and the Son’s 
glory, will now be seen to be one glory. All his former 
claims to a oneness with the Father, to a perfect 
equality with him in essential dignity, will now be made 
good. How gloriously will shine out the Father’s love, 
the Father’s grace, the Father’s wisdom, when the Son 
of God appears in the clouds of heaven with great 
glory and majesty! Exalted and precious as had been 
our previous view of the Father, methinks they will 
appear as nothing compared with the revelations which 
at that moment will burst in overwhelming power on 
the soul. 

But more especially well he appear in his own per- 
sonal glory. “The Son of man shall come in his 
glory.” He will come in the glory of his Divine nature. 
His deity will now be unveiled, unclouded, and unde- 
nied, the ‘‘God over all, blessed for evermore.” He 
will appear as the “Great God, even our Saviour.” 
The question of his deity will be set at rest for ever. 
Will men deny it now? Will they refuse him Divine 
honour? Will they withhold from him Divine worship ? 
Will they now lift their puny hands and pluck the 
crown of Godhead from his brow? No! ‘At the 
name of Jesus every knee shall bow, and every tongue 
shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of 
God the Father.” Angels will laud him, saints will 
crown him, devils will fear him, his enemies will bow 
to him. Every tongue will confess his deity. His 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 3881 


own glory will shine out to the confusion of his foes, 
to the admiration of his friends. 

But he will also appear in the glory of his human 
nature. ‘This was concealed beneath the cloud of sin 
and sorrow when he was on earth. Although it was 
holy, spotless, flawless, yet it was humbled, bruised, 
and trodden under foot. But he will ‘appear the 
second time without sin unto salvation,’ that same 
humanity now robed in glory and exalted in dignity. 
Especially will the glory of his priestly character now 
burst forth, and like the Jewish high-priest, who, after 
he had offered the sacrifice, entered the holy of holies, 
taking in his hands the blood of the atonement: then 
when he had sprinkled the blood upon the mercy-seat, 
put on his gorgeous robes, and appeared again to bless 
the congregation; so Jesus our great High Priest, 
having offered himself a sacrifice, and having entered 
within the vail with his own blood, will appear the 
second time, robed in majesty and glory, to bless his 
people, and to take them to himself for ever. 

Angels and saints will contribute to the glory of the 
scene. The celestial beings who sang his natal song, 
and who escorted him back to heaven, with ten thou- 
sand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands 
more, will now throng his descending way. Clustering 
around still nearer to his person, will be the ransomed 
church, the ‘“‘holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down 
from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned 
for her husband.” And as she nears the new earth, 
the future scene of her rest and her glory, a ‘great 
voice out of heaven’ will be heard, saying, “ Behold, 


382 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell 
with them, and God himself shall be with them, and be 
their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from 
their eyes; and there shall be no more death, nor sor- 
row, nor crying, nor shall there be any more pain: for 
the former things are passed away.’ Oh, blessed hope 
and glorious appearing of the great God our Saviour, 
‘‘when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and 
to be admired in all them that believe !” 

But let us briefly trace some of the important events 
suspended upon the coming of the Lord, which will con- 
tribute greatly to the glory of the Redeemer, and to 
the grandeur of the scene. 

The first that will then transpire will be the resur- 
rection of the righteous. This is termed in the Apoca- 
lypse the “‘ FIRST RESURRECTION.” After a glowing 
description of the thrones, and of the happy saints who 
filled them, the apostle proceeds to say, ‘‘ This is the 
first resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that hath 
part in the first resurrection: on such the second death 
hath no power, but they shall be priests of God and of 
Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand years.”’ 
Rey. xx. 5, 6. Now this first resurrection, which will 
transpire a thousand years before the second, will be 
exclusively the resurrection of the saints. They shall 
take precedence of the ungodly world. How distinctly 
is this truth thus affirmed! ‘The Lord himself shall 
descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of 
the archangel, and with the trump of Cod: and the 
dead in Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive 
and remain shall be caught up together with them in 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. $83 


the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air: and so shall 
we ever be with the Lord.” 1 Thess. iv.16,17. Then 
the ‘upright shall have dominion over the wicked in 
the morning’ of the resurrection; and in the evening 
of the thousand years — for with the Lord a thousand 
years are but as one day —the rest of the dead shall 
come forth. Blessed hope! transporting prospect! 
The Lord descends! the trumpet sounds! the earth 
trembles! the graves open! And who emerge? None 
but those who slept in Jesus. All the rest of mankind 
remain locked in the iron dominion of death until the 
thousand years shall have expired. Not an enemy of 
God, not a despiser of Christ, not a foe of the Chris- 
tian, now rears his dark brow! None but holy and 
happy forms are seen throwing back the clods, and 
coming forth, gilded with the light, breathing the air, 
and drinking the dew of that orient and blessed morn- 
ing. What calmness reigns! All sounds of sin and 
of suffermg are now hushed, and no voice breaks the 
holy stillness of that hour, save the joyous challenge, 
as each mounts in triumph from the tomb, ‘‘O grave! 
where is thy victory?” Saints of God! this will be 
your resurrection! Oh to have a part in it! Then 
will God’s electing love shine forth in all its magnifi- 
cence. ‘Then will sovereign grace appear truly glori- 
ous. And then will the crown be laid at Jesus’ feet, 
and every tongue will confess, ‘‘ Salvation is from the 
Lord.” 

The perfect glorification of his saints will then fol- 
low. In what will it consist? The re-union of the 
soul and the body, and both made like Christ. “Our 


384 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


conversation is in heaven; from whence we look for 
the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change 
our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his 
glorious body.” “It doth not yet appear what we 
shall be, but we know that when he shall appear, we 
shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is.” “Ag 
we have borne the image of the earthly, we shall also 
bear the image of the heavenly.”’ This will constitute 
the perfect glory of the risen saints, —they shall be 
like Christ in body and in soul. The body spiritual, 
immortal, glorified: the soul resembling a sea of glass, 
transparent, pure, serene, reflecting every perfection 
and lineament of the Divine image: ‘ We shall be like 
him.” Then we will not speculate as to the details of 
that happy and holy existence —it is enough that we 
shall be like Jesus: this, we know, will comprehend 
perfect holiness and consummate bliss. ‘‘ Then shall 
the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of 
their Father.” 

The mutual recognition and re-union of the saints, 
will form another element in the glory which is to be 
revealed at the first resurrection, and at the second 
coming of the Redeemer. ‘This truth is not one of 
vain speculation or idle theory, and conducting to no 
important practical result. It is one, if not of express, 
yet of clear revelation in God’s word, is comforting in 
its influence, and is associated with the sublimest pros- 
pect of the believer’s faith. We shall meet and know 
each other at the appearing of the Lord. That the 
saints will recognize, and have communion with each 
other immediately on their entrance into glory, is, we 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 385 


think, clear from the apostle’s words, when enumerat- 
ing the privileges of the released believers: ‘We are 
come .... to the spirits of just men made perfect.” 
We indulge, therefore, the fond hope that, should death 
remove us before the coming of the Lord, we shall 
meet, know, and have delightful intercourse with our 
friends, who departed this life in Jesus. But the 
recognition and the communion must necessarily be 
not so perfect and full as when Christ shall appear, 
and the risen saints shall cluster together around the 
person and in the kingdom of their Lord; since neither 
we nor they have attained our state of full knowledge 
and capacity, until that great event take place, and the 
‘blessed hope’ is realized. 

How clearly is this truth stated by the apostle! At- 
tempting to console the minds of those who were mourn- 
ing for their departed kindred, he uses these animating 
words: ‘‘ But I would not have you to be ignorant, 
brethren, concerning them who are asleep, that ye sor- 
row not even as others who have no hope. For if we 
believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them 
also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.” 
These members of the church in Thessalonica were be- 
reaved: the apostle seeks to- soothe their grief by 
assuring them that, at the coming of Jesus, they would 
meet their departed relatives again. But what real 
consolation could this hope inspire if, when they met 
them again, they should not know them? 

But we argue the recognition of the saints from the 
fact of the perfection of knowledge to which the coming 


glory will advance us. Our dear Lord reminds his 
33 


386 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


saints that they shall be equal to the angels. They 
know each other. It would seem impossible, living to- 
gether for so many years, that they should not. If, 
then, the saints are equal to them at all, they must be 
in this sweet privilege. And is it reasonable to suppose, 
that in all other respects our knowledge will be per- 
fected, save in this one particular only? Shall we pos- 
sess an element of mental power here, which we shall 
lose in a gradation towards perfection, and, conse- 
quently, shall not possess in a higher degree hereafter ? 
Assuredly not. When, therefore, the dead in Christ 
shall rise at his coming, every intellectual faculty will 
be enlarged, and not only retaining all our former, but 
increasing the amount by a larger degree of additional 
knowledge, we shall “‘know even as we are known.” 
The perfection of happiness, which glorification 
implies, involves this blessing. What a rich source 
of high and holy delight does the communion of 
saints supply even in our present state! How it 
elevates, chastens, expands, and soothes the mind and 
heart, so much beclouded by care and chafed by 
sorrow! <A look beaming with love, an expression 
of the countenance speaking of sympathy, a word 
unfolding counsel or uttering a promise, oh, it has 
been like the sudden gleam of the sun bursting 
through the dark clouds of a storm-wreathed sky! 
Above all price is Christian friendship! How sweet 
the intercourse of holy minds! To rush into the 
warm embrace of fond ones, from whom oceans had 
divided or years had long separated us; to recognize 
their well-remembered features, too deeply engraven 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 387 


on memory’s tablet to have faded, —to know again 
the speaking eye, the familiar countenance, the gentle 
voice, —oh, who has not felt the joyous thrill of that 
moment ? 
. But heaven will perfect this bliss. Does it not 
heighten the beauty of the prospect, and strengthen 
the expectation of the scene? Will it add nothing 
to the glory of that event, and to the happiness of 
that moment, when the Son of God descends, and, 
dissolving the soft slumbers of the holy dead, will 
re-animate each with its former occupant, that then 
we shall perfectly recognize those we once knew and 
loved, and renew the sweet intercourse before imper- 
fect and limited, but now complete and eternal? 
Dry, then, your tears, and cease to mourn, ye saints 
of God. They are ‘not lost, but gone before.’ Their 
spirits live with Jesus. And when he comes, he will 
bring them with him, and you shall see and know 
them with a cloudless sight and a perfect knowledge. 
The very eyes which once smiled upon you so kindly 
—the very tongue which spake to you so comfort- 
ingly —the very hands which administered to you so 
skilfully — the very feet which travelled by your side 
so faithfully — the very bosom which pillowed you so 
tenderly—you shall meet again. ‘The coming of the 
Lord draweth nigh,’ and those who ‘sleep in Jesus 
will God bring with him.’ Let us ‘comfort one 
another with these words.’ 

And will it be no additional joy to meet and to 
know those eminent servants of the Lord whose 
histories and whose writings stimulated, instructed, 


388 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


and cheered us, shedding light and gladness on our 
way? Abraham, whose faith had animated us— 
David, whose experimental psalms had comforted us 
— Isaiah, whose visions of Jesus had gladdened us— 
Paul, whose doctrinal epistles had instructed us — 
John, whose letters of love had subdued us ;—to gaze 
upon the ‘Magdelene’ sitting at Jesus’ feet -—upon 
the ‘beggar’ reposing in Abraham’s bosom — upon 
the ‘thief’ with Christ in paradise,—oh! will not 
this add to the happiness of heaven? Will this be 
no joy, no bliss, no glory? Assuredly it will! 

At Christ’s coming, will not his ministers, too, and 
those to whom their labours have been useful, meet, 
know, and rejoice in each other? ‘The pastor and 
the flock, will there be no certain and permanent 
re-union? no sweet, and fond, and holy recognition? 
Shall their union in the church below, exceed, in its 
beauty and sweetness, their re-union in the church 
above? Here it is necessarily mingled with much 
that is imperfect. Much concealment is connected 
with their united labours in the vineyard of Christ. 
They go forth weeping, bearing precious seed, and 
often are called to their rest ere the fruit of their 
prayers, and tears, and toil, appears. Here, too, 
seasons of sickness and of separation frequently tran- 
spire, enshrouding the spirit with gloom, and wring- 
ing the heart with anguish. And then, at last, death 
itself rudely breaks the tender bond, lays the standard- 
bearer low, leaving the affectionate flock to gaze with 
streaming eye upon the lessening spirit of their pastor 
as it ascends and towers away to glory, But the com- 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 389 


ing of Jesus, with all his saints, will restore this happy 
union, invest it with new and richer glory, and place 
it upon a permanent, yea, everlasting basis. ‘For 
what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are 
not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ 
at his coming? For ye are our glory and joy. It 
was this hope which animated the apostle so fully 
and constantly to preach Jesus: ‘‘ Whom we preach, 
warning every man, and teaching every man, in all 
wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in 
Christ Jesus.” Do we not see here an argument for 
the mutual recognition of the saints at the coming of 
the Lord? For how could the apostle present those 
believers in that day, unless he had a knowledge of 
their persons? or how, without this recognition, 
could he call them his “crown of rejoicing?’ Yes, 
beloved, we shall know one another again, altered 
and glorified though we may be. Our Lord’s appear- 
ing, if it change our vile body, fashioning it like 
unto his glorious body, will also enlarge our mental 
capacity of knowing even as also we shall be known. 
Ye bereaved flocks! Ye mourning churches! Has 
the Lord taken from you the faithful minister, the 
tender pastor, the watchful shepherd? Has he who 
first led you to Jesus, who preached to you Jesus, who 
built you up in Jesus, gone now to be with Jesus ?— 
Oh think, as you gaze upon the vacant and mourn- 
ing-clad pulpit, that soon Jesus will come in the | 
clouds of heaven, attended by your pastor; and you 


shall meet him again, and he will present you, even 
33 * 


390 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


you, his children begotten in the faith, before God 
perfect in Christ Jesus. 

The restoration of the Jewish nation to their own 
land and their national conversion to God, will be an 
event greatly contributing to the glory of the Re- 
deemer at his coming. Into the full investigation of 
this deeply interesting subject — deepening in interest 
as the “‘ day draweth nigh’’ — our few remaining pages 
will not allow us to enter. We must content ourselves 
with a rapid glance at the Scripture testimony on 
which we ground our belief of the gathering together 
of Israel and Judah to the land of their fathers, and 
the re-union of the two kingdoms subsequently to, and 
yet closely connected with the second advent of him 
whom they pierced. We need not spend any time in 
proving that the descendants of Abraham are not only 
not in possession of Palestine, but are at this moment 
a people ‘scattered and torn,’ the dispersed over all 
the lands. This fact is too evident to need proof. 
Where is there scarcely a spot on the earth, trodden 
by the foot of civilized man, where the Jews have not, 
in their wanderings, found their way? Separate and 
distinct from all, they yet have existed among all na- 
tions, a living monument of the truth of God’s word, 
and a mournful witness to the sin of their fathers. In 
almost every part of Europe, Asia, Africa, and Ame- 
rica, they have been alike found. No mountains nor 
rivers, no deserts nor oceans, have terminated their 
wanderings. They have penetrated into the very heart 
of countries where the traveller hears of their existence, 
but cannot reach them. Thus are fulfilled to the letter 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 391 


the predictions which foretold their expatriation and 
dispersion among all countries, their total separation 
from all people, and the severe persecution of which 
they should everywhere be the subjects: “‘I will scatter 
you among the heathen, and will draw out a sword after 
you, and your land shall be desolate, and your cities 
waste.”’ Lev. xxvi. 838. ‘And the Lord shall scatter 
thee among all people, from the one end of the earth 
even unto the other..... And among these nations 
shalt thou find no ease, nor shall the sole of thy foot 
have rest: but the Lord shall give thee there a tremb- 
ling heart, and failing of eyes, and sorrow of mind.” 
Deut. xxvill. 64, 65. “And I will deliver them to be 
removed into all the kingdoms of the earth for their 
hurt, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a 
curse, in all places whither I shall drive them.” Jer. 
xxiv. 9. ‘‘So the people shall dwell alone, and shall 
not be reckoned among the nations.”’ How literally 
have these prophecies been accomplished! From the 
moment of their banishment from their own land, they 
have roamed the world in quest of rest, finding it not, 
a ‘“‘proverb and a by-word,” the objects of individual 
hate, of national scorn, proscription and violence. Oh 
what an overwhelming evidence to the truth of revela- 
tion does their thrilling history afford! Let the infidel 
honestly study it with God’s word in his hand, and he 
must bend his judgment to the irresistible conviction 
that that word is truth. Their preservation is a stand- 
‘ing miracle, and that miracle is a standing proof of the 
divinity of the Bible. But exceedingly great and pre- 
cious promises are theirs. Bright and glowing pros- 
_pects are placed before them. 


392 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


Their own land, now occupied by Turks, Greeks, 
Christians, Arabians, and Moors, while very few Jews 
are permitted to remain in it—let it be distinctly 
borne in mind—God gave to them unconditionally, 
and as theirs for ever. Thus He spake to Abraham, 
“Unto thy seed will I give this land.’”’ Gen. xii. 7. 
‘¢ All the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, 
and to thy seed for ever.” xii. 15. ‘I will give unto 
thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou 
art a stranger, all the land of Canaan for an ever- 
lasting possession; and I will be their God.” xvii. 8. 
Now this gift God has never revoked, in any subse- 
quent period of their history, painful and chequered 
as that history has been. The unconditional promise 
of their perpetual possession of the land of Palestine 
remains to this day as God gave it to Abraham, and 
will ever so remain. 

Let us now turn our attention to some of the pro- 
mises which distinctly point to their certain restora- 
tion to this their own land. ‘‘And it shall come to 
pass in that day, that the Lord shall set his hand again 
the second time to recover the remnant of his people, 
which shall be left.” Isa. xi. 11. How striking and 
conclusive is this passage! It refers to a second re- 
covery of the Jews. Hitherto there has been but one 
restoration of the whole nation, which was when God 
- delivered them out of Egypt, for their partial recovery 
from Babylon does not correspond with the fulness of 
the language of this prophecy. Again, the prophet 
declares that the Lord shall set up an ensign for the 
nations, and shall assemble the outcasts of Israel, and 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 393 


gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four 
corners of the earth.” Ver. 12. ‘In those days the 
house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and 
they shall come together out of the land of the north 
to the land that I have given for an inheritance unto 
your fathers.” Jer. 11.18. ‘The days come, saith 
the Lord, that I will bring again the captivity of my 
people Israel and Judah, and I will cause them to 
return to the land that I gave to their fathers, and 
they shall possess it.” xxx. 8. ‘Thus saith the Lord 
of hosts, Behold, I will save my people from the east 
country, and from the west country; and I will bring 
them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem; 
and they shall be my people, and I will be their God, 
in truth and in righteousness..... Thus saith the 
Lord of hosts, In those days it shall come to pass, that 
ten men shall take hold out of all languages of the 
nations, even shall take hold of the skirt of him that is 
a Jew, saying, We will go with you: for we have heard 
that God is with you.’’ Zech. viii. 7, 8,28. What a 
bright and radiant landscape stretches out before the 
view of God’s ancient people! What hues of beauty 
tint and adorn their sky! What blessings, what bliss, 
what honour, what distinction, await them ! 

The conversion of the Jews to the faith of Jesus — 
perhaps the first in order of time—is a subject as 
distinctly and clearly specified in God’s word as is 
their literal restoration to their own land. A few 
passages only, affirming the certainty of this blessed 
event, must suffice for our present proof. “I will take 
you from among the heathen, and gather you out of 


894 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


all countries, and I will bring you into your own land. 
Then will I sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye 
shall be clean: from all your filthiness, and from all 
your idols, will 1 cleanse you. A new heart also will 
I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and 
I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and 
I will give you a heart of flesh. And I will put my Spirit 
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and 
ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. And ye 
shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers; 
and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.” 
Ezek. xxxvi. 24—28. ‘Behold, I will bring them 
from the north country, and gather them from the 
coasts of the earth... They shall come with weeping, 
and with supplications will I lead them.” Jer. xxxi. 
8,9. ‘They shall look upon me whom they have 
pierced, and they shall mourn for him, as one mourn- 
eth for his only son.”’ Zech. xu. 10. 

Passing on to the New Testament, we find the con- 
version of Israel as unequivocally and explicitly de- 
clared. ‘I say then, Hath God cast away his people? 
God forbid. For I also am an Israelite, of the seed 
of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin. God hath not 
cast away his people whom he foreknew. Wot ye not 
what the Scripture saith of Elias, how he maketh inter- 
cession to God against Israel, saying, Lord, they have 
killed thy prophets, and digged down thine altars: and 
I am left alone, and they seek my life? But what 
saith the answer of God unto him? I have reserved to 
myself seven thousand men, who have not bowed the 
knee to the image of Baal. Even so then at this pre- 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 395 


sent time also there is a remnant according to the elec- 
tion of grace.” Rom. xi. 1—5. ‘The apostle then 
goes on to show that the accession of Jacob’s posterity 
to the church of God, will involve on a large and na- 
tional scale the conversion of the Gentiles. ‘‘ Now if 
the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the 
diminishing of them the riches of the Gentiles; how 
much more their fulness!...If the casting away of 
them be the reconciling of the world, what shall the 
receiving of them be but life from the dead?” ‘‘ God 
hath concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have 
mercy upon all. O the depth of the riches both of the 
wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are 
his judgments, and his ways past finding out!’ 

But the glory which these events — the complete re- 
covery of the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and 
their gathering together within one fold, and under the 
one Shepherd — will enkindle around the descending 
form of the Redeemer, what imagination can fully con- 
ceive, or pen describe? Then how glorious will appear 
his word, magnified above all his name! How manifest 
his faithfulness in fulfilling to the letter all his promises 
to his ancient people! How stupendous his love, how 
rich his grace, how precious his blood, how mighty his 
power, how illustrious his wisdom, yea, how transcen- 
dent his whole moral government, as from the valley 
of dry bones a mighty army is seen to arise, of living, 
joyous, holy beings: as from every part under heaven, 
his long lost, long afflicted, long rebellious people are 
-seen to come clustering in adoring crowds around him 


396 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


whom their fathers slew and hanged upon a tree! Me- 
thinks it will be the crowning act of redeeming, par- 
doning, quickening grace, — the brightest, the sweetest, 
the richest of all. The cry of wondrous joy will be 
raised, ‘“‘Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as 
doves to the windows of their dove-cote?’’ Ten thou- 
sand voices will be heard replying, ‘These are they 
who have come out of great tribulation, and have 
washed their robes, and made them white in the blood 
of the Lamb ;’’ while from their lips, once muttering 
imprecations upon their Messiah, the song will now 
float, filling the air with its melody, “TI will greatly 
rejoice in the Lord, my soul shall be joyful in my God; 
for he hath clothed me with the garments of salvation, 
he hath covered me with the robe of righteousness.”’ 
Oh, who does not love, and long for his appearing in 
the clouds of heaven, whose coming will be the signal 
of such blessings to the church as these ? 

Other events dependent upon the coming of the Re- 
deemer will augment the glory of his person and the 
splendour of the scene. ‘Then will take place the full 
revelation, and the final overthrow of the “ Man of 
sin,’ and all anti-christian confederates — the creation 
of a new heaven and a new earth, in which will dwell 
righteousness — the setting up of the throne of David, 
and the millennial reign of the saints with Christ over 
a holy and happy creation. ‘Then will he sit upon 
the throne of his glory.” ‘‘He will judge among the 
nations.” He ‘shall reign in Mount Zion and in Jeru- 
salem, and before his ancients gloriously.” ‘All 
things shall be put under his feet.” He shall wear 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 397 


the ‘‘many crowns,” and the “kingdoms of this world 
shall become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his 
Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever.” ‘‘ Even 
so, come, Lord Jesus! Come quickly!” 

Let us now briefly contemplate the appropriate and 
spiritual posture in which it behoves all, and especially 
Christ’s church, to be found in view of so glorious and 
near an event as the second coming of Jesus. For 
‘‘behold the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his 
saints.”’ The becoming attitude is in general terms 
thus expressed — ‘‘Looking for that blessed hope and 
the glorious appearing of the great God even our 
Saviour Jesus Christ.” It involves among other par- 
ticulars, — 

Faith in the doctrine of the coming Saviour, as the 
basis of a holy posture of expectation. Without a 
belief of this truth, there can be no looking for this 
blessed hope. ‘‘ When the Son of man cometh, will 
he find faith’? —in this doctrine —‘‘on the earth ?”’ 
No: it is to be feared, that many in the chureh will 
be found sadly wanting here. They had believed in 
the coming of death, but they had not believed in the 
coming of him who ‘abolished death.’ They had ex- 
pected with trembling the “king of terror,” but had 
not expected with joy the “King of glory.” They 
had hoped to go to Christ, but they had not hoped 
that Christ would come to them. But the ‘glorious 
appearing’ of Jesus, and not-the death of the saints, 
is the “blessed hope” of the church of God. On this 
one grand event the eye of faith is bade to rest, as 
the pole-star of the soul: ‘‘ Until the day-star arise in 

34 


398 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


your hearts.’”” And how much more soothing to the 
believing mind is such an object of faith, than the 
terrific monster — Death! To look up to the “ bright 
and morning Star,’’ and not down into the misty 
vault of the grave — to anticipate the glorious coming 
of the great Captain of my salvation, and not the 
gloomy and subtle approach— perhaps by slow and 
lingering steps — of the “last enemy” of my being — 
to hope for the coming of the Conqueror, and not to 
live in dread expectation of the foe, surely is more 
strengthening to faith, animating to hope, and stimu- 
lating to love! 

Faith thus firmly grasping the doctrine that reveals 
will inspire the hope that expects the event. The 
child of God first believing it, will then be found 
looking for it. Resembling the faithful and affec- 
tionate wife, who frequently retires to read over the 
letters of her long-absent and far-distant husband, 
lingering with especial interest and delight over the 
assurances of his certain and speedy return to her 
again, love will constrain you to dwell upon the pro- 
mise — ‘‘Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe 
in God, believe also in me. In my Father’s house 
are many mansions; if it were not so, I would have 
told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if 
I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and 
receive you unto myself; that where I am, ye may be 
also.” “I will not leave you comfortless (orphans): 
I will come to you.” Thus, a quickening power and 
holy exercise are given to these sister graces of the 
Spirit, facth, hope, and love. Faith belteves it; hope 
expects it; love desires it. 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 399 


Thus, with this. firm belief in the doctrine of the 
Lord’s coming, the truth tiself will be found an emi- 
nently influential one. Is it asked, Of what practical 
use is this blessed hope to the church of God? We 
answer, ‘Much every way.’ Chiefly in the emptiness 
and nothingness to which it reduces all worldly glory, 
and in the holy elevation which it gives the believer 
above all sublunary enjoyments. And is this no 
great attainment in holiness? The grand duty of 
the believer is to live above the world. He is not of 
the world, even as Christ was not of it. The very 
name of a Christian implies his crucifixion to the 
world. In his profession, his joys, his pursuits, his 
hopes, he seems to say, with the soaring eagle, “‘I was 
born on the earth, but I live in the sky.” But we 
require powerful motzves to influence us to this. We 
are moved by motive, and the religion of Jesus is 
pre-eminently a religion of motive. ‘The certain and 
speedy coming of Christ to glorify his church, oh, 
what a motive is here! Were you to rise in the 
morning impressed with this truth, how sweetly 
would it carry you through your day! How effectu- 
ally would it dim the lustre of the world’s pomp, 
deaden its joys, soothe your sorrows, dry your tears, 
lighten your burdens, reconcile you to poverty, to 
crosses, to losses, yea, to whatever your Lord ordains! 
You would feel, ““What have I to do with the world’s 
vanities, its smiles, and its glories? I am waiting, 
expecting, looking, hoping, praying, for that blessed 
hope, the appearing of my Redeemer.” Oh what an 
eminent Christian would you be! What a burning 
and shining light! What vigorous faith, what lively 


400 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


hope, what fervent love, what a holy living for God, 
for Christ, and for eternity, would henceforth distin- 
guish you ! 

It stimulates to the exercise of watchfulness and 
prayer. How closely and beautifully has our dear 
Lord connected together these two important Chris- 
tian duties, “‘ Watch and pray!’ The one as neces- 
sary as the other is sublime. Watchfulness implying 
uncertainty as to time; prayer expressive of an 
earnest desire to be found in an appropriate attitude 
for the event. ‘‘ Watch ye therefore and pray always, 
that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all these 
things that shall come to pass, and to stand before 
the Son of man.’ ‘Watch therefore, for ye know 
not what hour your Lord doth come.” ‘Therefore, 
be ye ready also, for in such an hour as ye think not, 
the Son of man cometh.” “Behold, I come as a 
thief. Blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his 
garments.” Surely, if our affections were supremely 
fixed on Jesus —were he to us the ‘chief among ten 
thousand,’ and did we really feel in our hearts the sen- 
timent which our lips so often utter, ‘‘ Whom have I in 
heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that 
I desire besides thee,” the return of our Lord would be 
to us a matter of most delightsome expectation, and 
wearisome desire. Our earnest prayer would oftener 
be, “Why are thy chariot wheels so long in coming? 
Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly !” 

Yet again: we are the expectants of a “new hea- 
ven and a new earth,” from which will be excluded all 
that is sinful and sorrowful, and in which will dwell 


~ 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 401 


all that is holy and blissful. This world of pollution 
and of woe, and yonder skies of storm and of tempest, 
soon will pass away. ‘“‘The heavens and the earth 
which are now, by the same word are kept in store, 
reserved unto fire against the day of judgment and 
of perdition of ungodly men.”’ ‘“‘'The day of the Lord 
will come as a thief in the night; in the which the 
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the 
elements shall melt with fervent heat; the earth also, 
and the works that are therein, shall be burned up. 
Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for 
new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwelleth 
> As to the precise period at which 
God will thus create all things new, the students of 
prophecy are divided in opinion. Some place it at the 
commencement of the thousand years of millennial bless- 
edness, believing that on this renovated earth Christ 
will reign in glory with his saints, and that at its ex- 
piration, the second or general resurrection will take 
place, the judgment will be set, and the books be 
opened. But differing from this view as to the time 
of the new creation, we are constrained to place it after 
the first resurrection, at the close of the thousand years, 
and immediately following the judicial process of the 
judgment day. In support of this opinion we again 
quote the words of Peter, ‘The heavens and the earth 
which are now, by the same word are kept in store, 
reserved unto fire against the day of gudgment and of 
perdition of ungodly men.” And it will be recollected 
that immediately after John describes the process of 
the last judgment, he says, “And I saw a new heaven 
34 * 


righteousness.’ 


402 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first 
earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.” 

The heavens and the earth thus renovated and 
formed anew, will constitute the home and the abode 
of the glorified, palm-bearing saints. All the physical 
evils, all the ravages of sin, all the emblems of the 
curse, will have passed away; and from the conflagra- 
tion of the old, a new creation will spring, like the 
fabled phoenix from its ashes, robed in beauty, order, 
and loveliness. ‘For behold,” says God, ‘I create 
new heavens and a new earth; and the former shall 
not be remembered, nor come into mind. But be ye 
glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create.”’ That 
this view of a renovated earth may disturb the prepos- 
sessions of many pious minds, we are prepared to be- 
lieve. ‘To the believer the present material world has 
so long been the scene of moral degradation and of 
sin, a valley of bereavement and of tears, that he has 
laboured to detach his best sympathies and affections 
from its locality, and fix them upon some distant 
though undefined abode of glory and of bliss. Throw- 
ing his eye around, and resting it on nought but spots 
blighted with the mildew of the curse; forms of pollu- 
tion each moment crowding around his path, and 
spectacles of suffering meeting him at every glance; 
his ears assailed with the plaintive sighs of grief, or the 
harsh sounds of blasphemy, he has longed for the wings 
of a dove, with which he might soar to another and a 
holier dwelling-place, far removed from all the sorrows 
of earth and the grossness of materialism. But of such 
would [ inquire, May not your views and anticipations 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 403 


of heaven be less spiritual than you have supposed ? 
Are not your conceptions of its nature derived less 
from anticipations of the Divine glory, than they are 
intertwined with cherished expectations of your own 
happiness ?, What is it to me, whether I float in ether, 
or whether I dwell in a material heaven, —a world re- 
created, restored, made holy, if God is but glorified, 
and His will is done on earth, even as it ts done in 
heaven? And this is heaven! To come back, wear- 
ing my same material but glorified body to the same 
material but glorified earth, both springing from their 
ruin, lovely, pure, beauteous, immortal, —‘to be with 
Christ? —to be like Christ —to behold the glory of 
Christ —to mark his triumphs — to witness the golden 
harvest of redemption, waving in a world once accursed 
through rebellion, and barren through sin—to behold 
the contrast between revolt and allegiance, hatred and 
love, sorrow and bliss, death and immortality —to go 
and trace the spot where this picture of incarnate love 
was displayed — to see the cROWN upon his head, who 
single-handed fought the battle and won the victory — 
to REIGN with him, and to unite in the accordant song 
of praise in the presence of him to whom it refers, 
‘Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our 
sins in his own blood, and hath made us kings and 
priests unto God and his Father; to him be glory and 
dominion for ever and ever. Amen,’’—oh, can we 
form a loftier conception of heaven, or cherish a fonder 
desire for its happiness and joy, than this? Where is 
rest, where is peace, where is joy, where is purity, if 
not found in the presence of the cRowNED Lamb, agso- 


404 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


ciated with the REIGNING church, and on the actual 
theatre of his glorious triumph? “Seeing then that 
all these things shall be dissolved, what manner of per- 
sons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and godli- 
ness, looking for and hasting unto the coming of the 
day of God!’’* 

But the appearing of the Lord, while it will be ‘the 
year of his redeemed,”’ will also be the “day of venge- 
ance’ to his enemies. He comes to judgment! “Be- 
hold, the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his saints, 
to execute judgment upon all, and to convict all that 
are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds 
which they have ungodlily committed, and of all their 
hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken 
against him.’’ You may think lightly of Christ now 
— you may despise and reject him now— you may 
scoff at the doctrine, and say, ‘“‘ Where is the promise 
of his coming?” but, he will come to judgment, and 
every eye shall see him, and you shall see him. That 
same Jesus whose deity, perhaps, you have denied, 
whose atonement you have rejected, whose saints you 
have ridiculed, that same ‘* Lord Jesus shall be revealed 
from heaven, with his mighty angels, in flaming fire 
taking vengeance on them that know not God, and obey 
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ: who shall be 
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence 
of the Lord and from the glory of his power.” Then 
will “all the kindreds of the earth wail because of him.”’ 
‘‘T beheld,” says the apostle, ‘‘and the kings of the 


eiSeo © Prospects of the Christian Church,” by the Hon. G. 
T. Noel. 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 405 


earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the 
chief captains, and the mighty men, and every bond- 
man, and every free man, hid themselves in the dens, 
and in the rocks of the mountains; and said to the 
mountains and rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the 
face of Him that sitteth on the throne, and from the 
wrath of the Lamb; for the great day of his wrath is 
come; and who shall be able to stand?” 

Ye enemies of God! Ye despisers of Christ! Ye 
lovers of the world, dazzled with its pomp, and fasci- 
nated with its pleasures, pause for a moment, and 
contemplate this tremendous scene. “Look at that 
point, far away in the ethereal regions, where the 
gradually lessening form of our Saviour disappeared 
from the gaze of his disciples, when he ascended to 
heaven. In that point see an uncommon, but faint 
and undefined brightness, just beginning to appear. 
It has caught the roving eye of yon careless gazer, 
and excited his curiosity. He points it out to a 
second and athird. A little circle now collects, and 
various are the conjectures which they form respecting 
it. Similar circles are formed, and similar conjectures 
made, in a thousand different parts of the world. But 
conjecture is soon to give place to certainty— awful, 
appalling, overwhelming certainty. While they gaze, 
the appearance which has excited their curiosity, 
rapidly approaches, and still more rapidly brightens. 
Some begin to suspect what it may prove; but no 
one dares to give utterance to his suspicions. Mean- 
while the light of the sun begins to fade before a 
brightness superior to his own. Thousands see their 


406 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


shadows cast in a new direction, and thousands of 
hitherto careless eyes look up, at once to discover 
the cause. Full clearly they see it; and now new 
hopes and fears begin to agitate their breasts. The 
afflicted and persecuted servants of Christ begin to 
hope that the predicted, long-expected day of their 
deliverance is arrived. The wicked, the careless, the 
unbelieving, begin to fear that the Bible is about to 
prove no idle tale. And fiery shapes, moving like 
streams of lightning, begin to appear indistinctly 
amidst the bright dazzling cloud which comes rush- 
ing down as on the wings of a whirlwind. At length 
it reaches its destined place. It pauses; then, 
suddenly unfolding, discloses at once a great white 
throne, where sits, starry resplendent, in all the 
glories of the Godhead, the Man Christ Jesus. Every 
eye sees him, every heart knows him. Too well do the 
wretched unprepared inhabitants of the earth now 
know what to expect; and one universal shriek of 
anguish and despair rises to heaven, and is echoed 
back to earth. But louder, far louder than the uni- 
versal cry, now sounds the last trumpet; and, far 
above all, is heard the voice of the Omnipotent, 
summoning the dead to arise, and come to judg- 
ment. New terrors now assail the living. On every 
side, nay, under their very feet, the earth heaves, as 
in convulsions; the graves open, and the dead come 
forth, while, at the same moment, a change, equiva- 
jent to that occasioned by death, is effected by 
Almighty power on the bodies of the living. Their 
mortal bodies put on immortality, and are thus pre- 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 407 


pared to sustain a weight of glory, or of wretched- 
ness, which flesh and blood could not endure. Mean- 
while legions of angels are seen darting from pole to 
pole, gathering together the faithful servants of Christ 
from the four winds of heaven, and bearing them 
aloft to meet. the Lord in the air, where he causes 
them to be placed at his own right hand, preparatory 
to the sentence which is to award to them “everlasting 
life.” But another and a different scene presents 
itself. Consternation now seizes the myriads whom 
this event has surprised amidst their worldliness, their 
gaicty, their voluptuousness, their barter, their marry- 
ing, and their being given in marriage. As a thief in 
the night the Bridegroom has startled them from 
their sleep! And now the graceless professor seizes 
his lamp, and finds it destitute of oil. The pharisee 
hastens to wrap his righteousness around him, but 
discovers that it is too narrow to conceal his de- 
formity. The scoffer, the sceptic, the careless, the 
procrastinator, are seen fleeing from fastness to fast- 
ness, from mountain to mountain, from rock to rock, 
but none afford a shelter from the darkening storm. 
The great day of his wrath is come, and whois able 
to stand? The judgment is set! the books are 
opened! the wicked are arraigned! the trial pro- 
ceeds! the verdict. is given! the sentence is pro- 
nounced! the doom is fixed! and the undying worm 
and the quenchless flame are their portion for ever! 
“The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the 
nations that forget God.” ‘‘ Upon the wicked he will 
rain snares, fire and brimstone, and a horrible tem- 


“408 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


pest: this shall be the portion of their cup.” Reader ! 
are you prepared for the coming of the Lord? Are 
you ready to enter in with him to the marriage 
supper? Are you a professor? Have you grace— 
renewing, humbling, sanctifying, Christ-exalting grace 
in your heart? Is your preparation one of principle, 
one of habit? Will it abide the searching scrutiny 
of that day? Examine and see. Take nothing for 
granted, in deciding a matter so solemn, and involv- 
ing interests so momentous. Christ must be all in 
all to you—the entire groundwork and fabric of your 
salvation. Mere notions of truth—external member- 
ship with the church —sacraments—regular attend- 
ance upon means—punctilious observance of days, 
and forms, and ceremonies, in themselves, are no fit 
preparation for this awful event. As the fruit of a 
living faith in Jesus, they are valuable; but standing 
alone, without repentance towards God and faith in 
the Lord Jesus Christ, they are the wood, the hay, 
the stubble which the last fire will consume. 

Believer in Jesus, the day of your redemption 
draweth nigh! The Lord is at hand. Behold, the 
Judge standeth at the door. The days we live in are 
eventful. The times are perilous. The signs, thick- 
ening and darkening around us, are deeply and fear- 
fully significant. We are standing on the eve of 
events perhaps more awful than the world has ever 
seen. A period of glory to the church, brighter 
than has yet shone upon her, and a period of woe to 
the world more dark than has yet cast its shadows 
upon it, seems rapidly approaching. ‘Then, “‘let us 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 409 — 


not sleep as do others, but let us watch and be sober.” 
‘And that, knowing the time, that now it is high 
time to awake out of sleep, for now is our salvation 
nearer than when we believed. The night is far spent, 
the day is at hand.” ‘Watch ye therefore: for 
ye know not when the Master of the house cometh, at 
even, or at midnight, or at the cock-crowing, or in the 
morning: lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping.” 
Oh, to blend the steady thought of our Redeemer’s 
coming with every present duty, privilege, and effort: 
how would it hallow, cheer, and dignify us, consecrat- 
ing by one of the most solemn motives, the lowliest 
work of faith, and the feeblest labour of love! 

Thus, too, would there be a growing preparedness of 
mind for the yudgments which are yet to come upon 
the earth. ‘For there shall be great tribulation, such 
as was not since the beginning of the world to this time, 
no, nor ever shall be.” ‘ Men’s hearts failing them 
for fear, and for looking after those things which are 
coming on the earth; for the powers of heaven shall be 
shaken. And then shall they see the Son of man com- 
ing in a cloud with power and great glory. And when 
these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and 
lift up your heads; for your redemption draweth nigh.” 


‘* A child of God! and can this earth’s vain pleasures 
Be aught to thee for whom the Saviour died? 
Rise, rise above them all! its worthless treasures, 
Tis soul-destroying joys, its pomp and pride, 
Be His in all, thy soul and eye be single, 
Fixed as the glory that surrounds the throne; i 
Seek not Christ’s service with the world to mingle, 
Remember God has sealed thee for His own. 


9 
3) 5 


410 THE GLORY OF THE REDEEMER 


O child of God! be not this earth thy dwelling, 

But stand in spirit on that glassy sea, 

Where the rich harmonies for ever swelling, 

Sound forth the slain Lamhb’s love, so full, so free. 
Stand forth in peace, far above all the madness 

Of sinful man, weighing with even scale 

The worth of all things — feeling the deep gladness 
Of one who follows Christ within the veil. 

Child of the living God! what boundless blessing! 
His Spirit thine, to comfort and refine ; 

The heir of God! joint-heir with Christ, possessing 
All things in him, and he himself too thine. 

Hold fast thy crown, go forth with joy to meet him: 
Soon will he come, and take thee for his own. 

With girded loins and burning lamps then greet him, 
The Bridegroom’s triumph thine, thine too his throne !?? 


Precious Jesus! we have been contemplating thy 
glory as through a glass darkly. And yet we thank 
and adore thee even for this glimpse. Dim and imper- 
fect though it is, it has endeared thee, unutterably en- 
deared thee, to our hearts. Oh! if this is thy glory 
beheld through a clouded medium, what will it be, 
when seen face to face! Soon, soon shall we gaze 
upon it. Then, thou glorious King, we will exclaim, 
“It was a true report that I heard of thy acts and of 
thy wisdom, and, behold, the half was not told me.” 
“Seeing that we look for such things, grant us grace, 
that being diligent, we may be found of thee in peace, 
without spot, and blameless. Send to us what thou 
wilt, withhold from us what thou wilt; only vouchsafe 
to us a ‘part in the first resurrection,’ and a seat at 
thy right hand when thou comest to thy kingdom. 
Low at thy feet we fall! Here may thy Spirit reveal 
to us more of thy glory! Oh irradiate, sanctify, and 


IN HIS SECOND COMING. 411 


cheer us with its beams! Behold, we cling to thee! 
Thou art our Immanuel, our portion, and our all. In 
darkness, we repair to the fountain of thy light. In 
sorrow, we flee to the asylum of thy bosom. Oppressed, 
we come to the shelter of thy cross. Oh take thou 
our hearts, and bind them closer, and still closer to 
thyself! Won by thy beauty, and drawn by thy love, 
let there be a renewed surrender of our whole spirit, 
and soul, and body. Claim and take thou a fresh pos- 
session. ‘Thy statutes have been our songs in the 
house of our pilgrimage ;’ ‘thou shalt guide us with 
thy counsel, and afterward receive us to glory.’ Then, 
© then shall we unite with the HALLELUJAH CHORUS, 
and sing in strains of surpassing sweetness, Sai 
and love — 


“THANKS BE UNTO GOD FOR HIS 
UNSPEAKABLE GIFT!” 


yy! 


My, hs tide bal ENS 

‘ ts i ae ” H mah haha ay 

we Tapered Math WPL he 

Ls ' 3 y 

nl r At | ont, it Y is aah’ 
aay cee oe Feat 


ie ; , , baal cat ter a Abr a iy, te bia A f 


fe ea ai di cae 


ven y 
isin ny ; aire we wy ante ahh te ® Om; ci oy gy 
im yah tune aH od bat 


re a use oN 


i" . v4 (ellie 
i Ries! ee HEM. se (ne. 


Sine is i aie tay ie it h 
ey cat ve — rity, Hie x i ye ane Wg RS ris mB Re ‘sib he CI FAT wee 
} aie ae ‘ Daan . ti * it * i 
eile } eee pehiee! pee a) 


bie ake fon 


wiehe AR 


2 5 n 
( 
: v1 Pa ee a WEN RBar et ted | ae \ Aue 
, ° n A a Yea Mae =! 
se) Mh aR, 1 ore io b's \ : i Fe 
; ‘i ‘ a9 '6 49 , . = ae: ite” goat 
f f wy A rata +, aa j 
\ A ‘ oid ena my PI me! 


ee ee ee We : f 
SC URN 8, 

ig te - Hy" ryt i 

Pl We a VM 
ry yee ( y 
ue bi i 


\ nh # 


oud n iM 
er Why coe Veen 
aie t yy a ‘neal 


eS 


INDEX. 


AcceprTance through Christ glorifies God.......-0+. ences 

Address to believers...» ccceveucseces « lorcet siniatoreidey< x 
enemies Of Christ......+0cecs Same eet inion 0's 

persons Of rank. .evsecedevee Hale ss 's's Kees s . 

POOT IN. SPITE, oie os,« gece ame Tree kre 
Ay | Ue es Mee ae wee cere e ee eee ese 

peeking souls << acneee'e » saenaedlaeeein Bis 

the ungodly ..... cee cee ec ee reece seeeseecons 

Afflictions, sanctified, glorify God ........... een ale anew ae 
Gini SOG GC itiaiingeg Ue Aiea os oo ca eke rene tanta 

Ascension, the Redeemer’s, to glory. ..ccseece cereceee® se 

descent of Holy Spirit in consequence.......-. 

EOP) is TOO DIG ss ni5.9 sueusicn.e 19 = ¢.3oun ake gaia elena oe 

predicted nnn as oss ee ree ee re 

period of it... 00. ig ondiee eee sere sccenes 

place whence «....+++. ep iRlbp Ack wien aatatey we os 

Believer’s path to the richest blessings ...-eseesseeeeeoes 

Bush, burning, a type of Christ....... seven dix seshahosats e¥etaine 

manifestation of Jehovah......... usar eienene 

design of the Divine appearance........+. 


Christ, his pre-existence.. «siacessisisicewss 


foundation; of faith ... adveeise aa eeidlix anlies eo 
spring. ofall blessings. ths <.iwilis aja ats ore oe eae 
medium of, knowledgo. sjsaaitieise ts Oo: dared os ieee 
the glory of the Godhead....... anes ces PEI 


25 * (413 


414 INDEX. 


b PAGH 
Christ, corner stone @eeeeseoeoeeeeese @eeneoesvpeeesseceaespeev eee 6 107 
the sure foundation......... i 6a wh lee tate sou miRreR ALS 


eesumptionof our nature ss.0... dds ..cs'csay eee LOT 
temptation in the wilderness.........sseeee0e0.. 140 
DEAPIE OUT SUNG bios veo a sn ve vg og 8 5 awe ww oe» Ve waT ee 
nécéssity of his sufferings ~... cece. sees veeeseas 150 


compassion as our High Priest .......sesesseeees 154 
suffered voluntarily........ cove cccccscceeveveces LOO 
mataro Of ‘Ins sulieying., iv sdinage es Sede 0 FS orale tals 160 
humiliation, our salvation ......0...e00% ssiessieve 162 
resurrection, pledge of ours.........ese0 seveese QOL 
consolation under bereavements...... 260 

priesthood unchangeable.......+....00. iow eeeiee teed 
sympathy with his people.......++. CeloeGau shee ees ce 
exaltation, pledge of ours......... Tee SS hai oi 3*80L 
covenant Head to his people.....seeeesese sea sies 311 
glorified in our conversion.......--seees- ete os «+ 316 

his second coming......see0. cs 379 

Christian’s inward conflicts, Gc. ......cneeees OGRE one's 93 
Church ynconsumed....... rus Payares cee cet Oh sc VG RS 
its foundation ov do ctnt wen Oe TRUE. Cs Sas 105 


Contemplation of Christ’s humiliation, check to sin...... 171 
fraught with comfort 169 
our example....... 171 


Converse, habitual with God........ RP AX oftesGRZ9 
Conversion of the Jews........+ Ay pm ar Saitek sere 390 
Corner stones sssesscissvsseisraas yO ELSE Re Seren Oh 
Covenant of prey its stability siccescacss ce secccesveess 36 
Creation, a medium of knowledge.......... SORE wie -- 46 
Discernment, spiritual, necessary ...+.seevecesccesscees 119 

transforming ....ceereerccercccvens jako le 


Divisions in the church, mainte and hisnwline: ode a ete elOD 
Door opened by humiliation of Christ......e.eeeseseeeee 164 


Earthly-mindedness prohibited....seee.seseeceoes steees 200 
Encouragement to the humbled soul....ceseceeeesss eee eete 
Exaltation, the glory of Christ......sescccccerssesecees 208 
promised by the Father......sceeeseeeseeeee 200 

glory of his Godhead...e.cecsccceceesscsoes 283 
Mediatorseiicc. Fees vsicdesssiee ss 200 


INDEX. 415 


Page 

Exaltation, glory of his human nature....eseeeeeeee cues 287 
blessings flowing from it....... sallicn se que os LIC 
pledge Of OUrs....ceceseeesececccceees eet. SOL 
Example of Christ .......-ceeees Dea itale SRG SAE ene oO LEL 
Exhortation to heavenly-mindedness.....sssessecececeee 229 
Faith, confirmation of, by Godhead of Christ. .....-+-.e- 34 
in Christ’s second coming ........+. Ne fase acenes: Gon 

its influence’: fo. 2. 25554 ee sig Ra Ue Slee Wiee alee’ - 398 
Father’s love to us in Christ’s humiliation........sseeree- 167 
Foundation of the church........00.... e000 wee. L05—113 
Fountain of grace opened by Christ’s humiliation ....... . 163 
Glorification of the saints...... ae ened te ESS SG Pere on 383 
Glory, nature of the Redeemer’s ....cccscccccsesccccece 275 
Gospel, how precious..........- SOF o'.5 oes FES 72 
Habitual converse with God.......-0. rs ae oe elas pe Pater 229 
Happiness, its perfection in glory .ce. cess ceeccscccccces - 386 
Harmony of Old and New Testament ........ csecccceees 120 
Heavenly mindedness...+....0.0eee0 SelM a sla. ate Pahanetare 227 
exhortation to: foe. eh avec eee «« 235 

High Priest, Christ’s character as .......6. cocscccescecs LOE 
Holiness of God revealed by Christ............4. PU RAIS 
progressive; glorifies God’. os Fe c.seeee oe deh cs ne's 319 
tansiliation.of: Christ s cine faoa tees Ok Bede ok PO See a 133 
the salvation of the church......... 162 

Importance of Divine knowledge .......seeeseeeveees woe 40 
Incarnation, mysterious ........ betes ae tee eeee Js eons 135 
Influence of faith in Christ’s second coming ........e+ee5 398 
Jews, their restoration... .....ceceesseee ORE IE eee 390 
Justice, Divine, glorified .....s.eeeseee Det IPocteeeee SOS 
Knowledge, fallacious without Christ......... ....ee..e, 71 
perfection in glory .«.e.seee.... ee sedepece Soe 

Tiite,'a holy, slorifies Christ 72 se Pas cece evince cae t0s,0 LOU 
of faith glorifies Christ .s.csccoseccsseicscccccnse 322 


Love of Christ wonderful........ee0. Pale Sa Radeconteniane 157 


416 INDEX. 


Page 


Love of God. glorified... Hxedss Gain tee ie eae. cote 


Miai’s: fallenetate..¢ v.00 sae ites 6 oe theese ® ee. Mee 
Mercy. of God through Christ. 5 ...5+5.cbavece dines Soaee V2 
Ministers, Christian, treatment of ..... eA ae re oes 
their character and claims.........+. 239 

320t tO be Wiolizedaw.. & vs eas wiwis sav . 240 


Nature of, Christ/@Beterings «vine vs c:c sees © oc4 59 seieeee al koe 
Necessity of Christ’s sufferings .....ccesecsceceseeeress LOL 


Obedience, holy, glorifies Christ....... ulin iinyointny sO ie hoe SER 
Pastor and people .:....0escceesss Rs Wisint hie biclieye S secouelh voee 248 
Perfection of knowledge and happiness in glory..... oveee BOO 
Prayer to God through Christ ........ bib sesuisieve n) prsiote is rer 
essential to spirituality of mind.....es..eeeee » 229 
Pre-existence of the Redeemer .........+ oikw os atelite eee ee L6—25 
Priesthood of Christ unchangeable ........0+. nines see 297 
Prohibition against earthly-mindedness .....eseeeeeees »- 230 
Prophecies of Christ’s resurrection......++. a Reels wee 201 
Prophetical glory of Christ........ Sila Adiaiinteedolp in. 9 40e,4. wwe’ Gua 98 
Reading the Scriptures prayerfully...+..ceseeeecccceess 231 
best method of .....seceveseecers 343 

Recognition of saints in glory...... ce albiinty mosh o bd imnrela wee 384 
Redeemer’s prophetical eloryiiias oe ous o,0/0\ os e's cece ee wie o- 98 
anointing to his office..... aloe ceeare oe ie Serene 104 

foundation of the church ........ eye 105 

glorified by the Holy Spirit ....... midie, «deed 306 
Renovation of the heaven and the earth......ceeseeeees - 401 
Restoration by Christ ..a0...sccevesccevcess a daha tmisse tek 
Of the Jews ..csesceees re ey ae 390 
Resurrection of Christ, its glory ........ ee Fee phon 
LES WEPAGIET 4 Glan «epee s 5 ace pirat 195 

truths confirmed by...... Senne, Wer 199 

establishes his Godhead .........- 202 

acceptance of his work .......-.. 204 

consummation of his victory...... 208 

life of the church ....+..+e0: 210—222 


pledge Of OUTS Aisne) mew Yas 251 


- INDEX. 417 


Page 

Revelation of the Father’s glory ........ sid ets ties ix,0n el 
Saints, a risen people, their obligation and life.......226—229 
Sanctification from reconciliation ......eseeeeceeeeeeras 80 
by the truth ......... Saleh Rik card aig teas aie 344 

Scriptures, method of reading them......... Phled aehengn baa 
testify of Jesus...e.srevee raat ees So eesacs O44 

Sinner solemnly cautioned. .:.6 (Bice «Fees aia iialy's beie 0 aes» 36 
Somoof the dying sagittis s/s. cio, ceierelaine qptoieun,s o-t/s's sre: . 367 
Spirit, Holy, testifies to his Godhead ...... eae t hee cease O49 
glorifies Christ in his people ......,-.-. 300—360 

Stability of the covenant of grace ........0se0-0 ee Being 00 
Suffering Christians addressed.....ess.eeeee oie eeigh is eee LOO 
patiently cet Christsilg-e . ahies 326 

Trath Ob Gods alprietiicaktiav.s ois op eas: na''sa en's te Chee 62 
Types fulfilled by the cornet GL Chast. |. aah ceielre< 199 
Typical glory of the Redeemer.... ..... delays siaiaals aieie's 82 
Unity of the church, what .....cercecsessreces <leceraveiss - 109 


Voluntariness of Christ’s sufferings ......02.ceescecseese LOT 


Watchfulness and prayer... .ssesceoee ace Pree ay 400 
Wisdom of God in Christ ...... Saiipbaiela-atassies EEN ay ae 52 
THE END. 


ie 
Pea’. 


k y uy » “i Mh re 
, % Wy ined ‘ otal yal 
& 1 " x i ae Y 
a re } J] ei}; i F af 


: limo) 
eae i 
a 9 Pere 
‘ Ea epic 


5 ay a ity ag Oe 


Rimsay K DBlokiston, Philadelphia, 


HAVE JUST PUBLISHED 


THE SEPULCHRES OF OUR DEPARTED. 


BY 


REV. F. R. ANSPACH, A.M., 


HAGERSTOWN, MARYLAND. 


As flowers which night, when day is o’er, perfume, 
Breathes the sweet memory from a good man’s tomb. 


Sm E. B. Lyrron. 


CONTENTS. 


Communion with the Past. 

The Sacredness of the Sepulchre. 

Visits to the Sepulchres of our Do- 
parted. ; 

Lessons which the Sepulchre im- 
parts. 

The Glory of Man. 

In the Sepulchre the Conflicts of Life 
end. 

At the Sepulchres of our Departed we 
may learn the Value of Life. 

The Sepulchre proclaims the Evil of 
Sin. 

The Sepulchres of our Departed ad- 


monish us to be gentle and kind to 
the Living. 
Posthumous Fame.— The Sepulchre 


instructs us how to Live, so as to be 
remembered when Dead. 


Lhe Repose of the Holy Dead, 


The Sepulchre reminds us of the Value 
and Immortality of the Soul. 


The Hope of Resurrection divests the 
Sepulchre of its Terrors, and brings 
Consolation to the Bereaved. 


The Indestructibility of the Family 
Bond a source of Consolation to the 
Bereaved. 


At the Sepulchres of our Departed we 
may also learn the Right which God 
holds in us and our Families, 


Future Recognition. 


The Sympathy of Jesus with afflicted 
and bereaved souls. 


Our Present and our Future Home. 


Darkness turned to Light, or the Uses 
we should make of afflictions and 
bereavements. 


Grave-yards and Cemeteries, or the 
Claims of the Dead upon the Living, 
and the Care which should be be- 
stowed upon the Places of their Re- 
pose. 


One Volume, 12mo. Price, $1 00. 


a 


— Lindksoy & Blokiston, Philadelghia, 
THE CHILDREN OF THE NEW TESTAMENT 


BY 


REV. THEOPHILUS STORK, D.D. 


“ Of such is the kingdom of heayen.”—Jersus, 


“How oft, heart-sick and sore, 
Tve wished I were, once more, 
A little child.”—Mrs. SouTHey. 


CONTENTS, 


INTRODUCTION.—THE WONDERS OF 
BETHLEHEM. 


The “ Holy Child Jesus.” The Child- 
hood and Youth of Christ. The De- 
vout Simeon, with the Infant Saviour 
in his arms. Jesus among the Doc- 
tors in the Temple. The sympathy 
of Christ with little children. The 
beauty of childhood. Poetical quo- 
tations from Wordsworth. 


LITTLE CHILDREN BROUGHT TO THE 
SAVIOUR, 


Explanation of the scene in Mark x. 
13, 14. The Disciples’ conduct. 
The probable reasons of their inter- 
ference. The Saviour’s displeasure 
at their conduct. His affectionate 
welcome to children. How parents 
now may prevent children from 
going to Christ. An earnest dis- 
suasive from such deportment. The 
importance of example. The influ- 
ence of the home-spirit. 
tive duty of bringing our children 
to the Saviour. 


THE CHILDREN IN THE TEMPLE. 


ixplanation of the temple-scene, Matt. 
xxi. 15, 16. The hosanna of the 
children. The displeasure of the 
priests and scribes. The Saviour’s 
vindication of the children. Ps. 
viii. 2, explained. The importance 
ef early impressions. Reformation. 


Cne neat 12mo. Volume, Cloth, gilt. 


His early religious education. 


Explanation of the scene. 


iE 


The posi- | 9 


. Mission of children. 


. Children in heaven. 


National education. Sunday schools, 
Facts, showing that children trained 
in religion will become the cham. 
pions of truth and virtue. Beautiful 
visions of the future. 


TIMOTHY. 
The 


influence of maternal piety. Eunice 
an example for the imitation of mo- 


thers. The “child father of the 
man.” Instruction and piety com- 
bined. Encouragement to pious 
mothers. 


THE INFANTICIDE AT BETHLEHEM. 


Seeming 
incongruity. Vindication of Divine 
Providence, in the massacre of the 
infants. Infant martyrs. The scene, 
suggestive of the following topics: 
The death of little children. Sources 
of consolation. Providence. Infant 
salvation. ; 

The advent 
of a little child in the family. The 
child at home. The sick and dying 
child. The memory. 

Beautiful as- 
pect of the heavenly home. 
Recognition. Difficulties of tke 
doctrine. Scriptural aspect of the 
subject. David. Recognition of the 
loved and lost in heaven. 


Conclusion, 


Price, 75 cents, 


DATE DUE 


Miho Ghukpcabebee: 
ain 7 e a5 


FPRINTEDINU S.A. 


GAYLORD 


°, 
. 


ary 


IT 


| 


-Speer Librz 


Hh 


| Seminary 


00 
o>) 
sees 
N 
co 
O 
© 
sae 
© 


