ORNFll     LI"IVf"5ITY    LIBRARY


3    1


924    101    104   820


CORNELL

UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY


Cornell  University
Library


The  original  of  tiiis  book  is  in
tine  Cornell  University  Library.

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924101104820


^  THE

PULPIT    COMMENTARY,

EDITED   BY  THE

VERY  REV.  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  D.D.,

DEAN  OF  GLOUCESTER;
AND  BY  THE

REV.  JOSEPH  S.  EXELL,  M.A.

WITH

INTRODUCTIONS

BY  THE

VBN.  AKCHDEACON  F.  W.  FAEKAK,  D.D.,  F.E.S.—EIGHT  EEV.  H.  COTTEEILL,  D.D.,  F.E.S.K

— VBET  EEV.  PEINCIPAL  J.  TULLOCH,  D.D.— EEV.  CANON  G.  EAWLINSON,  M.A.

—EEV.  A.  PLUMMBK,  M.A.,  D.D.


FUKK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
Nbw  Yobk  and  Toeonto.


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY


EDITED  BY  THE


MY.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,

TIC4K  AMD  RURAL  DEAN  OF  ST.   FANCRA5,   AND  EXAMINING  CHAPLAIN  TO  THE  LORD
BISHOP  OF  GLOUCESTER  AND  BRISTOL;

AND  BY  THE

REY.  JOSEPH    S.   EXELL,  M.A.


PHILIP  piAisrs.

(Ejeposition  anb  i|omUctics :
By   rev.    B.    C.    CAFFIN,    M.A.,

VICAR  OF  NORTHALLERTON,  AND  RURAL  DEAN;
LATE  FELLOW  AND  TUTOR  OF  WORCESTER  COLLEGE,  OXFORD.

fotttilu0  bg  toariotts  ^ntl]ors:

REV.  D.  THOMAS,  D.D.,  REV.  R.  M.  EDGAR,  M.A.,

REV.  PROF.  T.  CROSKERV,  D.D.,      REV.  R.  FINLAYSON,  B.A.,
REV.  W.  F.  ADENEY,  M.A.,  REV.  CANON  VERNON  HUTrON.


FUNK    &    WAGNALLS    COMPANY
Nbw  York  and  Toronto.


THE  EPISTLE  OF

PAUL  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.


INTRODUCTION.


I.  Phihppi:  its  Inhabitants;  Foundation  or  the  church.

Thb  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  was  ■written  about  tLirty  years  after  the
Ascension,  ahout  ten  years  after  the  first  preaching  of  the  gospel  by  St.
Paul  at  Philippi.  Christianity  was  still  young,  in  all  the  freshness  of  its
first  youth.  It  had  come  suddenly  ilito  the  world.  The  world  seemed
growing  old:  the  old  religions  had  lost  whatever  power  they  once  possessed;
the  old  philosophies  were  worn  out ;  the  energies  of  political  life  had  been
weakened  or  suppressed  by  the  all-pervading  despotism  of  Rome.  Avarice,
uncleanness,  cruelty,  were  rampant  in  the  earth.  There  was  little  faith
in  God,  in  goodness,  in  immortality.  "  What  is  truth  ?  "  was  the  despainng
question  of  the  age.  The  gospel  flashed  upon  this  scene  of  moral  confusion
like,  what  it  is  in  truth,  a  revelation  from  heaven.  It  brought  before  the
eyes  of  men  a  life  and  a  Person.  The  world  saw  for  the  first  time  a  per-
fect life;  not  a  mere  ideal,  but  a  real  life  that  had  been  really  lived  upon
the  earth ;  a  life  that  stands  alone,  separate  from  all  other  lives ;  unique
in  its  solitary  majesty,  in  its  unearthly  loveliness,  in  its  absolute  purity,  in
its  entire  unselfishness.  The  world  saw  for  the  first  time  the  beauty  of
complete  self-sacrifice.  And  this  life  was  not  merely  a  thing  past  and
gone.  It  was  still  Hving,  it  is  still  living  in  the  Church.  The  life  of
Christ  lived  in  his  saints.  They  felt  it :  "  Not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."
They  could  tell  others  the  blessed  realities  of  their  own  spiritual  experience.
They  were  in  earnest ;  that  was  plain :  they  had  nothing,  to  gain  in  the
world.  St.  Paul  especially  had  renounced  a  career  most  tempting  to
Hebrew  ambition,  for  a  life  of  unceasing  labour — a  life  full  of  hardships,
persecutions,  dangers,  and  evidently  destined  to  end  in  a  violent  death.
He  was  in  earnest,  certainly  ;  he  was  consumed  with  an  untiring  zeal ;  in
spite  of  many  personal  disadvantages,  much  natural  timidity,  the  consti-ain-
ing  loye  of  Ghriet  nvged  him  to  spend  and  to  be  spent  in  his  Saviour's  work,


U  DTTEODUCTION  TO


And  in  that  work,  amid  all  its  difficulties,  anxieties,  and  dangers,  he  found
»  deep  and  living  joy,  joy  among  tears ;  "  sorrowing,"  he  said  of  himself,
"yet  alway  rejoicing."  Joy,  he  felt  and  taught,  was  the  privilege  and
the  duty  of  a  Christian,  who  knew  that  he  was  redeemed  with  the  precious
blood  of  Christ,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  was  sanctifying  him,  that  God  the
Father  had  chosen  him  to  be  his  own.

No  wonder  that  those  early  years  were  years  of  fmitfulness.  Earnest,
truthful  natures  soon,  ranged  themselves  with  the  preachers  of  the  new
religion ;  a  chord  was  struck  that  vibrated  in  all  true  hearts ;  all  who
waited  for  salvation,  who  were  longing  after  God,  were  gathered  round  the
cross.

St.  Paul  had  first  come  to  Philippi  about  the  year  52.  It  was  his  first
visit  to  Europe.  He  had  seen  in  Asia  a  vision,  a  man  of  Macedonia,  who
said,  "  Come  over  and  help  us ; "  and  he  came.  Philippi  was  the  first
Macedonian  city  which  he  reached ;  for  Neapolis,  the  port  of  Philippi,  was
generally  (not  always)  reckoned  as  belonging  to  Thrace.  The  place  had
been  called  Crenides,  or  Fountains,  a  prophetic  name,  for  it  became  the
fountain  of  European  Christianity.  The  city  was  founded  by  the  well-
known  Macedonian  king  from  whom  it  derived  its  name,  the  avrjp  Ma/ce-
Siiv  of  Demosthenes.  The  soil  was  exceptionally  fertile ;  there  were  gold
and  silver  mines  in  the  neighbourhood,  which  produced  a  large  revenue.
But  the  importance  of  Philippi  was  mainly  owing  to  its  situation :  it  com-
manded one  of  the  principal  routes  between  Europe  and  Asia ;  the  mountain
lange  which  separates  the  East  and  the  West  sinks  into  a  pass  near  to
Philippi.  It  was  this  circumstance,  not  only  the  mineral  riches  of  the
neighbourhood,  which  attracted  the  attention  of  Philip;  it  was  this,  as
well  as  the  wish  to  commemorate  his  decisive  victory,  which  led  Augustus
to  plant  a  Roman  colony  at  PhiUppi.

It  was  a  Roman  city  that  St.  Paul  found  when  he  came  hither  in  his
second  missionary  journey  :  "  a  Roman  colony  in  Greece,"  says  Bishop
Wordsworth,  "an  epitome  of  the  Gentile  world."  The  settlers  brought  by
Augustus  were  mainly  Italians,  discharged  Antonian  soldiers.  Along  with
these  there  existed  a  large  Greek  element  in  the  population ;  we  may  say
Greek,  for  the  Macedonians  possessed,  from  the  period  when  they  first
assumed  prominence  in  Grecian  history,  many  of  the  distinctive  character-
istics of  a  Hellenic  people  (comp.  Mure's  '  Literature  of  Ancient  Greece,'
I.  iii.  9).  The  official  language  was  Latin,  but  Greek  was  the  tongue
commonly  spoken.  Inscriptions  in  both  languages  have  been  found  among
the  ruins  of  Philippi;  the  Latin,  it  is  said,  outnumber  the  Greek.  The
colonists  were  Roman  citizens;  the  ensigns  of  Roman  rule,  the  S.P.Q.R.,
were  everywhere  to  be  seen.  The  colony  was  a  miniature  of  the  imperial
city.  Its  magistrates,  properly  called  duumviri,  were  addressed  by  the
more  ambitious  name  of  prsetors  (o-Tparjjyot)  ;  they  were  attended  by  lictors
(pa^SSov^oi).  The  inhabitants  claimed  the  great  name  of  Romans  (Acts  xri
21)|  th«  name  which  Paul  and  Silas  vindicated  to  themselves  in  the  house


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  iU

of  t'b.e  Fhilippian  jailor.  The  Philippians  possessed  some  of  the  simple
Tirines  of  the  old  Roman  stock.  Bom.ans  and  Macedonians  were  mingled
together  at  Philippi,  and  the  Macedonian  character  seems  to  have  resembled
the  Boman  more  nearly,  perhaps,  than  that  of  any  other  of  the  subject
races.  The  Macedonians,  like  the  old  Romans,  were  manly,  straightforwainl,
and  affectionate.  They  were  not  sceptical  Uke  the  philosophers  of  Athens,
or  Tolnptnons  like  the  Greeks  of  Corinth.  Holy  Scripture  gives  a  very
favourable  view  of  the  Thessalonians  and  Beroeans,  as  well  as  of  the  Philip-
pians. There  were  only  a  few  Jews  resident  at  PhiKppi,  for  it  was  a  military
colony,  not  a  mercantile  city.  There  was  no  synagogue,  only  a  proseuche,
a  place  of  prayer,  by  the  river-side,  and  that  so  little  known  that  (accord-
ing to  the  best-supported  reading  in  Acts  xvi.  13),  Paul  and  Silas  only
supposed  that  they  should  find  a  place  of  prayer  by  the  Gangites.  Thither
they  went,  with  Timothy  and  Luke,  on  the  sabbath.  They  found  only  a  few
women.  But  that  sabbath  was  an  eventful  day ;  that  little  congregation
was  the  germ  of  great  Churches  ;  the  gospel  was  preached  for  the  first  time
in  that  continent  of  Europe  which  was  destined  in  the  providence  of  God
to  be  the  scene  of  its  greatest  successes.  The  first  convert,  Lydia,  strange
as  it  may  seem,  came  from  that  Asia  where  Paul  had  been  forbidden  to
preach.  She,  with  her  household,  was  the  firstfruits  of  Philippi  unto
Christ.  Afterwards,  as  Paul  and  Silas  were  on  their  way  to  the  same
place  of  prayer,  they  met  a  slave-girl  possessed  with  a  spirit  of  Pytho ;  she
recognized  them  again  and  again  as  "  servants  of  the  most  high  God."  St.
Paul  cast  out  the  spirit.  This  led  to  the  apprehension  of  Paul  and  Silas.
It  was  the  first  direct  conflict  of  Christianity  and  heathenism;  hitherto,
as  at  Lystra,  Jews  had  been  the  instigators  of  persecution.  It  was  the
first  appearance  of  St.  Paul  before  a  Roman  tribunal,  the  first  beating,
and  the  first  imprisonment.  Then  came  the  conversion  of  the  jailor  jtnd
his  family.  Thus  the  Philippian  Church  was  formed — the  purple-seller
from  Thyatira,  the  Greek  slave-girl,  the  (probably  Roman)  jailor,  with  the
households  of  the  first  and  last.  Two  of  them  were  women — one  engaged
in  a  profitable  trade,  the  other  a  slave ;  the  third  remarkable  for  his  earnest
question,  "  Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "  and  for  his  kind  attentions
to  Paul  and  Silas.  We  observe  already  some  of  the  blessed  results  of
Christianity — the  Christian  family.  Christian  hospitality,  the  religious
equality  of  women  and  slaves.  "  There  is  neither  Jew  nor  Greek,  there  is
neither  bond  nor  free,  there  is  neither  male  nor  female  :  for  ye  are  all  one
in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Gal.  iii.  28).  There  were  others  not  known  to  us  by
name;  there  was  a  Church  in  the  house  of  Lydia,  where  Paul  and  Silas
saw  the  brethren  and  comforted  them  before  their  departure  from  Philippi
(Acts  xvi.  40).  We  notice  the  prominence  of  female  converts  in  Macedonia.
At  Thessalonioa  (Acts  xxii.  4)  and  at  Bercea  (Acts  xvii.  12)  many  women,
and  those  ladies  of  rank,  became  Christians.  Women  formed  an  unportaat
element  is  the  early  Philippian  Church.


INTEODUCTIOJS   TO


II.  Subsequent  Histokt  or  the  Philippiaw  Church.

St.  Paul's  first  visit  to  Philippi  ended  in  sufEering.  In  the  Roman  colony
he  and  Silas  claimed  the  privilege  of  Roman  citizens.  They  were  soon
released,  but  the  persecutions  which  the  teachers  were  the  first  to  feel  did
not  pass  away.  The  Churches  of  Macedonia,  the  Philippian  Church
especially,  were  called  to  suffer  tribulation.  St.  Paul  mentions  their  afflic-
tions more  than  once  (see  2  Cor.  viii.  1,  2,  and  ch.  i.  28 — 30).  It  was
given  to  them,  it  was  their  privilege,  not  only  to  believe  in  Christ,  but  also
to  sufEer  for  his  sake.  Their  sufferings,  their  "  deep  poverty,"  did  not
check  that  liberality  which  was  characteristic  of  the  Philippian  Church.
St.  Paul  had  not  left  them  long,  he  was  still  at  Thessalonica,  when  they
"  sent  once  and  again  unto  his  necessities."  And  from  2  Cor.  xi.  9  com-
pared with  ch.  iv.  15  we  may  safely  infer  that  his  Philippian  converts
supplied  his  wants  during  his  first  sojourn  in  Corinth.  Philippi  was  the
only  Church  from  which  the  great  apostle  was  willing  to  accept  help ;  it  is
a  striking  testimonial  to  their  zeal  and  love.

St.  Paul  probably  visited  Philippi  twice  during  his  third  missionary
journey.  After  leaving  Ephesus  he  went  into  Macedonia;  "and  when  he
had  gone  over  those  parts,  and  had  given  them  much  exhortation,  he  came
into  Greece."  It  is  not  likely  that  Philippi  was  omitted.  Philippi,  with
the  other  Churches  of  Macedonia,  was  then  suffering  that  "  great  trial  of
affliction  "  mentioned  in  the  Second  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,  which  St.
Paul  wrote  during  this  visit  to  Macedonia.  We  gather  from  that  Epistle
that  he  was  busily  employed  in  collecting  alms  for  the  saints  in  Jerusalem,
and  that  the  Macedonian  Christians  contributed  readily  and  liberally ;  and
we  also  learn  (see  2  Cor.  vii.  6  and  viii.  2)  that  it  was  a  time  of  persecu-
tion and  distress  for  himself  as  well  as  for  the  Macedonian  Churches.
After  three  months  in  Greece,  he  "  purposed  to  return  through  Macedonia,"
and,  St.  Luke  continues  (Acts  xx.  6),  "  we  sailed  away  from  Philippi  after
the  days  of  unleavened  bread."  St  Paul  chose  to  keep  the  Passover,  the
greatest  of  the  Jewish  festivals,  at  Philippi,  among  those  whom  he  calls  his
dearly  beloved,  his  joy  and  crown.  There  were  very  few  Jews  at  Philippi :
did  he  keep  the  feast  as  a  Christian  Easter  among  Christians,  rather  than  a
Jewish  festival  among  Jews  ?  It  was  the  last  Passover  for  several  years
which  he  could  keep  where  and  as  he  pleased.

At  this  point  in  St.  Luke's  narrative  (Acts  xx.  6)  we  notice  the  resump-
tion of  the  first  person,  which  St.  Luke  has  not  used  since  Acts  xvi.,  in
which  St.  Paul's  first  visit  to  Philippi  is  related.  Prom  this  circumstance
it  has  been  inferred  that  St.  Luke  was  left  at  Philippi  to  carry  on  the  work
of  organizing  the  Macedonian  Churches ;  and  perhaps  remained  there  till
he  rejoined  St.  Paul  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem.  Thus  it  may  be  that  the
Christians  at  Philippi  had  the  benefit  of  the  teaching  of  the  evangelist  during
the  seven  or  eight  years  which  followed  St.  Paul's  first  visit.    Thus  their


THE   EFJSTLE   TO  THE   PHlLlPPlANa


love  for  St.  Paul,  their  nnliesitating  submission  to  his  apostolic  authority,
thoir  steadfast  adherence  to  his  teaching,  may  in  part  be  the  result  of  the
labours  of  his  trusted  friend  and  follower,  who  continued  faithful  (2  Tim.  iv.
11)  when  others  forsook  him.

St.  Paul  "  sailed  away  from  Philippi  "  in  the  year  58.  His  imprisonment
soon  followed ;  he  remained  a  prisoner  for  four  or  five  years,  the  first  half
of  the  time  at  Csesarea,  the  second  half  at  Rome.  The  Epistle  to  the
Philippians  has  been  assigned  to  the  Cesarean  imprisonment  by  Paulus
and  others.  St.  Paul  was  kept  at  Ceesarea  in  Herod's  praetorium  (Acts
xxiii.  35),  and  in  the  Epistle  (ch.  i.  13)  he  says  that  his  bonds  in  Christ
have  become  manifest  in  the  whole  prsetorium.  But  it  is  most  probable
that  in  the  last-quoted  passage  the  word  ''prsetorium"  signifies,  not  a  build-
ing, but  the  PrsBtorian  Guard  (see  note  onch.  i.  13).  Rome  is  not  mentioned
in  the  Epistle-to  the  Philippians  (nor  in  any  of  the  other  three  supposed  to
have  been  written  there)  ;  but  St.  Paul's  reference  to  Caesar's  household,
his  account  of  the  success  of  his  preaching,  his  expectation  of  a  speedy
release,  all  point  to  Rome  rather  than  to  Csesarea.  Accordingly,  the  very
great  majority  of  commentators  are  agreed  in  ascribing  the  Epistle  to  the
Roman  captivity.

From  the  Epistle  we  learn  that  the  Church  at  Philippi  was  already  an
organized  society :  two  orders  of  the  Christian  ministry  are  mentioned  by
name.  The  Philippians  were  suffering  persecution.  There  was  a  tendency
to  discord  among  them ;  especially  there  was  a  quarrel  between  two  of  their
female  members.  Otherwise  there  is  no  hint  of  moral  corruption  or  erroneous
doctrine.  There  is  nothing  to  disturb  the  joy  and  thankfulness  with  which
the  apostle  contemplates  their  growth  in  grace.  Their  love  for  him  was
unchanged.  They  had  sent  Epaphroditus,  possibly  their  chief  pastor,  to
convey  their  gifts  and  to  minister  to  St.  Paul  in  his  affliction.

St.  Paul,  in  his  letter  to  the  Philippians,  expresses  a  hope  (ch.  ii.  24)  of
shortly  seeing  them  again.  We  gather  from  his  mention  of  a  journey  into
Macedonia  in  1  Tim.  i.  3  that  this  expectation  was  fulfilled.  From  the
notices  in  2  Tim.  iv.  13  and  20  it  has  been  inferred  that  he  may  possibly
have  visited  them  a  second  time  during  the  interval  between  the  two  Roman
imprisonments.

"We  hear  nothing  more  of  the  Philippian  Church  till  the  beginning  of  the
second  century.  About  fifty  years  after  the  Epistle  was  written,  Ignatius
passed  through  Philippi  guarded  by  ten  soldiers  (ten  leopards,  he  calls  them),
on  his  way  to  his  martyrdom  at  Rome.  He  was  kindly  received,  and  con-
ducted on  his  journey  by  the  Philippian  Christians.  This  led  to  a  corre-
spondence with  Polycarp,  the  Bishop  oi  Smyrna,  and  disciple  of  St.  John.
The  Philippians,  it  seems,  had  written  to  him,  asking  for  copies  of  the
letters  of  Ignatius,  and  for  advice  and  exhortation.  He  sends  the  letters
according  to  their  request.  He  cannot,  he  says,  reach  the  wisdom  of  the
blessed  Paul,  who  had  taught  them  and  written  to  them.  He  gives  them
mnoh  exhortation,  with  nUc*  for  deacons  and  presbyters.    One  presbyter


INTRODUCTION  TO


•f  PMlippi,  Valens,  and  his  wife,  had  caused  scandal  by  their  avarice.
Polycarp  hopes  they  will  repent ;  he  begs  the  Philippians  to  receive  them
to  forgiveness  on  their  repentance.  Polycarp's  epistle,  like  St.  Paul's,  is
rather  practical  than  doctrinal.  Like  St.  Paul,  he  praises  the  Philippiani
for  their  steadfastness  and  for  their  sympathy  with  suffering  brethren ;  in
both  epistles  we  find  allusions  to  strife  and  disunion ;  in  both  we  notice  the
absence  of  appeals  to  Old  Testament  authority.

From  the  time  of  Polycarp's  epistle  the  Church  of  Philippi  almost
vanishes  out  of  ecclesiastical  history.  Now  and  then  the  name  of  a
Philippian  bishop  occurs  in  the  subscriptions  of  the  decrees  of  Councils.
It  is  said  that  the  name  is  still  retained  in  the  title  of  an  Eastern  bishop,
the  Bishop  of  Drama  and  Philippi.  But  the  Church  of  Philippi  has  dis-
appeared, and  the  town  is  represented  only  by  ruins.  It  is  a  strange
history.  The  first  founded  of  the  European  Churches,  the  foremost,  it
seems,  of  all  the  Pauline  Churches  for  faith  and  love,  has  wholly  passed
away;  but  the  names  of  many  Philippian  Christians,  unknown  to  m.en,
remain,  and  ever  will  remain,  written  ia  golden  light  with  Clement  in  the
Lamb's  book  of  life.

in.    PtAOB   AHD  TiMK  OF  WEmifGf   THE  EPISTLB.

St.  Paul  wrote  four  Epistles  during  his  first  Roman  imprisonment — ^to
the  Philippians,  Colossians,  Ephesians,  and  to  Philemon.  The  three  last
were  evidently  written  about  the  same  time.  The  Epistle  to  the  Philippians
has  been  com.monly  regarded  as  the  latest  of  the  four.  But  some  writers
(notably  Bishop  Lightfoot,  to  whom  all  students  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles
owe  more  than  they  can  well  express)  place  it  early  in  the  first  Homan
imprisonment,  while  they  assign  the  other  three  to  as  late  a  date  as
possible.

The  Epistle  implies  the  existence  of  a  large  Christian  community  at  Rome,
much  activity  in  preaching,  party  spirit  too,  and  divisions.  The  gospel
had  penetrated  even  to  Nero's  establishment  on  the  Palatine ;  there  were
Christians,  apparently  not  a  few,  in  Geesar's  household.  The  bonds  of  the
apostle  were  known,  not  only  throughout  the  prsetorium.,  but  "  to  all  the
rest."    This  great  progress  seems  to  require  a  considerable  time.

On  the  other  hand,  we  must  remember  that  there  was  a  flourishing  Church
at  Rome  before  St.  Paul's  arrival.  The  Epistle  to  the  Romans  is  one  of
the  longest  and  the  most  elaborate  of  all  his  letters.  The  salutations
(assuming  that  the  last  chapter  really  belongs  to  that  Epistle,  and  not,  as
some  think,  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians)  are  more  numerous  than  in  any
other.  The  number  of  the  Roman  Christians  must  naturally  have  increased
considerably  during  the  three  intervening  years.  We  are  told  that  two
deputations  from  the  Roman  Church  met  St.  Paul  at  Appii  Forum  and  the
Three  Taverns.  The  assertion  that  his  bonds  were  known  "to  all  the
rest"  maybe  oompared with  1  These,  i,  8,  where  he  saysof  the Thessalomana,


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN3.


"  In  every  place  yonr  faith  to  Godward  is  spread  abroad."  It  is  a  Christian
hyperbole,  the  language  of  joy  and  thankfalness,  not  to  be  pressed  to  •
literal  interpretation.

Again,  it  is  nrged  that  Aristarchns  and  Lnke,  who  accompanied  St.  Panl
to  Borne,  are  mentioned  in  the  Epistles  to  Philemon  and  the  Oolossians,
bat  not  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Fhilippians.  It  is  inferred  that  they  must
hare  left  Borne  before  this  last  Epistle  was  written,  which,  therefore,
would  seem  to  be  of  later  date.

This  argument  is  too  precarions  to  be  of  much  weight.  They  may  have
been  absent  for  a  time ;  or  accidental  circnmstances,  anknown  to  ns,  may
have  cansed  the  omission.  They  are  not  mentioned  in  the  Epistle  to  the
Ephesians ;  nor  is  Timothy,  though  that  Epistle  was  certainly  written  at  the
same  time  as  those  to  FhQemon  and  the  Colossians.

Again,  the  varions  communications  between  Rome  and  Plulippi  are
thought  to  imply  a  late  date  for  our  Epistle.  The  PhUippians  had  heard
of  St.  Paul's  arrival  at  Rome.  They  had  sent  Epaphroditos  with  contri-
butions for  the  relief  of  his  wants.  Epaphroditus  had  a  dangerous  illness,
the  restdt  of  over-exertion.  News  of  his  illness  had  reached  Philippi.  And
lastly,  Epaphroditus  had  heard  that  the  report  of  his  danger  had  greatly
distressed  the  Philippians.

But  the  time  required  for  these  communicationB  is  not  very  long.  The
distance  from  Rome  to  Philippi  is  about  seven  hundred  miles.  Each
journey  would  occupy  about  a  month  (see  Bishop  Lightfoot's  note, '  Philip,
plans,'  p.  38).  And  no  one  supposes  that  St.  Paul  could  have  written  the
Epistle  till  he  had  resided  several  months  in  Rome.

Again,  it  is  thought  that  St.  Luke's  words  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles
and  also  St.  Paul's  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  (vi.  19,  20)  imply  a
greater  degree  of  liberty  than  the  Epistle  before  us.  When  St.  Paul  writes
to  the  Philippians,  he  does  not  seem  to  be  actively  engaged  in  preaching ;
others  preach  (ch.  i.  15,  16),  his  Work  is  almost  limited  to  the  silent
eloquence  of  his  bonds.  This  more  rigorous  imprisonment,  and  the  possi-
bilities of  martyrdom  hinted  at  in  the  Epistle,  are  thought  by  some  to  point
to  the  time  when  Tigellinus  became  PraBfect  of  the  Praetorian  Guard,  after
the  death  of  the  upright  Burrus,  the  oaptain  of  the  guard  to  whom  St.  Panl
with  other  prisoners  was  at  first  delivered  (Acts  xxviii.  16).  Burrus  died
in  the  year  62,  scarcely  a  year  after  St.  Paul's  arrival.  It  is  also  thought
that  the  Jewish  tendencies  of  PoppaBa,  who  was  married  to  Nero  about  the
same  time,  may  have  led  to  the  aggravation  of  the  apostle's  sufferings.  But
it  does  not  seem  very  likely  that  such  a  prisoner  as  St.  Paul,  though  to  ns
Christians  an  object  of  the  very  deepest  interest,  would  have  attracted  the
notice  of  Tigellinus  or  Poppaaa;  and  indeed,  if  such  were  the  case,  the
result  in  all  probability  would  have  been,  not  closer  confinement,  but
immediate  death.

Not  much  stress  can  bo  laid  on  the  other  evidence  furnished  by  the
Epistle.    St  Paul  trusts  to  come  to  the  Philippians  shortly  (ch.  ii.  24);  but,


Tiii  INTRODUCTION  TO


on  the  other  hand,  he  expresses  much  uncertainty  as  to  the  result  of  his
trial ;  he  knows  not  whether  it  wiU  end  in  acquittal  or  the  death  of  martyr-
dom :  he  is  prepared  for  either  issue.  He  seems  to  speak  with  more  hope
of  a  speedy  release  in  his  Epistle  to  Philemon  (ver.  22),  which  must  have
been  written  about  the  same  time  as  that  to  the  Colossians.  But  these
Tariations  of  expression  may  be  due  to  accidental  circumstances,  or  to  those
changes  of  feeling  which  must  have  taken  place  in  the  course  of  a  long
imprisonment,  and  therefore  seem  scarcely  sufiB.cient  to  furnish  reliable
arguments  in  either  direction.

Bishop  Lightfoot,  who  thinks  that  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  must
be  placed  as  early  as  possible  in  St.  Paul's  first  Roman  imprisonment,
insists  strongly  on  its  undoubted  resemblance  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans.
He  points  out  many  close  parallels  and  a  considerable  number  of  verbal
coincidences  ('  Philippians,'  pp.  43,  44).  These,  he  thinks,  furnish  a  strong
argument  for  the  earlier  date  of  this  Epistle  as  compared  with  those  to  the
Ephesians  and  Colossians,  which  are  connected  rather  with  the  pastoral
Epistles  than  with  Ihose  of  the  third  missionary  journey.  In  the  Epistle
to  the  Philippians  we  have  "  the  spent  wave  of  the  controversy "  with
Judaism.  In  those  to  the  Ephesians  and  Colossians  we  meet  with  new,
forms  of  error,  made  known  to  the  apostle,  it  may  be,  by  the  visit  of
Epaphras  of  Colossas,  the  shadows  of  the  coming  heresies  of  Gnosticism,
which  at  the  time  of  the  pastoral  Epistles  had  assumed  something  more  of
distinctness.

There  is  considerable  weight  in  these  arguments.  On  the  other  hand,
we  must  remember  that  the  Epistles  to  the  Romans  and  Philippians  can-
not be  separated  by  an  interval  of  less  than  three  years ;  while  the  last
Epistle,  on  the  hypothesis  of  its  priority,  cannot  have  been  written  more
than  two  years  before  those  to  the  Ephesians  and  Colossians.  The  close
resemblance,  therefore,  between  the  Epistles  to  the  Romans  and  Philippians
can  scarcely  be  due  exclusively  to  nearness  of  date.  It  may  result  in  large
measure  from  the  fact  that  both  Epistles  are  the  spontaneous  utterances  of
the  apostle's  heart.  They  were  not  elicited,  like  the  Epistles  to  the  Corin-
thians or  the  Galatians,  by  the  special  circumstances,  errors,  or  backslidings
of  the  Churches  addressed.  The  one  is  a  treatise,  the  other  a  letter ;  but
both  represent  the  apostle's  general  teaching  when  not  modified  by  the  needs
of  particular  Churches.  At  Ephesus  or  Laodicsea  and  Colossse  the  tendencies
which  afterwards  took  the  form  of  Gnosticism  may  have  shown  themselves
early;  while  at  Philippi,  a  European  city,  there  was  no  appearance  of
those  Eastern  heresies.  We  must  not  omit  to  notice  that,  if  this  Epistle
has  many  points  of  contact  with  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  it  exhibits  in
two  or  three  places  (ch.  i.  23,  30 ;  ii.  17)  a  remarkable  resemblance  to  a
striking  passage  in  the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy  (2  Tim.  iv.  6 — 8),  the
last  Epistle  written  by  St.  Paul.

On  the  whole,  the  balance  of  argument  seems  slightly  in  favour  of  the
earlier  date  of  our  Epistle.    It  may  have  been  written  in  61  or  62.     But


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   PHILIPPIANS.  b

the  evidence,  it  seems  to  ns,  is  not  decisive ;  nor  -would  the  decision  be  ol
mncli  importance,  were  it  not  for  the  varioas  points  of  interest  which  it
brings  to  our  notice.

IV.  Contents  of  the  Epistle.

The  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  is  a  letter  from  a  friend  to  friends,  ■
letter  of  spiritual  counsel,  written  in  acknowledgment  of  loving  help.
The  apostle  knew  that  the  Philippians  would  be  interested  in  his  personal
circumstances,  as  he  himself  is  interested  in  theirs.  He  tells  them  of  his
bonds,  of  the  progress  of  the  gospel  at  Rome,  of  the  conduct  of  the  Jewish
party,  of  their  endeavours  to  distress  him  by  factious  opposition,  preaching
Christ,  as  they  did,  out  of  euvy  and  party  spirit.  He  tells  them  of  the
inward  peace  and  joy  which  bore  him  up  in  all  his  aflflictions ;  he  feels  sure
of  their  sympathy,  he  writes  in  the  fullest  confidence  of  Christian  friendship,
his  joy  is  their  joy.  He  tells  them  of  the  uncertainty  of  his  future ;  he
does  not  know  how  his  trial  will  end,  in  death  or  in  life  ;  he  is  prepared  for
either  event — a  holy  life  is  blessed,  a  holy  death  more  blessed  still.  Ho
tells  them  of  his  thankful  acceptance  of  their  gifts  :  he  had  been  unwilling
to  receive  aid  from  other  Churches,  but  with  them  he  was  on  terms  of  the
very  closest  intimacy,  and  that  afBectionate  and  trusting  friendship  made
him  ready  to  accept  their  help^  But  he  valued  it,  not  so  much  as  an  allevia-
tion of  his  own  hardships,  but  rather  as  an  additional  evidence  of  their  love
to  himself  and  of  their  growth  in  that  charity  which  is  the  first  of  Christian
graces.  For  himself,  he  was  content ;  he  had  learned  to  be  self-suflS^cient
in  the  Christian  sense :  none  felt  his  own  weakness  more  than  he,  but  ho
could  do  all  things  through  the  strength  of  Christ.

He  assures  them  of  the  sympathy  of  the  Broman  Christians  ;  especially  ho
mentions,  we  know  not  why,  the  interest  which  the  Christians  of  Nero's
household  felt  in  their  Philippian  brethren.  St.  Paul  believed  with  all  his
heart  in  the  communion  of  saints ;  the  sense  of  Christian  fellowship,  the
sympathy  of  his  brother  Christians,  was  very  precious  to  him ;  he  knew  it
was  so  to  the  Philippians.

He  tells  them  of  his  own  circumstances,  and  dwells  with  affectionate
friendship  upon  theirs.  He  calls  them  saints  in  Christ  Jesus,  his  brethren,
dearly  beloved  and  longed  for,  his  joy  and  crown.  He  mentions  their
bishops  and  deacons  (see  note  on  ch.  i.  1).  He  assures  them  of  his
constant  prayers ;  he  always  remembers  them,  and  that  with  joy  and
thankfulness.  He  remembers  their  fellowship  with  him  in  the  gospel;
they  had  assisted  him,  and  that  loyally  and  earnestly,  in  his  self-denying
labours.  He  believed  that  his  continued  life  was  desirable  for  their  sakes ;
he  was  confident,  therefore,  that  it  would  be  prolonged,  and  that  he  should
see  them  again.  He  hints  here  and  there  at  their  Roman  citizenship  (ch.  i,
27  ;  iii.  20)  j  he  nrges  them  to  live  as' citizens  of  the  heavenly  country,  to
show  the  courage  of  Romans  in  the  good  fight  of  faith.     He  knows  he  telU


INTRODUCTION  TO


them,  tlieir  trials  and  persecntions ;  to  suffer  for  Christ,  he  says,  is  a  gift
from  God,  a  high  honour.  He  reminds  them  delicately  of  his  own  example ;
he  is  snfEering  as  they  are,  more  than  they  are ;  he  and  they  are  partners
now  in  affliction,  as  they  will  be  hereafter  in  glory.

They  have  already  given  him  much  satisfaction;  he  begs  them  to  com-
plete the  joy  which  he  has  in  them.  There  is  one  fault  in  the  Philippian
Church,  a  tendency  to  disunion.  He  implores  them,  in  the  most  affectionate
language,  to  be  on  their  guard  against  strife  and  vain-glory,  to  esteem,  each
one  of  them,  others  as  better  than  himself.  He  exhorts  them  to  cultivate
lowliness  and  unselfishness.  He  knows  how  hard  the  lesson  is ;  precept  is
not  enough, — ^there  is  need  of  a  high  constraining  example.  He  points  to
the  Saviour ;  he  bids  them  remember  his  lowliness,  his  Divine  self-sacrifice.
This  introduces  the  great  doctrinal  passage  of  the  Epistle.  He  soon  returns
to  exhortation.  Hitherto,  he  says,  they  have  obeyed  him:  they  obeyed
when  he  was  with  them ;  in  his  absence,  obedience  is  more  needful  still.
They  must  work  out,  each  one  of  them,  his  own  salvation,  not  depending
on  the  presence  of  a  hnman  teacher,  but  on  God  who  worketh  in  the
Christian  heart,  from  whom  alone  all  holy  desires  and  all  good  works  do
proceed.  He  again  warns  them  against  murmurings  and  disputings ;  they
must  be  blameless  and  harmless,  the  sons  of  God.  They  appear  already,  he
says,  as  lights  in  the  world ;  they  hold  forth  the  "Word  of  life  to  others.
Let  them  persevere,  for  his  sake  as  well  as  their  own,  that  he  may  rejoice
in  the  day  of  Christ.  Nothing  can  give  him  greater  joy  than  their  salva-
tion ;  for  that  great  end  he  is  willing  to  be  offered  up  i  it  would  fill  him
with  holy  joy  to  pour  forth  his  own  blood  as  a  drink  offering  upon  the
sacrifice  of  their  souls  as  a  whole  burnt  offering  unto  God.  He  will  send
Timothy  to  them  shortly,  that  he  may  have  a  trustworthy  account  of  their
state ;  he  reminds  them  that  they  know  the  proof  of  him, — ^he  will  care  for
them  with  a  genuine  love.  He  hopes  to  come  himself.  In  any  case,  he
will  send  Epaphroditus  at  once.  Epaphroditus  had  just  recovered  from  a
dangerous  illness ;  that  illness  had  been  caused  in  some  way  by  his  unselfish
labours,  possibly  during  the  autumn  always  unhealthy  at  Rome  (see  ch.  iv.
10,  and  note).  St.  Paul  knew  that  the  Philippians  felt  the  deepest  interest
in  their  brother's  recovery  :  he  will  send  him  at  once  with  the  letter.

After  another  doctrinal  digression,  St.  Paul  returns  to  the  circumstances
of  the  Philippian  Church.  He  mentions  especially  two  women,  Euodia  and
Syntyche.  They  evidently  held  an  important  position  at  Philippi ;  they
were  at  variance  with  one  another ;  their  reconciliation  was  necessary  for
the  well-being  of  the  Church.  He  exhorts  them  in  the  most  earnest  words
to  be  of  the  same  mind,  and  that  in  the  Lord ;  they  were  members  of  the
one  body  of  Christ ;  the  Church's  union  with  the  one  Lord  must  not  be
disturbed  by  disunion  among  its  members.  He  begs  his  "true  yokefellow,"
perhaps  Epaphroditus  himself,  with  Clement  and  his  other  fellow-labourers,
to  assist  in  the  Christian  work  of  restoring  peace.  He  exhorts  them  all  to
rejoice  in  the  Lord,  for  that  holy  joy  is  the  best  remedy  against  the  spirit


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.


of  dissension.  He  insists  on  the  paramount  duty  of  prayer  and  thanks-
giving, and  the  watchful  government  of  the  thoughts.  He  acknowledgeg
with  thanks  their  repeated  gifts,  and  prays  that  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ  may  be  with  their  spirit.

This  Epistle  has  been  called  "  the  least  dogmatic  of  the  apostle's  letters  "
(Bishop  Lightfoot,  Preface,  p.  ix  ).  It  is  natural  that  it  should  be  so ;  the
apostle  is  writing  a  letter  in  acknowledgment  of  the  gifts  of  the  Philippians,
not  a  theological  treatise ;  a  letter  of  Christian  love  and  spiritual  counsel.
But,  though  the  doctrine  is  introduced  incidentally,  and  always  employed
to  enforce  Christian  practice  and  holiness  of  life ;  nevertheless,  the  whole
Epistle  is  interpenetrated  with  Christian  doctrine.  The  great  doctrinal
passage  in  the  second  chapter  asserts  most  of  the  distinctive  articles  of
the  Christian  creed.  St.  Paul  insists  upon  the  divinity  of  Christ,  his  pre-
existence,  his  equality  with  God  the  Father,  his  incarnation,  his  perfect
humanity,  his  precious  death  upon  the  cross,  his  glorious  exaltation.  In
the  third  chapter  we  have  his  resurrection,  bis  second  advent,  his  Divine
power.  In  that  chapter  we  have  also  a  full  statement  of  the  doctrines  of
justification  by  faith,  of  the  transitory  character  of  the  Mosaic  Law,  and  of
the  Church  as  the  city  of  God.  Doctrine,  then,  is  here,  as  elsewhere,  the
basis  of  St.  Paul's  teaching ;  but  here,  as  elsewhere,  he  enforces  doctrine  as
bearing  upon  holiness  of  life.

In  the  practical  portion  of  the  Epistle,  the  g^ces  on  which  the  apostle
most  insists  are,  especially  and  above  all  others.  Christian  joy ;  then  unity ;
and,  as  conducive  to  unity,  unselfishness  and  humility.  He  also  urges  the
duty  of  mutual  forbearance,  thankfulness,  constant  prayer,  contentment,
and  the  due  ordering  of  the  thoughts.

V.    COERESPONDENCB    Of  THE    BpiSTLB   WITH    THE   ClECUMSTANCES   Of   THE

Philippians.  <

We  must  not  omit  to  notice  the  correspondence  which  exists  between  the
language  of  the  Epistle  and  the  circumstances  of  the  Philippians.  Philippi
was  a  Roman  colony;  St.  Paul  refers  once  and  again  to  the  rights  and
duties  of  citizenship.  Like  other  Roman  colonies,  it  had  a  military  charac-
ter; it  was  a  garrison  against  the  Thracian  barbarians.  St.  Paul  calls
Epaphroditus  his  fellow-soldier ;  he  derives  his  metaphors  from  wrestling
and  the  race ;  he  bids  the  Philippians  to  stand  fast  and  strive  together  for
the  gospel.  It  was  a  city  in  which  there  were  very  few  Jews ;  hence  there
ia  nothing  in  the  Epistle  which  presupposes  an  acquaintance  with  the  Old
Testament.  There  are  references  to  it  here  and  there  (ch.  i.  19  ;  ii.  10,  11,
15 ;  iv.  18);  but  no  direct  appeals  to  its  authority.  It  was  founded  by  a
Macedonian  king  on  Macedonian  soil.  The  official  tongue  of  the  colony
was  of  course  Latin  ;  but  the  language,  education,  customs,  religion,  of  a
large  proportion  of  the  Philippians  were  Greek.  The  apostle  not  only
writes  in  Greek,  as  in  all  his  extant  Epistles  ;  bnt  uses  here  and  there  words


til  INTEODUCTION  TO


whicli  remind  ns  of  Greek  ttonght  and  Greek  philosophy,  airdpKeta,  apei^
ETTtetKEia,  aio-^ijo-ts,  l'-op<l)ij :  or  of  Greek  rites,  fxveia-Ocu,  ivapx^cOai,  airevSea-Gat.
It  was  not  a  very  populous  city,  not  a  great  centre  of  trade ;  but  it  was
eitaated  on  the  great  Egnatian  Way,  the  main  road  between  Borne  and
Asia;  it  was  "the  first  city  of  Macedonia"  as  one  came  from  the  Bast.
Hence  it  had  something  of  a  cosmopolitan  character,  which  seems  to  be
reflected  in  the  composition  of  the  earliest  Church — the  purple-seller  from
Thyatira,  the  Greek  slave-girl,  the  Roman  jailor.  Women  appear  to  have
had  a  much  higher  social  position  in  Macedonia  than  in  other  parts  of  the
heathen  world  ;  St.  Paul  in  this  Epistle  speaks  of  the  dissensions  between
Euodia  and  Syntyche  as  a  matter  of  grave  importance.  The  hospitality  of
Lydia  was  the  first  item  in  that  "  account  of  giving  and  receiving,"  which
he  mentions  in  ch.  iv.  15,  16.  Philippi  was  the  first  European  city  in  which
he  preached ;  in  writing  to  them,  therefore,  he  naturally  speaks  of  "  the
beginning  of  the  gospel "  (ch.  iv.  15).  Timothy  was  with  him  during  that
first  visit ;  he  reminds  them  in  ch.  ii.  22,  "  Te  know  the  proof  of  him,  that
as  a  son  with  the  father,  he  hath  served  with  me  in  the  gospel."  He
suffered  much  at  Philippi — it  was  the  scene  of  his  first  imprisonment ;  he
mentions  "the  conflict  which  ye  saw  in  me"  (ch.  i.  30).  At  Philippi  he
and  Silas  in  th'e  dungeon  "  sang  praises  unto  God ; "  and  afterwards  the
jailor  "  rejoiced,  believing  in  God  with  all  his  house."  It  is  not  without
fiigniflcance  that  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians  is  emphatically  the  Epistle
of  Chiistian  joy.

VI.  Genuineness  oj  the  Epistlb.

Of  the  genuineness  of  this  Epistle  there  can  be  no  shadow  of  doubt.  It
l«a8  been  questioned  by  F.O.  Baur,  who  finds  references  to  Grnosticism  in  the
second  chapter,  and  creates  for  himself  a  historical  difficulty  by  identifying
the  Clement  of  ch.  iv.  3  with  Flavins  Clemens,  the  relation  of  Domitian,
who  was  put  to  death  by  that  prince,  and  was,  in  all  probability,  a  Christian
martyr.  But  the  arguments  of  Baur  have  found  little  acceptance  even  with
the  Tubingen  school,  and  are  rejected  even  by  such  critics  as  M.  Renan.
Dean  Alford  calls  them  "  the  insanity  of  hyper-criticism."  The  Epistle  is
essentially  Pauline ;  it  reflects  the  character,  the  heart,  the  teaching,  of  St.
Paul.  Its  language  and  style  are  St.  Paul's ;  especially  it  bears  a  close
resemblance,  both  in  teaching  and  in  words,  to  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,
one  of  the  four  Epistles  which  Baur  regards  as  undoubtedly  Pauline.  It  is
simply  inconceivable  that  a  forger  could  have  so  successfully  imitated  the
apostle's  manner,  could  have  poured  forth  that  warm  flood  of  affection,  or
could  have  bo  exactly  adapted  his  production  to  the  circumstances  both  of
St.  Paul  and  of  the  Philippians.

There  is  large  external  testimony  to  our  Epistle.  We  meet  with  words
and  expressions  from  it  reproduced  in  the  earliest  Christian  writings ;  in
Clement  of  Borne,  in  Ignatius,  in  Polycarp,  in  the  epistle  to  Diognetns.


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHIL1PPIAN3.  i«H

Polycarp,  when  himself  writing  to  the  Philippians,  speata  of  the  Epistle
which  they  had  received  from  St.  Paul.  Men  who  had  known  St.  Paul,  who
had  contributed  to  his  necessities,  may  well  have  been  living  at  Philippi
when  Polycarp's  letter  was  received,  A.D.  107,  There  is  a  distinct  quotation
from  the  Epistle  in  the  letter  from  the  Churches  of  Lyons  and  Vienne  (a.d.
177),  preserved  in  the  'Ecclesiastical  History'  of  Eusebius  (v.  2),  where  the
words  of  ch.  ii.  6  are  cited.  In  the  same  century  it  is  quoted  by  Irenajus,
by  Clement  of  Alexandria,  and  by  Tertullian.  It  is  found  in  Marcion's
Canon,  in  the  Muratorian  Fragment,  and  other  ancient  lists  of  the  books
of  the  new  Testament.  It  ia  contained  in  the  Feshito,  the  Old  Latin,  and
othtc  ancient  versions.


VII.  Commentaries  on  the  Epistle.

A  MONO  the  most  valuable  patristic  helps  arethe  Homilies  of  St.  Chrysostom;
there  are  also  the  commentaries  of  Theodoret,  Theodore  of  Mopsuestia,
and  Theophylact.  Among  later  writers  may  be  mentioned  Calvin  (1539)
and  Estius  (1614)  ;  and  in  modern  times,  Bengel  (1742),  Van  Hengel
(1838),  Eilliet  (1841),  Meyer  (1847),  Holeman  (1839),  De  Wette  (1847),
Wiesinger  (1850),  Neander  (1849).

Among  the  best  English  commentaries  are  those  of  Bishops  Lightfoot,
Ellioott,  and  Wordsworth,  Deana  Alford  and  Gwjnn,  and  Professor  Eadia.


THE  EPISTLE   OF

PAUL  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTBB  L


Ver.  1. — faul  and  TimotlieTig.  St.  Paul
does  not  assume  his  offloiiil  title  in  writing
to  tlie  Macidonian  Churches,  Philippi  and
ThesSiiloiiioa;  it  Is  used  in  all  his  other
'  Epistles,  except  the  short  letter  to  Philemon.
His  relations  to  the  Philippians  aud  Thes-
salonians  were  those  of  the  (Jeepest  personal
affection ;  there  was  no  need  of  a  formal  in-
troduction, especially  in  an  Epistle  wliich
hag  so  little  of  an  official  character  as  this
to  the  Philippians.  He  joins  the  name  of
Timothy  with  his  own,  as  in  2  Corinthians,
Colossiaiis,  1  and  2  Thessaloninns,  and  Phi-
lemon. Thus  Timothy  is  associated  with 'St.
Paul  in  every  Epistle  in  which  another
name  is  found  except  1  Corinthians,  where
Sosthenes  only  is  mentioned ;  this  shows  the
intimate  affection  that  bound  St.  Paul  to
his  "  own  son  in  the  faith."  There  was  a
spi  cial  reason  for  mentioning  Timothy  in
tliia  Ejiistle,  as  he  was  so  well  known  to
the  I'll  lippians,  and  St.  Paul  was  intending
(ch.  ii.  19)  to  send  him  shortly  to  Philippi.
But  St.  Paul  writes  in  liis  own  name  from
the  beginning.  Timothy  was  not  in  any
SHnse  a  joint  author;  he  may  possibly  have
been  St.  Paul's  amanuensis,  as  Terlius  was
in  the  case  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans
(Rom.  xvi.  22).  Possibly  also  motives  of
humility  led  St.  Paul  to  insert  other  names
besides  his  own ;  but  it  was  not  to  support
his  teaching  by  additional  authority— he  was
"  an  apostle,  not  of  man,  neither  by  man,"
and  needed  not  the  weight  of  other  names.
The  servants  of  Jesus  Christ;  slaves,  lite-
rally :  "  made  free  from  sin  and  become  ser-
vants [slaves]  to  God,"  whose  service  is
perfect  freedom.  We  belong  to  bim ;  he  is
our  Master  (/ciJpios,  Sea-vSTris)  as  well  as
Father,  we  are  his  slaves  as  well  as  his
song ;  "  Ye  ara  not  your  own,  ye  are  bought

PHILIFFIANS.


with  a  price.'*  Compare  the  words  of  VLt
"  damsel  possessed  with  a  spirit  of  divina-
tion "  at  Philippi :  "  These  men  are  the
servants  [slaves]  of  the  most  high  God."
She  felt  the  difference  between  her  state
and  theirs !  she  was  the  slave  of  her  Philip-
pian  masters,  of  the  evil  spirit  too ;  St.  Paul
and  his  companion  were  the  slaves  of  God
most  high.  In  the  best  manuscripts,  as  in
the  R.V.,  "Christ"  is  put  before  "  Jesus "
here.  The  apostle  frequently  sets  the  official
before  the  personal  name  of  our  Lord ;  pos-
sibly because  he  knew  not  the  Lord  Jesus
after  the  flesh,  but  saw  him  first  as  the
Messiah,  the  Christ  of  God,  To  all  the
saints  in  Christ  Jesus  which  are  at  FhUippi.
The  word  "  all "  is  of  very  frequent  occur-
rence in  this  Epistle.  There  may  possibly
be  a  reference  to  the  dissensions  alluded  to
in  cb  iv.  ?  •  oi-  as  some  think,  to  the  sup-
plies sent  lui  St.  Paul's  assistance;  he
addresses  all  alike,  not  only  those  who  con-
tributed ;  he  does  not  recognize  tlieir  divi-
sions. But  it  is,  perhaps,  only  the  natural
expression  of  his  warm  affection :  the  apostle
was  beloved  by  all  the  Philippians,  and  all
were  dear  to  him ;  there  was  no  hostile  fac-
tion there,as  at  Corinth  andelsewhere.  Com-
pare the  affectionate  repetition,  "  always,"
"  every,"  "all,"  in  ver.  4.  St.  Paul  usee
the  word  "saint"  as  the  general  name  for
his  converts,  like  "Chrislian."  The  word
"Christian"  occurs  only  three  times  in  the
New  Testament  (Acts  xi.  26;  xxvi  28;
1  Pet.  iv.  16).  Christ's  people  are  called
"  brethren,"  "  disciples,"  or  "  saints."  Thui
St.  Paul  addresses  the  Corinthians  gene-
rally as  "  saints,"  though  many  of  them
weie  far  from  possessing  holiness  of  hear*
and  life.  The  ancient  Church  was  holy,
the  Israelites  are  called  "a  holy  na-
tion," "saints  of  the  Most  High."  They
were  holy  bjr  God's  election,  his  chosen


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.


[oh.  1, 1—30.


people,  separated  unto  him  by  the  rite  of
cirou incision.  By  tlie  same  election  the
Christian  Church  is  lioly,  dedicated  to  God
ill  baptism.  This  holiness  of  dedication
(comp.  1  Cor.  vii.  14)  does  not  necessarily
involve  the  actual  existence  of  that  inner
holiness  of  heart  "  without  which  no  man
shall  see  the  Lord."  But  it  does  imply  the
Dounden  duty  of  striving  after  that  spiritual
holiness.  "  Ye  are  the  ttmple  of  the  living
God,"  St.  Paul  says  to  the  Corinthians  (2
Ci.r.  vi.  16),  "  for  God  hatli  said,  I  will  dwell
in  them,  and  walk  in  them ;  and  I  will  be
th(  ir  God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people  .  .  .
therefore  ...  let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from
all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfect-
ing holiness  in  the  fear  of  Gfod."  The  Greek
word  aytos  (in  our  translation  sometimes
"  holy,"  sometimes  "  saint ")  is  the  usual
rendering  for  the  Hebrew  ^'"no-  The  pri-
mary idea  of  tlie  Hebrew  word  seems  to  be
that  of  separation — separation  from  all  that
defileth.  God  is  "of  purer  eyes  than  to
behold  evil;"  those  who  are  dedicated  to
liiin  must  strive  by  his  grace  to  purify
themselves  even  as  he  is  pure.  "I5e  ye
holy,  lor  1  am  holy."  In  Christ  Jesus.
They  are  saints  in  virtue  of  their  relation  to
Christ.  They  were  once  "  baptized  into  one
body  " — the  mystical  body  of  Olirist.  Holi-
ness of  dedication  can  issue  in  holiness  of
heart  and  lil'e  only  by  abiding  in  him  (comp.
iTohn  XV.  4 — 6).  All  saints  are  one  body
in  Christ ;  they  are  knit  together  into  one
communion  and  fellowship  by  their  personal
union  « ith  the  one  Lord.  With  the  bishops
and  deacons.  In  the  New  Testament  the
word  eV/ffKoiroj  is  synonymous  with  irpeirpi-
repos  (comp.  Acts  XX.  17 ;  1  Pet.  v,  1,  2;  1
Tim.  lii.  1—7 ;  Titus  i.  5—7).  St.  Paul  is
arldressing  the  elders  of  the  Church  at
Philippi,  not  bishops  in  our  sense  of  the
w  ord.  It  is  possible  that  Epaphroditus  may
havebeenthe  presiding  bishop  of  the  Church
(see  notes  on  ch.  ii.  25  and  iv.  3).  If  so,  we
see  a  reason  why  the  second  and  third  orders
of  the  ministry  only  are  mentioned,  as  Epa-
phroditus was  tlie  bearer  of  the  Epistle.
But  diocesan  episcopacy  does  not  seem  to
have  become  general  till  the  last  quarter  of
the  first  century.  AiVe  know  that  Paul  and
Barnabas  "ordained  elders  in  every  Church"
in  their  first  missionary  journey ;  we  need
not,  therefore,  be  surprised  at  the  mention
of  these  ofSoial  designations  in  this  Epistle,
which  was  written  seventeen  or  eighteen
years  later.  St.  Paul's  address  to  the  elders
of  the  Church  at  Ephesus  shows  the  impor-
tance which  he  attached  to  the  office  and  to
the  faithful  performance  of  its  duties  Per-
haps "  the  bishops  and  deacons "  are  spe-
cially mentioned  here  as  having  collected
the  contributions  sent  to  St.  Paul ;  so  Ohry-
sostom  and  Meyer.    On  the  whole  subject,


see  Bishop  Lightfoot's  exhaustive  '  Disser-
tation on  the  Christian  Ministry,'  in  his
volume  on  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians.

Ver.  2. — Grace  be  unto  you,  and  peace.
This  combination  of  the  Greek  and  Hebrew
salutations  is  the  common  form  in  St.  Paul's
earlier  Epistles ;  in  the  pastoral  Epistles
"  mercy  "  is  added.  Grace  is  the  favour  of
God,  free  and  sovereign,  which  rests  on  the
faithful  Christian,  and  brings  the  gift  of
peace;  which  is,  first,  reconciliation  with  God;
and,  secondly,  the  childlike  confidence  and
trustful  hope  which  result  from  faith  in
Christ's  atonement.  From  God  our  Father,
and  from  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ.  God  the
Father  is  the  first  Author  of  oiu:  salvation  ;
God  the  Son,  the  Word  made  flesh,  brought
the  message  of  peace  from  heaven,  and  re-
conciled us  to  God.

Ver.  3. — I  thank  my  God  upon  every  re-
membrance of  you.  All  St.  Paul's  Epistles,
except  those  to  the  Galatians,  1  Timothy,
and  Titus,  begin  with  a  thanksgiving.  la
this  Epistle  the  thanksgiving  is  especially
warm  and  earnest;  no  cloud  of  doubt
darkened  the  apostle's  confidence  in  the
Philippians ;  he  pours  forth  his  gratitude  to
God  for  their  spiritual  gifts  fervently  and
without  reserve.  My  God.  The  pronoun
expresses  the  inner  consciousness  of  personal
relations  with  God ;  it  reminds  us  of  Acts
xxvii.  23,  "  God,  whose  I  am,  and  whom  I
serve."  Upon  all  my  remembrance  of  you
(as  E.V.)  is  the  more  exact  rendering.
The  remembrance  (not  mention)  was  con-
tinuous ;  he  "  had  them  in  his  heart,"  and
that  unbroken  remembrance  resulted  in  up-
broken  thanksgiving.

Ver.  4. — Always  in  every  prayer  of  mine
for  you  all  making  request  with  joy.  Per-
"haps  the  first  part  of  this  verse  is  better
joined  with  ver.  3,  "  I  thank  my  God  .  .  .
always  in  every  prayer  of  mine  for  you  all;"
BO  Bishop  Lightfoot.  "The  Greek  word  for
"  prayer  "  and  "  request "  is  the  same,  Sevan,
better  rendered  "my  supplication,"  as  in
the  E.V. ;  it  implies  not  merely  a  lifting  up
of  the  heart  to  God,  but  an  earnest  entreaty
for  a  necessary  gift.  We  meet  now  for  the
first  time  with  that  "joy"  which  is  the  key-
note of  this  Epistle.  "Sunima  epistolss,
Gaudeo;  gaudete;"  so  Bengel,  who  con-
tinues, "  This  Epistle  of  joy  well  follows
that  to  the  Bphesians,  where  love  reigns.
'  The  fruitof  the  Spirit  is  love,joy.'  Joy  gives
life  to  prayer."

Ver.  5. — For  your  fellowship  in  the  gospel
from  the  first  day  until  now ;  rather,  as  R. V.,
for  your  fellowship  in  furtherance  of  the  got-
pel.  This  verse  should  be  taken  in  oonneo-
tioii  with  ver.  3.  St.  Paul  thanks  God  for
their  help,  their  oo-operation  towards  thi»
work  of  the  gospel.  They  helped  forward
the  work  by  their  prayers,  their  labours.


OH.  1. 1—80.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.


and  their  liberal  bounty.  This  fellowship
began  "in  the  beginning  of  the  gospel,"
when  the  Philippiaiis  sent  aid  to  the  apostle
at  Thessalonioa  and  Corinth;  it  continued
"  niitil  now  " — ten  years ;  they  had  just  sent
their  alms  to  St.  Paul  at  Borne  by  Epa-
phvoditus  (ch.  iv.  10).

Ver.  6.  —  Being  confident  of  this  very
thing.  St.  Paul's  thanksgiving  refers,  not
only  to  tlie  past,  but  also  to  tiie  future.  He
has  a  confident  trustfulness  in  God's  power
and  love.  The  words  ourb  touto  might
mean  "  on  this  account,"  i.e.  on  account  of
the  perseverance  described  in  ver.  5,  but  the
order  seems  to  support  the  ordinary  reniler-
ing.  That  he  which  hath  begun  a  good
work  in  you  will  perform  it;  rather,  as  K.V.,
he  tehioh  began.  Both  ivap^d/ievos  and  eiri-
TcXcVei  have  (Bishop  Liglitfoot)a  sacrificial
reference.  Tiie  good  worlc  is  self-consoura-
tion,  tlie  sacrifice  of  themselves,  their  souls
and  bodies,  issuing  in  the  co-operation  of
labour  and  almsgiving.  This  sacrificial
metaphor  recurs  in  ch.  ii.  17.  The  good
work  is  God's;  he  began  it  and  he  will
perfect  it.  The  beginning  (Bengel)  is  the
pledge  of  the  consummation.  Yet  it  is  also
their  work — their  co-operation  towards  the
gospel  (comp.  ch.  ii.  12,  13).  Until  the  day
of  Jesus  Christ.  The  perfecting  will  go  on
until  the  great  day.  To  the  individual
Christian  that  day  is  practically  the  day  of
his  death ;  though,  indeed,  'the  process  of
perfecting  maybe  going  on  in  the  holy  dead
till  they  obtain  their  perfect  consummation
and  bliss  both  in  body  and  soul.  These
words  do  not  imply  that  St.  Paul  expected
the  second  advent  during  the  life  of  his
Philippian  converts.  The  words  "  in  you  "
must  be  understood  as  meaning  "in  your
hearts,"  not  merely  "  among  you."

Ver.  7. — Even  as  it  is  meet  for  me  to  think
this  of  yon  all.  It  is  meet ;  rather,j«6<,  right.
To  tliink  this;  to  entertain  this  confidence
concerning  yon.  Because  I  have  you  in  my
heart ;  or,  because  you  have  me  in  your  heart.
But  the  order  of  the  words,  and  ver.  8,  make
the  first  rendering  the  more  probable.  His
love  for  them  increasrs  liis  confidence.  In-
asmuch as  both  in  my  bonds,  and  in  the  de-
fence and  confirmation  of  the  gospel.  These
words  may  be  taken  with  the  preceding,  "  I
have  you  in  my  heart  during  my  imprison-
ment and  defence."  So  Chrysostom,  whose
words  are  very  striking :  OBtw  yip  iari  tv-
cwviKhy  d  %pas  6  irvevfiaTiKos  a>s  /xTjSei/l  irapa-
XO'peij'  Kcup^.  But  it  is,  perhaps,  more  na-
tural to  take  them  with  the  following.  Ye  all
are  partakers  of  my  grace  ;  rather,  ye  all  are
partakers  with  me  of  the  grace.  They  were
partakers  of  the  grace  of  God  given  to  him
in  his  bonds  and  in  his  work.  The  like
grace  was  given  to  them  both  for  the  passive
i'.nd  active  aides  of  the  Christian  life — both


in  endurance  of  suffering  and  in  propagating
the  gospel.  Thus  there  seems  to  be  no
reference  in  the  words  "defence  and  con-
firmation" to  his  public  defence  before
Csssar  (which  probably  had  not  yet  taken
place),  but  generally  to  his  work  of  preach-
ing the  gospel,  which  was  both  apologetic,
meeting  the  objections  of  adversaries,  and
aggressive,  asserting  the  truth.

Ver.  8. — For  God  is  my  record — rather,
Mitoes8(comp.  Bom.  i.  9) — how  greatly  I  long
after  yon  all  in  the  bowels  of  Jesns  Christ.
The  word  (Tir\iyxva,  here  rendered  "bowels,"
means  the  heart,  liver,  etc.,  not  the  entrails.
The  expression  is  remarkable,  and  is  well
illustrated  by  Bengcl's  striking  words,"Pau-
lus  lion  in  Pauli,  sed  Jesu  Ohristi  movetur
visoeribus."  "  Not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in
me."  He  is  so  united  with  Christ  that  he
feels  with  the  heart  of  Christ,  he  loves  with
the  love  of  Christ.

Ver.  9. — ^And  this  I  pray.  This  is  the
purport  of  the  prayer  already  mentioned  in
ver.  i.  The  coujimctlon  %va  marks  the  end
of  St.  Paul's  prayer,  and  so  its  purport.
That  your  love  may  abound  yet  more  and
more.  Your  love ;  not  love  for  the  apostle
only,  but  the  grace  of  Christian  charity.  St.
Paul  finds  no  fault  with  the  Philippians,
but  "  ignis  in  apostolo  nunquam  dicit,  SuflS-
cit"  (Bengel).  He  prays  for  their  con-
tinued growth  in  love,  but  not  unintelligent
love.  In  knowledge  and  in  all  judgment.
'ETT^yi/wins  is  a  stronger  word  than  yvSiffis :  it
means  full,  complete  knowledge.  The  Greek
aXaBr)ats  (literally,  sense')  occurs  only  here  in
the  New  Testament,  though  ala-BriT'fipta  (or-
gans of  sense)  is  found  in  Heb.  v.  14.  "  Dis-
cernment," the  rendering  of  E.V.,  is  more
correct  than  "judgment."  It  is,  Bishop
Wordsworth  Bays,  "  that  delicate  tact  and
instinct,  which  almost  intuitively  perceives
what  is  right,  and  almost  unconsciously
shrinks  from  what  is  wrong."  It  cannot
exist  without  love.  "  Every  one  that  loveth
is  born  of  God,  and  knoweth  God."  With
love  there  comes  a  spiritual  sense,  spiritual
sight,  spiritual  hearing,  a  sense  of  the  beauty
of  holiness,  a  fine  perception  of  Christian
propriety ;  ri  liydTrri  oiiK  aaxw"^"'-

Ver.  10. — That  ye  may  approve  things
that  are  excellent.  Love,  issuing  in  spiritual
discernment,  would  enable  them  to  recog-
nize, to  test,  to  prove  things  that  are  excel-
lent ;  BO  Bengel, "  Non  mode  prse  malis  bona,
sed  in  bonis  optima."  This  seems  better
than  the  alternative  rendering,  "  to  prove
the  things  that  differ  "  (comp.  Bom.  ii.  18).
That  ye  may  be  sincere  and  without  ofi'enca
till  the  day  of  Christ.  'EiKtKpivis,  according
to  the  common  derivation  (from  eUt;,  sun-
light, and  Kphu),  means  <* judged  in  the  full
light  of  the  Bun,"  that  is,  pure,  true ;  comp.
John  iii.  21,  "  He  that  doeth  truth  comeih


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.


[oh.  1. 1—30.


to  the  light,  that  his  deeds  may  be  made
matiifist,  that  they  are  wrought  in  God."
According  to  another  possilile  derivation,
the  word  would  mean  "  unmixed,"  that  Ib,
genuine,  sincere.  "  Without  offence  "  may
be  taken,  actively  or  passively;  witliout
giving  offence  (causing  stumbling)  to  others,
or  without  stumbling  themselves.  Perhaps
the  latter  sense  is  more  suitable  here.  He
prays  that  the  Pbilippians  may  be  true  and
pure  inwardly,  and  blameless  in  their  out-
ward lives.  "Till,"  ralher,  "against  the
day  of  Olirist."  The  preposition  eis  does  not
d(  note  time  only,  as  Sxp's  in  ver.  6;  it  im-
plies preparation.

Ver.  11.— Being  filled  with  the  fruits  of
righteousness.  The  best  manusciipts  read
"  fruit."  He  prays  that  their  love  may
abound,  not  only  in  knowledge  and  discern-
ment, but  also  in  the  fruit  of  holy  living.
The  fruit  of  righteousness  is  eanctifieation,
which  springs  from  justification,  and  mani-
fests itself  in  holy  living  (oomp.  Amos  vi.
12;  Gal.  v.  22).  Which  are  by  Jesus  Christ ;
rather,  through.  The  righteousness  of  God's
saints  is  not  that "  which  is  of  the  Law,  but
that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ "
(comp.  John  xv.  4).  The  branch  lives  by
the  life  of  the  vine ;  the  Christian  lives  by
the  life  of  Christ.  It  is  his  life,  living  in,
assimilated  by  the  Cliristiun  snul,  which
brings  forth  the  fruit  of  righteousness.
Unto  the  glory  and  praise  of  God.  The
righteousness  of  God's  saints,  springing
from  the  abiding  presence  of  Christ,  shows
forth  the  glory  of  God.  The  glory  of  God
is  his  majesty  in  itself;  praise  is  the  ac-
knowledgment of  this  majesty  by  the  voice
and  heart  of  man.  The  glory  of  God  is  the
end  of  all  Christian  effort.

Ver.  12. — But  I  would  ye  should  under-
stand, brethren,  that  the  things  which  hap-
pened unto  me  have  fallen  out  rather  unto
the  furtherance  of  the  gospel.  After  thanks-
giving and  prayer,  St.  Paul  turns  to  his  own
imprisonment  at  Rome.  That  imprison-
ment, he  says,  has  resulted  in  the  further-
ance of  tlie  gospel,  rather  than,  as  might
linve  been  expected,  in  its  hindrance.

Ver.  13. — So  that  my  bonds  in  Christ  are
manifest;  rather,  as  E.V.,  «o  that  my  bonds
became  manifest  in  Christ.  At  first  he
leemed  like  other  prisoners ;  afterwards  it
became  known  that  he  suffered  bonds,  not
for  any  crime,  but  in  Christ,  i.e.  in  fellow-
ship with  Christ  and  in  consequence  of  the
relation  in  which  he  stood  to  Christ.  In  all
the  palace ;  rather,  as  E.V.,  throughout  the
whole  Prietorian  Guard;-  literally,  in  the
whole  prxtorium.  The  word  elsewhere
means  a  governor's  house :  Pilate's  house  in
the  Gospels,  Herod's  palace  in  Acts  xxiii.  35.
But  at  Borne  the  name  so  used  would  give
•nnecessary  offence,  and  there  is  no  proof


that  it  was  ever  used  for  the  palatium  there.
St.  Paul  must  have  heard  it  constantly  as  th«
name  of  the  Prsstorian  rej;iinent;  he  waa
kept  chained  to  a  soldier  uf  that  corps  (Acts
xxviii.  16);  and  as  his  guard  was  continu-
ally relieved,  his  name  and  sufferings  for
Christ  would  become  gradually  known
throughout  the  force.  Others,  on  the  au-
thority of  a  passage  in  Dion  Cassius,  undor
stand  the  word  of  the  barracks.of  that  part
of  the  Praetorian  guard  attached  to  the  im-
perial residence  on  the  Palatine.  But  the
passage  relates  to  the  time  of  Augustus,
before  the  Praetorian  cohorts  were  estab-
lished by  TjberiuB  in  the  camp  outside  of
the  Colline  Gate.  And  in  aU  other  places  j
rather,  as  E.V.,  and  to  all  the  rest;  generally,
that  is,  throughout  the  city.  ■

Ver.  14. — And  many  of  the  brethren  in  the
lord;  rather,  and  that  most.  Most  of  the
brethren  took  courage;  there  were  exceptions.
Waxing  confident  by  my  bonds.  The  words,
"in  the  Lord,"  are  perhaps  better  taken
with  being  "conlident."  Their  confidence
rests  upon  St.  Paul's  bonds,  but  it  is  in  the
Lord.  St.  Paul's  example  gives  them  cour-
age, because  thi  y  know  that  he  is  suffering
for  the  love  of  Christ,  and  is  supported  in
his  suflerings  by  the  grace  of  Christ.  Are
much  more  bold  to  speak  the  word  without
fear;  betler,7norea6M7Mia«%,  as  E.V.  The
best  manuscripts  read  here, "  the  Word  of
God."

Ver.  15. — Some  indeed  preach  Christ  even
of  envy  and  strife.  The  Judaizing  party,
whom  St.  Paul  censures  in  eh.  iii.  2,  preached
Cnrist,  but  not  from  pure  motives.  Like
the  writers  of  the  pseudo-Clemeutiues,  they
envied  St.  Paul,  and  in  the  wicked  madness
of  the  odium  theologieum,  they  wished  to
distress  St.  Paul,  to  depreciate  his  preaching,
and  to  exalt  their  own.  And  some  also  of
good  will.  The  word  generally  means  God's
good  pleasure,  as  in  ch.  ii.  13,  but  hero
simply  good  will,  benevolence  towards  St.
Paul.

Vers.  16,  17.— These  two  verses  must
change  places  according  to  the  reading  of
the  best  manuscripts.  'Ihe  clauses  are  in-
verted by  the  figure  chiasmus.  But  the
other  of  love ;  read,  as  E.V.,  the  one  do  it  oj
love.  This  is  better  than  the  other  possible
rendering,  "those  who  are  of  love  do  it."
Knowing  that  I  am  set  for  the  defence  of  the
gospel.  KeT/tai,  I  am  set  or  appointed,  as  in
1  Thess.  iii.  3 ;  not,  as  some  understand,  I  lie
in  prison.  They  preach  Christ  out  of  love —
love  for  Christ,  and  love  for  Paul  for  Ch  i  ist'a
sake.  The  one  preach  Christ  of  contention ;
read  and  translate,  as  E.V.,  hut  Oie  other
proclaim  Christ  of  faMvm  ;  perhaps  rather,
announce  (jcaTayyiWouiriv) ;  bring  newi  of
Christ;  and  that  they  do  out  of  factious-
ness.   'l,fiBeia,  derived  from  tpi^os,  a  hired


tm.  1. 1—30.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.


eervant,  means  labour  for  hire,  and  is  com-
monly used  of  hived  canvassers,  in  the  sense
of  factiousness,  party  spirit.  It  is  reckoned
by  St.  Paul  in  Gal.  v.  20  among  the  works
of  the  flesh,  and  is  condemned  also  in  Eom.
'  ii.  8.  Not  sincerely,  supposing  to  add  afflic-
tion to  my  bonds ;  rather,  as  E.V.  (reading
with  the  best  manuscripts  iyeipeiv),  thinking
to  raise  up  affliction  for  me  in  my  hands.
Their  motives  were  not  pure ;  they  wislied
to  make  St.  Paul  feel  the  helplessness  of
imprisonment,  and  to  increase  his  affliction
by  opposing  his  doctrines,  and  by  forming  a
party  insisting  on  the  observance  of  the
ceremonial  law.  Bishop  Liglitfoot  trans-
lates 6\i-^iv  iyttpeiv  "to  make  my  chains
gall  me."

Ver.  18. — What  then?  notwithstanding,
every  way,  whether  in  pretence,  or  in  truth,
Christ  is  preached ;  rather,  only  that,  as
K.V..  (eomp.  Acts  xx.  23).  What  is  the
result  of  all  this  preacliing?  Only  that
Christ  is  announced,  that  the  story  of  Christ
is  told.  The  motives  of  the  preachers  may
not  be  good,  but  the  result  is  ^ood ;  the
gospel  facts  are  made  more  widely  known,
not  only  by  those  who  preach  in  sincerity,
but  even  by  means  of  those  who  strive  to
promote  their  own  parly  ends  under  the
pretence  ot  preaching  Christ.  And  I  therein
do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice.  St.  Paul
rejoices  in  the  good  which  God  brings  out
of  evil;  though  that  good  is  produced  by
the  outward  agency  of  his  own  adversaries,
yeo,  and  I  shall  rejoice.  He  will  not  allow
himself  to  be  vexed  by  the  bitterness  of  his
opponents,  he.  will  not  imitate  their  party
spirit ;  his  joy  will  continue,  for  he  knows
that,  in  spite  of  present  hindrances,  the
result  is  assured.

Ver.  19. — For  I  know  that  this  shall  turn
to  my  salvation.  ToSto,  this,  refers  to  the
general  preaching  of  Christ,  rather  than  (as
Calvin  and  others  interpret)  to  the  affliction
raised  up  for  St.  Paul.  The  opposition  of
his  enemies  will  stir  Mm  up  to  greater
activity  and  earnestness,  a  nd  so  conduce  to
his  spiritual  well-being  now  and  to  his  sal-
vation hereafter.  This  he  knows,  for  "all
all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them
that  love  God."  Some,  as  Chrysostom,
understand  a-arripia  here  of  present  safety
or  deliverance  from  prison;  but  this  seems
improbable.  The  words  are  quoted  from
Job  xiii.  16,  Septuagint  Version.  Through
your  prayer,  and  the  supply  of  the  Spirit  of
Jesus  Christ.  He  knows  that  they  pray  for
him ;  be  hupibly  believes  that  those  prayers
assist  liim  in  working  out  his  own  salvation.
As  the  prayer  ascemls,  says  Bengel,  the
supply  of  the  Spirit  descends;  comp.  Gal.
iii.  5,  "  He  that  rainisteretli  ['  supplieth,'
R.V.J  to  you  the  Spirit."  The  Spirit  is  the
supply;  the  Lord  Jesus  sends  the  quickening


Spirit  from  the  Father.  Others,  as  Meyer,
make  the  genitive  subjective,  nnd  interpret
"  the  aid  which  the  Spirit  supplies."  Tha
Spirit  is  here  called  "tlie  Spirit  of  Jesus
Christ" — "  proceeding  from  the  Fatlier  and
the  Son."  So  also  Gal.  iv.  6;  Eom.  viii.  9;
Acts  xvi.  7  (in  the  true  reading),  "the  Spirit
of  Jesus."

Ver.  20. — According  to  my  earnest  expec-
tation and  my  hope,  that  in  nothing  I  shall
be  ashamed.  The  Greek  word  for  "  earnest
expectation,"  which  occurs  also  in  Eom.  viii.
19,  means  literally,  a  watching  with  out-
stretched head,  with  the  attention  concen-
tiateil  on  one  object,  and  turned  away  from
all  others.  Neither  his  sufferings  nor  the
opposition  of  the  Judaizers  will  put  him  to
shame.  But  that  with  all  boldness,  as  al-
ways, so  now  also  Christ  shall  be  magnified
in  my  body,  whether  it  be  by  life,  or  by
death.  After  "  boldness  "  (literally,  boldness
of  speech)  we  should  expect  the  active  form,
"  I  shall  m.igiiify."  St.  Paul,  in  his  humility,
prefeis  the  passive,  "  Christ  shall  be  magni-
fied." Boldness  of  speech  was  to  be  his
part,  tl  e  glory  should  be  Christ's.  What-
ever the  issue  might  be,  whether  a  life  of
Christian  labour  or  a  martyr's  death,  it
would  be  well.  The  apostles  were  not  om-
niscient, says  Bengel,  in  relation  to  their
own  future  lot ;  they  lived  in  faith  and
hope.

Ver.  21. — For  to  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to
die  is  gain.  Others,  as  Calvin,  render  (not
so  well),  "  For  to  me  Christ  is  gain  both  in
life  and  in  death."  Tue  alternative  sug-
gested in  ver.  20  leads  St.  Paul  to  a  short
digression  on  the  comparative  advantages  of
life  and  death ;  he  is  conti  nt  with  either.
Life  is  blessed,  for  it  is  Christ ;  comp.  Col
iii.  4,  "  Christ,  who  is  our  Life,"  and  Gal.  ii,
20, "  Not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me ;"  "Quio-
quid  vivo,  Christum  vivo"  (Bengel).  The
life  of  Chiist  lives,  breathes,  energizes,  in
the  life  of  his  saints.  H)s  flesh,  his  incar-
nate life  is  their  meat ;  his  blood,  the  mys-
tery of  his  atonement,  is  the  drink  of  their
souls.  He  abideth  in  them,  and  they  in
him.  And  yet  death  is  gain ;  the  slate  of
death,  not  the  aet  of  djing,  is  meant  (the
intinitive  is  aorist,  t5  diroflopeic),  for  the  dead
in  Christ  are  at  home  with  the  Lord  QivSTi-
fiQvyres  ir^os  tov  Kvptov')  in  a  far  more  blessed
sense  than  the  saints  on  earth.

Ver.  22. — But  if  I  live  in  the  flesh,  this  is
the  fruit  of  my  labour:  yet  what  I  shall
choose  I  wot  not ;  or  perhaps,  as  Meyer,  "  I
make  not  known."  St.  Paul  wavers  be-
tween his  own  personal  longing  for  rest  in
Paradise  with  Christ,  and  the  thought  that
the  continuance  of  his  life  on  earth  might
conduce  to  the  spreading  of  the  gospel.
The  grammar  of  the  Greek  sentence  aptly
represent*  the  apostle's   hesitation.     Tht


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHlLIPPIANS.  [aa,  1. 1—30.


eonstrnctlon  is  almost  hopelessly  eonfueed.
Perhaps  the  interpretation  of  the  K.V.  is  the
Bimplest :  "  But  if  to  live  in  the  flesh, — if
this  is  the  fruit  of  my  work,  then  what  I
ehall  choose  I  wot  not."  Thus  Kap-irSs  is
pftT»lJel  with  KfpSos  (ver.  21);  rh  Cv"  ^''
capxi  is  also  a  gain,  a  fruit;  the  genitive  is
one  of  appositif)n ;  the  work  itself  is  the
fruit.  St.  Paul,  says  Bengel,  regards  his
work  as  fruit,  others  seek  fruit  from  their
work.  Bishop  Lightfoot  proposes  another
rendering,  "  ISut  what  if  ray  living  in  the
flesh  will  bear  fruit,  etc.  ?  in  fact  what  to
clionse  I  know  not."  Surely,  says  Bengel,
the  Christian's  lot  is  excellent;  he  can  hesi-
tate only  in  the  choice  of  blessings ;  disap-
pointed he  cannot  be.

Ver.  23. — For  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt
two ;  rather,  hut  (so  the  best  manuscripts)
I  am  straitened,  hemmed  in  (Bishop  Lights
foot)  betwixt  the  two  alternatives,  life  and
death,  pressing  upon  me,  constraining  me  on
either  side.  Having  a  desire  to  depart ;
having  my  desire  set  towards  departing  QeU
rd  di/o\C(rai).  The  word  occurs  a  gain- in  2
Tim  iv.  6,  'O  Katpds  ttjs  ^firjs  avaKvffias.
It  is  used  of  a  ship,  to  loose  from  its  moor-
ings ;  or  a  camp,  to  break  up ;  comp.  2  Cor.
T  1,  "  If  our  earthly  house  of  this  taber-
nacle were  di-solved  ((caraAufl^)."  Probably
here  the  metaphor  is  taken  from  tent  life;
to  loosen,  to  remove  the  tent,  the  temporary
abode,  in  the  journey  to  the  heavenly  city.
And  to  be  with  Christ.  The  holy  dead  are
with  Clirist,  they  rest  from  their  labours ;
they  live  unto  God  (Luke  xx.  38) ;  they  do
not  sleep  idly  without  consciousness,  for
they  are  described  in  Holy  Scripture  as  wit-
nesses (Ueb.  xii.  1)  of  the  race  set  before
living  Christians  (comp.  also  2  Cor.  v.  6,  8
and  Acts  vii.  59).  Yet  they  are  elsewhere
described  as  sleeping  (1  Cor.  xv.  51,  52 ;  1
Thess.  iv.  14,  15) ;  for  the  rest  of  the  spirits
of  just  men  in  Paradise  is  as  a  sleep  com-
pared with  the  perfect  consummation  and
bliss  of  God's  elect,  both  in  body  and  soul,
in  his  everlasting  glory.  Which  is  far
better ;  read  and  translate,  for  it  is  hy  much
very  far  better.  He  piles  up  comparatives,
as  if  unable  to  find  words  capable  of  express-
ing the  glory  of  his  hope.

Yer.  24.—  Nevertheless  to  abide  in  the  flesh
is  more  needful  for  yon.  To  abide  by  the
flobh  (if  with  some  authorities  the  prepo-
sition is  omitted),  to  hold  to  this  human  life
with  all  its  trials,  is  more  needful  for  your
sake.  Meyer  quotes  Seneca,  '  Epist.'  98,
"  VitSB  sua)  adjici  nihil  desiderat  sua  causa,
sed  eorum,  quibus  utilis  est."

Ver.  25. — And  having  this  confldence,  I
know  that  I  shall  abide  and  continue  with
yon  all.  Being  persuaded  of  this,  that  my
life  is  needful  for  you ;  or,  as  others  render,
"  And  this  I  certainly,  confidently  know."


The  first  translation  seems  preferable,  fol
St.  Paul's  assurance  does  not  seem  to  rest  on
direct  inspiration,  but  on  a  calculation  of
probabilities.  The  apostles  could  not  always
foresee  their  own  future  (Acts  xx.  22).  ^
Bishop  Lightfoot  says,  "  The  same  word
oiSa  is  used  Acts  xx.  25,  where  he  expresses
his  belief  that  he  shall  not  see  his  Asiatio
converts  again.  Viewed  as  infallible  pre-
sentiments, the  two  are  hardly  reconcilable;
for  the  one  assumes,  the  other  negatives,  his
release.  The  assurance  liero  jecorded  was
fulfilled  (1  Tim.  i.  3) ;  while  the  presenti-
ment there  expressed  was  overruled  by
events  (2  Tim.  i.  15,  18;  iv.  20)."  For  your
furtherance  and  joy  of  faith;  for  the  progress
and  joy  of  your  faith,  that  you  may  con-
tinually increase  in  faith  and  take  delight
in -it.    Joy  is  the  key-note  of  this  Epistle.

Ver.  26. — That  your  rejoicing  may  be  more
abundant  in  Jesus  Christ  for  me  by  my  com-
ing to  you  again.  Glorying  or  boasting
(/cai5x»j;i"i),  not  rejoicing.  Perhaps  rather,
as  Meyer, "That  the  matter  in  which  you
have  to  glory  [i.e.  the  bliss  in  which  you
rejoice  as  Cljristians]  may  increase  abun-
dantly in  Clirist  Jesus  [as  the  element  or
sphere  of  the  glorying]  in  me  [as  the  instru-
ment or  cause]."

Ver.  27. — Only  let  your  conversation  be.
St.  Paul  exhorts  the  Philippians  to  stead-
fastness. Only,  whatever  happens,  whether
I  come  or  no,  TroKcTeieaBe,  behave  as  citi-
zens (comp.  ch.  iii.  20,  'H/iSi'  to  ■jro\irevfia
and  Eph.  ii.  19,  Su^iro^iTai  t&v  aylui>.  The
verb  also  occurs  in  Acts  xxiii.  1, "  I  have
lived  (TreiroKiTevfiai)  in  all  good  conscience
towards  God."  St.  Paul  was  himself  a
Eoman  citizen;  he  was  writing  from  Kome;
his  presence  there  was  caused  by  his havingex-
ercised  the  rights  of  citizenship  iu  appealing
to  CsBsar.  He  was  writing  to  a  place  largely
inhabited  by  Eoman  citizens  (for  Philippi
was  a  Roman  colony),  a  place  in  which  he
had  declared  himself  to  be  a  Eoman  (Acts
xvi.  37).  The  metaphor  was  natural.  Some
of  you  are  citizens  of  Eome,  the  imperial
city ;  live,  all  of  you,  as  citizens  of  tlie
heavenly  country,  the  city  of  the  living
God.  As  it  becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ ;
rather,  as  E.V.  margin,  behave  as  citizens
worthily  of.  There  is  a  striking  parallel  in
Polycarp's  letter  to  these  same  Philippians
(sect.  5), '  Ehif  iraKiT^utrc^fieda  a.^las  aurov,  Kal
aun$airt\ei:roiiet>  avr^  :  literally,  "  If  we  live
as  citizens  worthily  of  bin  we  shall  also
reign  with  him."  That  whether  I  oome  and
see  you,  or  else  be  absent,  I  may  hear  of
your  affairs,  that  ye  stand  fast  in  one  spirit.
The  metaphor  is  military,  and  follows
naturally  from  the  thought  of  citizenship.
I  Philippi  was  a  military  colony,  its  chief
magistrates  were  pr.-olors,  (rrparriyoi  (Acts
xvl.  20),  literally,  "  generals "  (comp.  Eph,


OH.  r  1—80.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.


vL  13  and  Qal.  t.  1).  Spirit  ia  the  highest
part  of  our  immaterial  nature,  which,  when
enlightened  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  can
rise  into  communion  with  God,  and  discern
the  truths  of  the  world  unseen.  In  one  spirit ;
because  the  spirits  of  believers  are  knit  to-
gether into  one  fellowship  by  the  one  Holy
Spirit  of  God  abiding  in  them  all.  This
distinction  between  spirit  and  soul  occurs
again  in  1  Thess.  v.  23.  The  soul  is  the
lower  part  of  our  inner  being,  the  seat  of  the
appetites,  passions,  affections,  connected
above  with  the  Trviviia.,  below  with  the  irap|.
With  one  mind  striving  together  for  the  faith
of  the  gospel ;  with  one  soul  (not  mind) ;  i.e.
with  all  the  desirL-s  and  emotions  concen-
trated on  one  object,  all  acting  together  in
the  one  great  work ;  comp.  Acts  iv.  32,
"  Striving  together  with  one  another  for  the
faith,"  rather  than  "  striving  together  with
the  faith."  The  personification  of  faith,
though  approved  by  high  authority,  seems
forced  and  improbable.  Faith  is  here  used
objectively ;  the  faith  of  the  gospel  is  the
doi;trine  of  the  gospel,  as  Gal.  i.  2H,  "  The
faith  which  once  he  destroyed."

Ver.  28. — And  in  nothing  terrified  by  your
adversaries;  literally,  scftrfd,  as  a  frightened
horae.    Which  is  to  them  an  evident  token


of  perdition,  but  to  you  of  salvation ;  trans-
late, seeing  that  it  (your  courage)  is  to  them
an  evident  tolcen  of  periJition,  but  (with  the
best  manuscripts)  of  your  salvation.  And
that  of  God.  These  words  are  to  be  taken
with  "an  evident  token."  The  courage  of
God's  saints  in  the  midst  of  dangers  is  a
proof  of  his  presence  and  favour,  a  token  of
final  victory  (oomp.  2  Thess.  i.  5).

Ver.  29.— For  unto  you  it  is  given  in  the
behalf  of  Christ,  not  only  to  believe  on  him,
but  also  to  suffer  for  his  sake.  On  you  it
was  conferred  (e'xapio-STj)  as  a  gracious  gift,
a  free  spontaneous  act  of  Divine  bounty.
Faith  in  Christ  is  the  gift  of  God,  so  is  "  the
fellowship  of  his  suiferiiigs."  It  is  not  a
burden,  but  a  privilege : "  In  all  these  things
we  are  more  than  conquerors  through  him
that  loved  us."

Ver.  30. — Having  the  same  conflict  which
ye  saw  in  me,  and  now  hear  to  be  in  me.
These  words  are  best  taken  with  ver.  27,
vers.  28  and  29  being  parunthetiual.  The
apostle  returns  to  the  military  or  gladia-
torial metaphor  of  a  contest,  aydp.  He  had
himself  been  p;  rseouted  at  Philippi  (Acts
xvi. ;  1  Thess.  ii.  2);  now  the  Philipplans
heard  of  his  Roman  imprisonment,  and  were
themselves  sufi'eriug  similar  persecutions.


HOMILETIOS.

Veri.  1,  2. — 3%«  address.  I.  St.  PaqIi's  desckiption  op  himself.  He  is  a  servant
of  Jesus  Christ.  1.  He  does  not  here  style  himself  an  apostle.  The  title  was  unnecessary
in  writing  to  the  Philippians;  he  does  not  assume  it  needlessly.  He  associates
Timotlieus  with  himself.  In  the  presence  of  the  blessed  Lord  and  Master  distinctions
sink  into  insignificance.  2.  Paul  and  Timotheus  are  alike  "  servants."  But  that  name,
in  its  inner  meaning,  is  a  lofty  title.  He  who  belongs  wholly  to  Christ,  who  is  the
slave  of  Christ,  bought  with  the  blood  of  Christ,  is  free  from  sin  ;  he  must  be  free,  says
St.  Ohrysostom,  from  all  other  masters,  or  he  would  be  only  in  part  the  servant  of
Christ.

II.  His  description  of  the  Philippian  Christians.  He  calls  them  "saints  in
Christ  Jesus."  It  is  true  that  the  word  "  saint"  may  be  used  here  in  an  official  sense,
as  equivalent  to  "  Christian."  But :  \.  It  implies  the  necessity  of  that  which  all  who  are
to  see  God  in  heaven  must  possess,  holiness  of  heart  and  life.  We  believe  in  the  Holy
Ghost,  who  sanctifieth  the  elect  people  of  Grod;  that  belief  pledges  us  to  follow  afier
personal  holiness.  We  have  been  once  dedicated  to  God ;  the  great  aim  of  life  should
be  self-constcration — tie  entire  consecration  of  our  whole  nature,  spirit,  soul,  arid  body,
to  his  blessed  service.  2.  Saints  are  sv^h  only  hy  being  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  living
branch  abides  in  vital  union  with  the  vine;  the  saint  abides  in  spiritual  union  with
the  Saviour.  God  taketh  away  the  unfruitful  branch ;  the  unfruitful  branch  is  the
ungodly  Christian — a  branch,  indeed,  but  without  fruit,  withered,  dead.  Spiritual  life
is  sustained  only  by  union  with  Christ,  by  the  abiding  presence  of  Christ,  who  is  the
Bread  of  life,  the  Life  of  the  world.  If  we  would  be  saints,  not  in  name  only,  but  in
heart  and  in  truth,  we  must  strive  above  all  things  to  live  habitually,  consciously,
lovingly,  in  that  "  fellowship  which  is  with  the  Father,  and  with  his  Son  J'esus  Christ."

III.  The  salutation — ^what  Christian  good  wishes  should  be.  1.  Grace.
Orace  is  the  favour  of  God,  unbought,  undeserved,  freely  given,  out  of  his  geneions
bounty.  That  <irace  is  the  origin  of  our  salvation :  "  By  grace  ye  are  saved."  It  is  tho
(ourcc  of  holiness :  "  By  the  grace  of  God  1  an  what  I  am."    It  is  an  unfailing  support


8  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHTLTPPIAN8.  [ch.  1. 1— 30.

in  all  troubles  and  distresses :  "  My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee."  It  should  be  our
earnest  effort  not  "to  receive  the  grace  of  God  in  vain,"  but  "  to  continue  in  the  grace
of  God;"  for  that  grace  "hringith  salvation."  2.  Peace.  Peace  is  (1)  a  condition
resting  on  facts  external  to  ourselves ;  nconciliation  with  God  though  the  atonement  of
Clirist.  He  bore  our  sius  ;  he  suffered  our  punishment;  he  gave  himself  a  ransom  for
many,  dying  in  our  stead,  that  we  might  live.  "Christ  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,  the
just  for  the  unjust,  that  he  might  bring  us  to  God."  His  incarnation,  death,  and
resurrection  have  wholly  changed  the  relations  in  which  we  stand  towards  God.  We
were  "sometime  alienated,  and  enemies  in  our  miud  by  wicked  works;  yet  now  hath
he  reconciled  us  in  the  body  of  his  flesh  through  death."  "  It  pleased  the  Father  that
in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell;  and  having  made  peace  through  the  blood  of  his  cross
by  him  to  reconcile  all  things  unto  himself."  This  is  the  bleascd  work  of  Christ  our
Lord.  He  hath  slain  the  enmity;  he  is  our  Peace.  By  his  act,  external  to  ourselves,
he  hath  reconciled  us  to  God.  Bat  (2)  the  peace  of  God  is  internal,  the  blessed
possession  of  the  Christian  soul.  "  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  "Peace  I  leave  with  you,"  the  Saviour  said  to  his
chosen — "  my  peace."  Such  peace  as  he  had,  not  freedom  from  outward  care  and  pain,
but  a  quiet  heart  resting  upon  God.  His  path  on  earth  was  full  of  bitter  sorrow,  but  his
inner  life  was  still  and  calm.  No  evil  or  selfish  thought  ever  ruffled  the  clear  current
of  holy  meiitation,  or  disturbed  his  constant  communion  with  his  heavenly  Father.
The  peace  of  Ood  is  the  blessing  of  the  clear,  calm  spirit  that  hath  chosen  the  good  part,
seeking  to  love  God  only,  and  to  serve  him  with  an  undivided  service.  It  is  the  blessed
consciousness  of  forgiveness  and  acceptance  with  God ;  it  is  the  cliildlike  confidence  and
trustful  love  which  spring  from  a  living  faith  in  Christ's  atoning  work.  It  passeth  all
understanding ;  it  is  the  earnest  of  the  eternal  peace,  the  peace  beyond  the  grave.  It  is
the  peace  of  God,  for  it  is  his  gift ;  it  comes  "  from  God  our  Father,  and  from  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ."

Learn:  1.  To  be  servants,  slaves,  of  Christ;  wholly  given  up  to  him;  content  with
that  service  uhich  is  perfect  freedom.  2.  To  think  the  bebt  of  others,  to  esteem  them
better  than  ourselves.     3.  To  wish  them  the  best  wishes — grace  and  peace.

Vers.  3 — 8, — St.  Paul  an  example  to  all  Christian  ministers.  1.  He  eemembbbs
HTS  CONVERTS.  He  was  possessed  through  and  through  with  an  ardent  love  of  souls.
Like  the  good  Shepherd,  he  knew  his  slieep,  and  cared  for  tliem  with  a  sincere,  self-
sacrificing  affection.  He  worked  for  them  while  he  could  ;  in  prison  he  does  not  forget
them.  His  thoughts  are  not  taken  up  with  his  own  hardships  and  dangers.  The  care  of
all  the  Churches  still  occupies  hisj  mind.  He  has  his  converts  in  his  heart ;  it  is  his  joy
to  think  on  their  progress  iu  holiness,  to  thank  God  for  his  grace  vouchsafed  unto  them.

II.  He  prats  fob  them.  1.  Intercessory  prayer  was  part  of  his  daily  worlc.  He
had  learned  of  the  Lord  that  men  "ought  always  to  pray,  and  not  to  faint;"  and  he
"  prayed  to  God  always."  Thus  his  time  was  fully  occupied ;  his  mind  was  active.  He
was  cliained  to  a  soldier,  he  could  not  visit  his  converts ;  hut  he  could  think  of  them,
he  could  pray  for  them.  And  he  did  what  he  could.  He  teaches  us  by  his  example
to  make  prayers  and  supplications,  and  to  give  thanks  for  all  men.  2.  He  prays  for
all,  always.  We  notice  the  constant  repetition  of  the  word  "all"  in  this  Epistle.
There  were  dissensions,  it  seems,  among  the  Philippians.  The  apostle  will  not  recognize
their  differences ;  he  loves  them  all,  ho  prays  for  all :  all  are  dear  to  him,  all  have  their
place  in  his  prnyers.  3.  Bis  prayers  flow  from,  love.  He  loves  them,  he  longs  for  them
all,  and  that  "  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ."  He  loves  them  as  Christ  loves  them ;  nay,
more  than  that,  he  loves  them  with  tlie  love  of  Christ,  with  the  heart  of  Christ ;  for
Christ  was  his  life  :  "  Not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  mc."  Hence  he  could  say  (would  to
God  that  we  could  say  the  same !)  that  he  loved  with  Christ's  love.  Mark  the  intensity
ef  his  consciousness  of  the  blessed  piesence  of  Christ  in  all  his  power  and  love  abiding
within  him.

III.  His  HUMILITY.  None  laboured  as  St.  Paul  laboured,  but  he  was  wholly  free
from  vain-glory.  1.  He  gives  the  g'ory  to  Ood.  It  was  God  who  began  the  good  work
in  the  liearts  of  the  Pliilippians ;  God  began  it;  God  will  complete  it.  God  is  every-
thing, the  apostle  nothing.  Yet  this  confidence  in  God  makes  the  apostle  work  all  th«
more;  it  increases  his  efforts,  it  deepens  the  earnestness  of  his  prayers.     2.  Ht  recoff-


OH.  1. 1—30.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILTPPIA  NS.


nizei  the  feUowsMp  of  the  Philippians.  They  had  assisted  him  in  the  furtherance  of
the  gospel  both  by  their  gifts  and  by  their  labours.  He  acknowledges  their  help;  he
tiianks  God  for  it ;  he  regards  them  all  as  partakers  of  his  grace.  Grace  had  been  giren
to  him  to  endure  and  to  labour.  The  like  grace,  he  says,  had  been  granted  to  the
Philippians ;  he  is  thankful.

IV.  His  siNCEKiTT.  "  God  is  my  witness,"  he  says  :  his  love  for  the  Philippians  is
deep  and  true ;  God  who  seeth  the  secrets  of  the  heurt,  knows  how  he  longs  after  them.
Living  always  in  the  felt  presence  of  God,  he  knows,  and  gladly  knows,  that  no
thoughts  of  his  heart  are  hidden  from  God.

Lessons.  1.  Pray  for  the  strong  love  of  souls.  2.  Pray  for  a  transparent  sincerity
and  iruLhfulness  of  heart.  3.  Be  humble;  without  humility  there  can  be  no  real  pro-
gress in  holiness.     4.  Give  much  time  to  intercessory  prayer.

Vers.  9 — 11. — St.  Paul's  prayer  for  the  Philippians,  L  That  tiieih  love  mat
ABOUND  MORE  AND  MORE.  1.  .Ood  had  legun  in  them  the  good  work,  the  work  of
faith,  faith  that  worketh  by  love.  St.  Paul  recognizes  the  n-ality  of.  their  love;  it  was
trurt  and  deep.  But :  2.  There  is  always  room  for  growth  in  love ;  it  is  the  noblest
of  Christian  graces,  the  most  precious  of  all  the  gifts  of  tlie  Holy  Spirit.  The  Christian's
desire  for  love  is  without  limit.  'AKi^peo-Toc  ayadbv  tovto,  says  Chrysostom.  "  Owe  no
man  anytliing,"  says  the  apostle,  "  but  to  lo^fe  one  another."  Love  is  always  owing ;
we  can  never  love  our  brethren  as  we  ought.  Still  less  can  we  attain  to  tliat  soul-
■vbsorbing  love  which  we  owe  to  God.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all
thy  heart,  with  all  thy  soul,  with  all  thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy  strength."  The
commandment  is  very  deep  and  searching ;  we  can  never  obey  it  perfectly ;  we  shall  be
always  in  debt.  But  we  may  approach  ever  neai'er  and  nearer  to  that  fulness  of  perfect
love.  Therefore  the  Christian's  prayer  for  love  is  uiictasing,  deepening  in  earnestness
as  he  grows  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  The  Christian  life  is  a  continual  progress.
"  The  path  of  the  just  is  as  the  shining  light,  shining  more  and  more."  Love  must  be
ever  growing,  or  it  will  lose  its  freshness.

II.  He  pbays  for  their  growth  in  knowledge.  1.  Christian  love  is  not  indis-
criminate,  unintelligent ;  it  is  informed  and  directed  by  spiritual  knowledge.  Love
is  informed  by  knowledge.  2.  Love  increases  knowledge.  For  it  is  not  book  know-
ledge of  which  Ct.  Paul  is  spia'  i  g,  but  heart  knowledge.  The  knowledge  of  Christian
experience  is  the  personal  knowledge  of  God  gained  by  communion  with  him.  Only
love  can  know  him;  for  like  is  known  by  like.  "He  that  loveth  not,  knoweth  not
God,  for  God  is  love."  And,  on  the  other  hand,  "  Every  one  that  loveth  is  burn  of  God,
and  linoweth  God."  The  religious  sense,  the  tact  which  distinguishes  good  from  evil,
which  approves  among  good  things  the  best  and  holiest,  flows  out  of  love.

III.  He  prays  for  their  growth  in  purity.  The  word  means  singleness  of  mind,
simplicity,  sincerity,  purity.  "  If  thine  eye  be  single,  thy  whole  body  is  full  of  light."
This  sincerity,  this  singleness  of  purpose,  springs  from  love.  Holy  love  refines  the
whole  nature;  for  it  brings  the  Christian  daily  into  nearer  fellowship  with  Christ,  who
alone  can  cleanse  the  sinful  heart.  "  If  we  walk  in  the  li  iht  ...  the  blood  of  Jesus
Christ  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  That  inward  purity  results  in  outward  blameless-
ness,  and  prepares  the  soul  against  the  day  of  Christ.

IV.  He  prays  fob  their  growth  in  obedience.  Love  must  work ;  it  cannot  lie
dormant  in  the  soul.  It  must  produce  the  fruit  of  righteousness.  But  that  fruit  of
righteousness  is  :  l!  Through  Jesus  Christ.  "  The  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself,
except  it  abide  in  the  vine ;  "  nor  can  the  Christian  bring  forth  the  fruit  of  holy  living,
except  he  abide  in  Christ.  The  life  of  the  vine  lives  in  the  branch;  the  life  of  Christ
lives  in  the  Christian  soul,  and  bears  the  fruit  of  holiness.  2.  And  to  the  glory  and
praise  of  God.  The  ultinjate  end  of  the  righteousness  of  the  saints  is  the  glory  of  God
Therefore  we  are  taught  to  pray  "that  in  all  our  works  begun,  continued,  and  ended  in
thee,  we  may  glorify  thy  holy  Name."  There  can  be  no  nobler  ambition :  to  live  for
God;  only  to  seek  his  glory ;  to  love  him,  not  for  what  he  has  to  give  us,  but  because
he  is  so  holy,  so  loving,  so  glorious ;  to  be  willing  to  live  or  to  die ;  to  do  great  things
in  the  world,  or  to  be  unknown  and  obscure,  if  only  he  may  be  glorified ;— this  is  the
noblest  aim  of  life,  the  highest  theme  of  prayer.

LassoNi.  1,  Pray  much  lor  others ;  cultivate  the  habit  of  intercessory  prayer.  2.  Praj


10  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [ea.tl-Sa

for  the  continual  growth  and  diffusion  of   love,  knowledge,  righteousness.     3.  Seek
above  all  things  the  glory  of  God.

Vers.  12 — 18. — The  apostle's  own  circumstances.  His  holy  unselfishness.  He  measures
his  condition,  not  by  its  present  hardships  or  comfurts,  but  by  the  facilities  which  it
gives  for  spreading  the  Imowledge  of  Cluist.

I.  His  imprisonment  has  turned  to  the  furtherance  op  the  gospel.  It  was  not
to  have  been  expected;  the  area  of  his  preachin;^  was  contracted;  he  himself  was
suffering  and  conliued.  But  God  makes  "all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them
that  love  him;  "even  things  that  might  seem  liliely  to  iiiterfere  with  their  spiritual
work.  1.  His  chains  attracted  attention :  It  became  manifest  that  he  was  a  prisoner
"in  Christ,"  living  in  Ghris',  suffering  in  and  with  Christ,  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  2.
Listeners  gathered  round  him :  the  Prajtorian  soldiers,  among  whom  he  lived,  one  of
whom,  in  continual  rotation,  guarded  him:  others  too — "  aU  the  rest."  His  imprison-
ment became  widely  known.  The  strange  fact  (it  was  strange  then)  that  these  bard-
ships  were  endured  voluntarily,  from  religious  motives,  excited  curiosity,  interest;
hence  many  converts.  3.  Eis  example  encouraged  others.  Some  were  timid,
frightened.  But  the  <^reater  number  of  the  brethren  look  courage  to  preach  fearlessly.
Example  is  better  than  pi;ece[jt.  The  sight  of  a  suffering  saint,  patient,  contented,
happy,  does  more  to  win  souls  than  hundreds  of  sermons.  It  is  a  visible  proof  of  the
power  of  Christ.

II.  St.  Paul  a  centre  of  mission  work.  1.  His  presence  in  Borne  led  to  mtich
preaching ;  his  example,  his  energy,  stirred  up  others.  There  was  much  activity.  But
alas!  there  were  dissensions  even  in  the  primitive  Church.  There  was  a  Judaizing
party  at  Eome  who  hated  the  apostle.  Their  zeal  was  kindled  by  his  success ;  they
preached,  but  with  the  design  of  winning  adherents  to  the  Law.  Hence  there  was  a
division.  2.  Some  preached  of  good  will ;  they  knew  that  St.  Paul  was  set  for  the
defence  of  the  gospel  The  siiiht  of  his  earnestness,  his  sufferings,  exciied  their
sympathies,  quickened  their  affections ;  they  were  eager  to  help  on  the  good  work,  to
carry  the  gospel  message  into  places  which  the  imprisoned  apostle  could  not  reach.
They  preached  (jut  of  love — love  for  St.  Paul,  love  for  the  work,  love  for  Christ.  3.
But  others  preached  of  envy  and  party  spirit.  They  did  preach  Christ  in  a  sense ;
Jhey  brought  news  of  Christ,  they  made  known  the  facts  of  tlie  gospel,  thoy  spread
the  knowledge  of  Christ's  life  and  death.  But  they  were  not  sineere ;  they  did  not  in
their  hearts  care  for  the  salvation  of  souls  ;  they  preached  really  for  their  party — it  was
party  zeal,  not  love,  that  ftimulated  their  efforts.  They  were  like  the  Pharisees  of
whom  our  Lord  said,  "  Ye  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one  proselyte,  and  when  he  is
made,  ye  make  him  twofold  more  the  child  of  hell  than  yourselves"  (Malt,  xxiii.  15).
They  envied  St.  Paul's  success,  and  sought  to  raise  up  a  party  against  him,  to  maJie
him  feel  more  bitterly  the  confinement  of  his  chains.  The  gift  of  preaching  is  far
inferior  to  the  grace  of  charity.  The  eloquent  preacher  may  be  ambitious,  worldly,
actuated  by  party  spirit,  nt)t  by  the  love  of  Christ.

III.  St.  Paul  is  happy  because  Christ  is  preached.  He  seeks  not  his  own  glory ;
he  is  not  troubled  lor  himseli  when  others  disparage  his  preaching  or  his  conduct.  He
is  wholly  free  from  party  spirit,  from  sectarian  animosities,  from  earthly  motives.  He
rejoices  in  the  progress  of  the  gospel,  though  that  progress  may  be  due  in  part  to  the
preaching  of  men  who  differ  widely  from  himself,  and  who  are  his  perfonal  opponents.
What  an  example  of  unselfish  charity !

Learn:  1.  Never  to  give  way  to  despondency.  2.  Never  to  allow  oursehes  to  think
that  we  could  serve  God  better  if  our  circumstances  were  other  than  they  are.  3.
Always  to  try  to  do  our  best  where  we  are,  knowing  that  he  can  bring  good  out  of  evil.
4.  The  exceeding  value  of  the  silent  influence  of  holy  example.  5.  The  great  danger
cf  party  spirit,  the  blessedness  of  charity.

Vers.  19,  20. — St.  Paul's  own  hope.  I.  His  holt  confidence.  He  knows  that  God
will  njake  all  things,  even  this  opposition,  work  together  for  his  eternal  salvation.
The  activity  of  his  adversaries  will  stimulate  him  to  greater  zeal ;  it  will  kindle  the
sympathy  of  his  friends,  and  lead  them  to  pray  for  him  more  earnestly.  Mark  hii
absolute  self-surrender,  his  entire  submission  to  the  holy  will  of  God.


3B.  11—80.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  11

TI.  The  souroe  of  strength.  1.  InUreessory  prayer.  He  knows  that  the  Philip.
piaus  will  pray  for  him.  When  they  hear  of  the  bitter  opposition  of  his  Jndaizing
adversaries,  they  will  pray  the  more  earnestly  that  help  may  be  given  him  in  his
perplexities  and  trials.  He  gladly  believes  that  their  prayers  in  his  behalf  will  be
heard.  He  knows  the  power  of  pvayer.  He,  the  great  apostle,  is  thankful  for  the
prayers  of  the  humblest  Christian.  The  highest  saints  are  ever  the  lowliest.  2.  The
wupply  of  the  Spirit  given  in  antwer  to  the  prayer  of  faith.  "My  Father  will  give
the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him."  In  proportion  to  the  depth,  the  strength,
the  reality  of  prayer,  the  help  of  the  Spirit  is  given.  That  help  issue;!  in  salvation;
"  to  be  spiritually  minded  is  life."  Tlie  presence  of  the  Spirit  in  the  soul  is  the  earnest,
the  pledge,  of  our  inheritance  in  heaven.  He  works  within  us  that  holiness  without
which  we  cannot  see  God.  His  writing  in  the  heart  is  the  counterpart  of  those  golden
characters  of  love  in  which  the  names  of  God's  saints  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  book
of  life.

III.  The  result  of  that  strength.  1.  Boldness  of  speech.  A  gift  to  be  earnestly
desired  by  all  Christian  ministers :  boldness  to  preach  the  Word ;  to  be  instant  in
season  and  out  of  season;  to  reprove,  rebuke,  exhort,  with  all  long-suffering.  It  is  a
rare  gift;  it  requires  that  strength  of  conviction,  that  vividness  of  hope,  that  deep
humility,  which  were  characteristic  of  St.  Paul.  With  all  his  thoui^hts  concentrated
on  the  one  great  desire  of  glorifying  Christ,  with  his  assured  confidence  that  in  nothing
he  should  be  ashamed,  with  his  absolute  trust  in  the  fulfilment  of  God's  promises,  he
could  speak  from  the  fulness  of  his  own  personal  experience,  boldly,  persuasively,  with
a  holy  enthusiasm  which  mightily  drew  the  hearts  of  men.  Oh  tlut  we  could  follow
him  as  he  followed  Christ !  2.  The  glory  of  Christ.  It  is  this  that  St.  Paul  desires
with  such  intense  eagerness;  not  his  own  glory,  not  eartlily  success  or  earthly  com-
forts, but  that  Chiist  may  be  magnified  in  his  body.  He  is  content  to  leave  the  issues
of  life  or  death  wholly  in  the  hand  of  God ;  willing  to  live,  if  his  apostolic  activity  is
needed  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel;  willing  to  die,  if  the  death  of  martyrdom  would
best  serve  his  Master's  cause.'  His  one  desire  is  that  Christ  should  he  magnified  in
his  servant.

Learn :  1.  To  value  intercessory  prayer,  to  pray  ourselves  for  others,  to  desire  their
prayers  for  us.  2.  To  prize  above  all  things  the  daily  su|iply  of  the  influencei  of  the
Holy  Spirit.  3.  To  pray  tor  boldness  of  speech.  4.  But  only  that  Christ  may  be
plorified.

Vers.  21 — 26. — The  great  alternative,  life  or  death.  I.  St.  Paul  is  prepared  for
either  ;  " for,"  he  says,  "  to  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and  to  die  is  gain."  1.  Christ  was  his
life.  Christ  was  magnified,  not  in  his  body  only,  in  his  labours  and  suffering,  but  in  his
spirit.  The  presence  of  Christ  filled  his  whole  conscious  existence ;  communion  with
Christ  was  to  him  the  very  breath  of  life.  Life  was  worth  having  only  so  far  as  the
life  of  Christ  was  realized  in  the  apostle's  life.  The  outward  life,  with  its  wjmforts  or
its  hardships,  was  as  nothing  in  comparison  with  this  inner  life  of  the  spirit.  "  Dost
thou  not,  O  blessed  Paul,  live  the  common  life  of  men?"  exclaims  St.  Chrysostom;
"  dost  thou  not  see  the  sun,  dost  thou  not  breathe  the  air,  dost  thou  not  neeil  sleep,
food,  clothing,  like  ourselves  ?  "  Yes,  he  needed  these  things ;  he  sent  for  his  cloak  and
books.  But  he  lived  in  the  spirit  of  the  Saviour's  words,  "Take  no  thought  [no
anxious  thought]  for  your  life ; "  "  Seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God."  His  real  life
was  hidden — hidden  with  Christ  whose  presence  filled  his  soul.  He  was  dead  unto  the
world,  but  alive  unto  God.  He  was  conscious  of  high  thoughts  burning  within  him ;
there  was  a  power  there  and  an  energy  that  lifted  him  up  and  strengthened  him  and
filled  him  with  calm  and  holy  joy  in  all  his  many  trials.  But  that  new  life  was  not
hia  life:  "Not  I,  but  Christ."  Christ  was  there;  that  sacred  presence  influenced  the
whole  conscious  life  of  the  apostle,  keeping  up  a  current  of  pure,  high,  heavenly
thought  within  his  heart.  Where  that  blessed  presence  dwelleth  the  outward  life  sinks
into  comparative  insignificance.  St.  Paul  scarcely  counted  that  outward  life  as  belong-
ing to  himself;  it  was  full  of  change,  shadowy,  unreal.  His  true,  real  life  was  the  Life
that  lived  within  him.  "To  me  to  live  is  Christ."  2.  Death  would  he  gain  to  St.
Faul.  Life  in  Christ  is  blessed ;  still  more  blessed  are  the  holy  dead.  They  rest  from
their  labours ;  de»th  removes  them  from  the  temptations,  conflicts,  cares  of  life.    And


12  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANa  [ch.  1. 1— 30.

to  depart  is  to  be  with  Christ,  in  his  immediate  presence.  To  see  him  thus,  without
the  intervention  of  the  veil  of  flesh,  is  gain,  unutterable  gain.  But  we  must  know  by
o'lr  own  experience  the  power  of  Christ's  life  indwelling  in  our  souls  before  we  can  feel
with  the  apostle  that  death  is  truly  gain.

II.  St.  Padl  knows  not  which  to  ohoosb,  life  or  death.  Who  can  tell  the
blessedness  of  such  advanced  holiness?  Who  would  not  gladly  accept  St.  Paul's
sufferings  to  share  his  calm  faith?  Life  is  blessed,  for  it  is  life  in  Christ.  Death  is
blessed,  "  by  much  very  far  better,"  for  it  is  to  be  with  Christ.  The  apostle  hesitates ;
he  is  in  a  strait  between  two  alternatives — work  for  Christ  here,  and  the  life  with  Christ
in  Paradise.  1.  For  himself  his  desire  is  set  towards  departing.  Death  is  to  him  but
the  weighing  anchor,  or  the  taking  down  of  his  tent,  the  last  stage  in  his  journey  to
the  heavenly  country.  The  blessedness  awaiting  him  there  is  beyond  the  power  of
language  to  express ;  it  needs  the  tongue  of  angels.  2.  But  he  fears  there  may  he  some-
thing of  selfi''hness  in  this  longing  to  depart.  His  continued  life  on  earth  may  be
necessary  for  the  progress  of  the  gospel.  For  his  converts'  sake  he  is  willing  to
remain,  for  their  furtherance  and  joy.  A  high  example  of  most  entire  unselfishness.
3.  He  leaves  his  will  submissive  to  the  higher  will  of  Ood.  God  knows  better  than  he
what  is  best  for  the  Church  and  for  himself.  One  thing  he  knows :  if  his  presence  is
needful,  he  shall  continue  with  his  converts  j  for  his  life  and  death  are  in  the  hands
of  God,  and  God  doeth  all  things  well.

Lessons.  1.  Death  is  no  strange  thing  to  the  advanced  Christian ;  he  lives  in
habitual  preparation  for  it.  2.  He  knows  that  he  is  in  the  hands  of  God ;  knowing
this,  he  is  content  to  live,  and  content  to  die;  "  Thy  will  be  done."  '6.  More  than  this,
he  hath  a  desire  to  depart,  for  to  depart  is  to  be  with  Ohri.st.  4.  B'lt  (his  holy  resigna-
tion, this  calm  and  blessed  hope,  implies  a  life  of  fellowship  with  Christ.  "To  me  to
live  is  Christ."     Be  it  our  most  eager  desire,  our  most  earnest  effort,  thus  to  live.

Vers.  27 — 30. — Practical  exhortation.  I.  Christian  conversation  the  condition
OF  Christian  jot.  Only  (the  word  is  emphatic) — only,  St.  Paul  says,  whether  he
lives  or  dies,  whether  he  comes  again  or  sees  them  in  the  flesh  no  more,  whatever
happens  to  him  or  to  them — let  them  mind  this  one  thing,  holy  living.  This  must  be,
he  says,  your  one  desire,  your  one  aim,  to  live  as  Christian  men  should  live.

II.  St.  Paul  addkessks  the  Philippians  as  mbmbbrs  op  a  Church;  not  isolated
individuals,  but  members  of  a  community,  knit  together  into  one  body.  1.  We  are
citizens  of  the  heavenly  commonwealth,  under  the  one  heavenly  King.  We  must  fight
under  his  banner  against  the  common  enemy.  There  is  need  of  united  action  :  union
is  strength ;  we  must  stand  fast,  keeping  our  ground  as  in  battle,  striving  together.
Disunion  breaks  the  power  of  the  great  army ;  it  dissipates  Christian  energy,  and
impedes  grievously  the  progress  of  the  gospel.  2.  Christian  union  is  the  unity  of  the
Spirit.  The  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  abiding  in  the  whole  Church  and  in  enoh  individual
Christian,  is  the  bond  of  union.  The  spirit  of  the  believer  is  the  sphere  of  his  influence.
"  The  Spirit  itself  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit ; "  "  The  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,
joy,  peace."  The  more  fully  he  abideth  in  us,  the  more  shall  we  be  disposed  to  love
one  another,  to  hate  party  spirit,  to  remember  that  we  are  one  body  in  Christ.  3.
If  we  preserve  the  unity  of  the  Spirit,  we  shall  strive  together  with  one  soul.  The
indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit  will  direct  all  our  affections,  emotions,  awl  desires  to  bear
on  the  one  great  object,  the  progress  of  the  faith.  4.  This  Christian  energy,  this  holt/
courage,  is  the  gift  of  Uod.  It  shows  that  his  presence  goeth  with  the  Christian  host.
It  is  the  pledge  of  victory  to  his  servants,  of  ruin  to  their  adversaries.  5.  And  it
implies  willingness  to  suffer.  Patience,  as  well  as  courage,  is  the  gilt  of  God.  It  is  as
high  a  privilege  to  be  called  to  suffer  with  Christ  and  for  Christ,  as  it  is  to  work  for  him.

Lessons.  1.  The  gospel  is  the  good  tidings  of  God's  unspeakable  gift:  think  of  your
Christian  privileges,  your  Christian  responsibilities,  and  walk  worthily  of  the  gospel.
2.  Pray  for  the  grace  of  persevirance,  pray  for  it  daily,  earnestly.  3.  Endeavour  to
keep  the  unity  of  the  Spirit.  4.  Remember  that  suffering  comes  from  our  Father  in
heaven ;  he  chasteneth  us  for  our  profit.  Suffering  meekly  burue,  borne  in  the  faith
of  Christ  and  out  of  love  for  Christ,  becomes  a  blessinj^


OH.1. 1--30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  13


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2. — Apostolic  address  and  salutation.    The  Apostle  Paul  is  as  chaiacteristla

in  his  greetings  as  in  tlie  substance  of  his  epistolary  writings.

I.  The  authors  op  the  greeting.  "Paul  and  Timotheus,  bond-slaves  of  Jesus
Chiist."  1.  The  apostle  associates  Timothy  with  himself  as  one  who  had  laboured  at
Philippi  and  was  uell  known  to  the  Christians  of  that  city.  Timothy,  besides,  was
then  his  companion  at  Rome.  It  was  natural  that  he  sliould  name  the  disciple  who
was  associated  with  him  through  a  longer  range  of  time  than  any  other — extending,
indeed,  from  the  date  of  his  first  missionary  journey  till  near  the  very  time  of  his
martyrdom.  2.  He  does  not  call  himself  an  apoatle,  because  the  assertion  of  his  official
designation  was  not  needful  at  Philippi,  but  places  himself  on  a  level  with  Timothy,
by  bringing  into  prominence  their  common  relationship -to  the  Lord  as  "bund-slaves  of
Jesus  Christ."  They  belonged  to  him  as  Master,  and  bore  his  marks  in  their  very
budies,  and  were  supremely  devoted  to  his  service.

II.  The  pbksons  to  whom  the  greeting  was  addressed.  "  To  the  saints  which  are
in  Christ  Jesus  at  Philippi,  with  the  bishops  and  deacons."  1.  They  dwelt  in  Philippi,
an  important  city  of  Macedonia,  which,  thirty-four  years  before,  was  the  scene  of  a
great  battle  which  detormined  the  prevalence  of  the  imperial  system  of  Rome.  It  was
still  more  celebrated  as  the  iirst  city  in  Europe  which  received  the  gospel — "  thus
opening  up  the  long  vista  of  what  has  become  Western  Christendom."  2.  They  were
"saints  in  Christ  Jesus }"  with  a  ten  years'  history.  The  title  must  have  had  a
special  force  in  the  case  of  those  addressed  with  such  a  warmth  of  affection.  Their
saintship  was  grounded  in  their  union  with  Christ.  It  is  interesting  to  mark  the
prominence  of  female  names  both  in  the  first  founding  of  the  Church  and  in  its  later
developments,  as  noticed  in  the  Epistle,  Who  can  say  whether  the  delicate  and
untiring  generosity  of  the  Philippian  Church  to  the  apostle  may  not  have  been  mainly
due  to  these  saintly  women,  who  enjoyed  in  Macedonia,  as  women,  a  far  more
independent  position  than  in  other  parts  nf  the  world?  There  is  at  all  events  a  sweet
tenderness  in  Philippian  piety  which  made  the  designation  of  "saints"  peculiarly
appropriate.  3.  The  greeting  was  extended  to  the  bishops  and  deacons  along  with  the
saints.  (1)  This  implies  that  Philippian  Christianity  was  fully .  organized,  (2)  It
suggests  that  the  bishops  and  deacons  may  have  taken  an  active  part  in  the  contribu-
tion to  the  apostle's,  wants.  (3)  Yet  the  apostle,  by  his  mode  of  greeting,  lends  no
sanction  to  hierarchical  usurpation,  for,  instead  df  greeting  "  the  bishops  and  deacons,
together  with  the  saints  at  Philippi,"  he  assigns  the  first  place  to  the  Christian  flock.

III.  The  feiendlt  greeting  of  the  apostle.  "  Grace  to  you  and  peace,  from  Grod
the  Father,  and  from  the  Lord  Jesns  Christ "  (see  Homilies  on  GaL  i.  3  and  Eph.  L  2).
— T.  0.

Vers.  3 — 5. — Thanksgiving  for  their  fellowship  in  the  gospel.    L   THANESoiviNa

IS  A  NATURAL   AND  PROPER  EXERCISE  OF  THE   BELIEVING  HEART.      The  apostle  USUally

begins  his  Epistles  by  blessing  God — "  my  God,"  as  marking  intimate  personal  relation-
ship—for the  spiritual  condition  of  his  converts.  There  was  special  cause  for  thanks-
giving in  the  case  of  the  Philippians.  1.  Scripture  has  psalms  of  thanksgiving.  (Neh.
xii.  8.)  2.  We  have  constant  reason  for  thanksgiving.  We  thank  God  for  temporal
mercies (Exod.  xv.  1,  2);  for  spiritual  mercies  (Rom.  i,  8;  1  Cor.  i,  4);  for  deliverance
from  the  body  of  death  (Rom.  vii.  25) ;  but,  above  all,  for  Christ,  hit  unspeakable  GKft
(Luke  ii.  38).

II.  The  apostle's  thanksgiving  was  based  upon  his  bntibb  rbmbmbbanob  of
HIB  CONVERTS.  "  Upon  my  whole  remembrance  of  you."  Gratitude  is  usually  fed  by
memory.  They  had  been  often  in  his  remembrance  for  ten  years  back.  Every  fresh
tolsen  of  their  affection  received  in  his  trials  and  imprisonments  would  revive  the
thought  of  them.

III.  The  ocoabionb  of  his  thanksgiving.  "  Always  in  every  prayer  of  mine  for  you
all,  making  request  with  joy."  There  is  something  significant  in  "  the  studied  cumula-
tion" of  the  "alls"  in  the  passage.  It  marks  the  overflowing  heart,  1.  The  apostle  wts
much  i»  prayer  for  his  converti.    He  had  a  large  heart,  for  he  prayed  for  them  alL


14  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  1. 1—30.


MiniBteirs  slionld  bear  their  people  much  upon  their  hearts  in  prayer  to  God.  They
should  pray  always  for  their  people.  The  apostle  prayed  for  his  converts  as  often  as
he  remembered  them  (1)  because  "the  anxiety  of  all  the  Churches"  was  upon  liim;
(2)  because  he  had  a  deep  affection  for  them  ;  (3)  because  they  were  exposed  to  srreat
dangers  at  once  from  eirorists  and  from  persecutors.  2.  His  prayers  for  the  Philippiani
were  always  with  joy.  "  Making  request  with  joy."  Though  he  was  a  prisoner  exposed
to  all  the  morbid  depression  caused  by  isolation,  joy  mingled  with  all  his  prayers.
The  sum  of  this  Epistle  is,  Qaudeo ;  yaudete.  Eighteen  times  does  the  word  occur  in
its  verbal  or  substantive  forms.  Joy  is  a  true  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22).  The
apostle  mingled  joy  with  his  requests,  (1)  because  the  converts  at  Philippi  were  very
dear  to  him;  (2)  because  they  were  so  mindful  of  his  neceSeities;  (3)  because  they
abounded  in  many  spiritual  graces.

IV.  The  cause  fok  which  he  retukned  thanks  to  God.  "  For  your  fellowship
in  aid  of  the  gospel  from  tlie-  first  day  until  now."  It  was  a  fellowship  of  faith  and
love  and  service  with  a  view  to  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel.  It  implied  :  1.  A  cordial
and  united  action.  2.  A  thoughtful  consideration  for  the  apostle s  wants.  3.  A  con-
tinuance in  well-doing,  which  was  at  once  a  ])roof  of  the  gospel's  power  in  their  hearts,
a  demonstration  of  Christian  consistency,  and  a  means  for  sustained  success  in  gospel
work.— T.  C.

Ver.  6. — The  grounds  of  the  apostles  thanksgiving.  "  Being  confident  of  this  very
thing,  that  he  which  began  a  good  work  in  you  will  perfect  it  till  the  day  of  Christ."

I.  The  subject  of  his  confidence.  "  A  good  work,"  regarded :  1.  In  itself.  It  is
the  work  of  grace  or  salvation  in  the  human  soul.  2.  In  its  development.  It  has  a
beginning  and  an  ending.  It  is  God,  not  man,  who  begins  it ;  and  he  who  begins
it  ends  it.  It  is  thus  a  good  work,  (1)  because  it  is  God's  through  all  its  stages ;
(2)  because  it  brings  good  to  man,  being,  the  restoration  of  the  Divine  image  in  bis
heart;  (3)  because  it  brings  glory  to  God.

II.  The  grounds  op  his  confidence.  Not  in  the  power  of  priesthood  or  sacrament,
but  in  the  character  and  resources  of  the  Worker.  He  who  begins  will  end  it,  for  he
has  fixed  a  day  for  its  completeness — "  the  very  day  of  Christ."  Not  the  day  of  death,
but  the  day  of  Christ,  because  man  does  not  exist  in  his  completely  glorified  condition
till  he  stands  in  the  redemption  of  both  body  and  souL  The  grounds  of  a  believer's
perseverance  are  not,  therefore,  to  be  found  in  his  own  watchfulness  or  his  own  strength,
but  (1)  in  the  purposes  and  promises  of  God,  (2)  in  the  mediation  of  Christ,  (3)  in  the
constant  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit.

III.  How  this  confidence  operated  in  the  apostle.  It  did  not  prevent  him
from  praying  for  his  converts  or  exhorting  them  to  the  use  of  means  for  their  continu-
ance in  grace.  It  suggests  (1)  that  we  ought  to  he  careful  not  to  abuse  assurance;
and  (2)  that  we  ovjjht  to  interest  ourselves  deeply  in  each  other's  spiritual  welfare. — T.  0.

Vers.  7,  8. — A  double  explanation  of  the  origin  of  this  confidence.  "  Even  as  it  ia
right  for  me  to  think  this  of  you  all,  because  1  have  you  in  my  heart,  and  because  in
my  bonds  and  in  my  defence  and  confirmation  of  the  gospel,  ye  are  all  partakers  with
me  of  my  grace."  The  apostle  has  found  the  objective  ground  of  his  confidence  in  the
exclusively  Divine  source  of  the  "good  work;"  but  this  confidence  is  justified  at  once
by  his  own  love  to  the  Philippians  and  by  their  spiritual  fellowship  with  him  in
Bufferings  and  service,

I.  Love  inspires  confidbnob.  "I  have  you  in  my  heart."  Therefore,  he  says,
it  is  right  for  him  to  cherish  this  confidence  respecting  them.  It  is  the  nature  of  love
to  have  this  confident  hope,  for  it  "  beareth  all  things,  believeth  all  things,  hopeth  all
things"  (1  Cor.  xiii.  7).  The  intensity  of  his  love  enhanced  his  confidence.  The
apostle's  love  was  peculiarly  tender.  "  For  God  is  my  witness,  how  I  long  after  you  all
in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  appeal  to  God  marks  the  sincerity  of  his  love.
But  its  true  origin,  its  pattern,  its  fervency,  are  only  to  be  found  in  the  bowels  of
Christ.     The  heart  of  the  aposlle  throbs  in  unison  with  the  heart  of  Christ.

II.  Another  ground  of  confidence  was  thbib  simpathetio  fellowship  with
HIM  ni  BUFFERING  AND  IN  SERVICE.  1.  They  identified  themselves  with  him  "  in  his
londs "  ly  ministering  once  and  again  to  his  necessities  and  chetring  him  by  thsir


eH.i.  1— 30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILTPPIANS.  IS

sympathies.  They  remembered  him  "as  an  ambassador  in  bonds,"  as  we  are  all  bound
to  "  remember  them  that  are  in  bonds  as  bound  with  them"  (Heb.  xiii.  2).  They  did
it,  too,  at  a  time  when  Roman  sympathy  seems  to  have  been  sorely  wanting.  It  is
strange  that,  .with  a  Church  in  the  capital  of  the  world,  he  should  have  been  dependent
upon  the  charity  of  the  far  distant  Philippians.  2.  They  identified  themselves  heartily
both  with  his  defence  of-  the  gospel  either  before  heathen  magistrates  or  Jewish  opponents,
and  with  his  positive  establishment  of  Ihe  truth.  There  is  a  negative  and  a  positive  side
in  the  great  teaching  office  of  the  Church. — T.  C.

Vers.  9 — 11. —  The  apostle's  prayer.  He  had  spoken  of  praying  for  them.  This  was
the  purport  of  his  prayers :  "  And  this  I  pray,  that  your  love  may  abound  more  and  more
in  knowledge  and  in  all  discernment."

I.  The  iNCKBASE  OF  LOVE  THE  MAIN  THING  IN  BELioiON.  1.  The  language  implies
the  existence  of  this  love  as  well  as  its  imperfection.  It  had  been  manifest  in  many
ways;  but  there  were  social  rivalries  and  jealousies  and  disputes  at  Philippi.  There-
fore the  apostle  prays  that  their  love  may  abound  more  and  more.  2.  It  is  love
absolutely  that  he  sp/aks  of,  the  grand  principle,  the  motive  power  of  Christian  life.
Matthew  Henry  says  it  is  the  law  of  Christ's  kingdom,  the  lesson  of  his  school,  the
livery  of  his  family.  (1)  It  is  iJivine  in  its  origin,  for  "love  is  of  God;"  (2)  it  is
the  principle  of  the  Divine  indwelling,  for  "he  that  dwelleth  in  love  dwelleth  in  God,
and  God  in  him ; "  (3)  it  is  the  spring  of  all  holy  obedience,  for  it  is  "  the  fulhlling  of
the  Law;"  (4)  it  is  "  the  bond  of  perfectness ; "  (5)  it  has  no  metes  or  bounds  like
law,  for  we  are  to  love  with  all  our  powers.  The  gospel  lays  the  believer  under  a
weightier  line  of  oblij;ation  than  the  Law ;  for  we  are  not  to  do  this  or  that  particuhir
duty  prescribed  by  the  Law,  but  to  do  all  that  we  can  do  through  the  constraining  force
of  the  love  of  God.  3.  It  is  love  fed  by  knowledge  and  guided  by  Judgment ;  for  it  is  to
abound  "in  perfect  knowledge  and  universal  discernment."  (1)  Knowledge  here  is  the
thorough  grasp  of  theoretical  and  practical  truth,  (a)  This  is  needed  to  feed  love.
We  cannot  love  an  unknown  person ;  we  cannot  love  an  unknown  gospel ;  we  cannot
love  one  another  except  so  far  as  we  know  one  another.  The  more  we  know  of  our
blessed  Redeemer  the  more  shall  we  love  him.  Love  is  not  a  blind  attachment.  (6)  It
is  needed  to  regulate  love.  Cove  without  knowledge  may  lead  a  Christian  into  mis-
takes, irregularities,  improprieties,  like  a  foolishly  fond  father  who  spoils  his  child.  Love
may  waste  itself  on  worthless  or  frivolous  objects,  or  it  may  attempt  impracticable
projects  by  unwarrantable  means;  but  if  knowledge  be  the  guide,  these  mistakes  will
be  prevented.  (2)  The  love  is  in  "all  disceniment."  This  is  more  than  knowledge.  It
is  more  even  than  the  application  of  knowledge.  It  is  that  discriminating  power,
which  enables  a  man  to  appreciate  the  true  nature  of  things  presented  to  him  in
the  sphere  of  religious  realities.

II.  The  ends  accomplished  by  a  love  thus  regulated.  1.  Christian  capacity
to  discern  excellent  things.  "  That  you  may  be  able  to  prove  things  that  are  excellent."
Love,  rightly  guided,  penetrates  through  all  disguises  of  error.  It  is,  in  fact,  a  mighty
l)reseivative  against  error.  The  Christian  is  able  "  to  prove  all  things,  and  hold  fast  that
which  is  good."  He  does  not  lose  sight  of  the  true  proportions  and  relations  of  truth.
But  the  spiritual  capacity  of  believers  is  found  to  difier  like  the  natural  capacities  of
men.  Some  are  very  deficient  in  the  power  of  spiritual  discernment,  yet  this  may  be
mainly  due  to  the  weakness  of  love.  Those  who  are  strong  maintain  the  tranquillity
of  their  own  mind,  and  will  be  a  stay  to  the  timid  an<l  the  weak.  Cecil  says,
"  A  sound  heart  is  the  best  casuist."  2.  Sincerity.  "  That  ye  may  be  sincere."  Love,
rightly  guided,  brings  out  the  deep  reality  of  Christian  character,  and  presents  it  in  a
holy  simplicity  without  stratagem,  diplomacy,  or  manceuvre,  A  sincere  man  has  all
the  strength  that  springs  from  an  undivided  heart:  his  love  is  without  dissimulation ;
his  sincirity  is  a  godly  sincerity,  which  realizes  the  impossibility  of  uniting  the
interests  and  pleasures  and  pursuits  of  the  present  world  with  those  of  true  religion.
3.  ITie  absence  of  offence.  "  And  void  of  offence."  It  seems  hard  to  be  so  in  a  world
to  which  the  gospel  itself  is  an  offence.  Yet,  though  we  are  not  to  compromise  the
principles  of  the  gospel,  we  are  to  live  peaceably  with  all  men,  to  take  wrong  rather
than  give  offence,  to  have  a  good  report  from  them  that  are  without,  to  be  "  blamelesi
and  harmless  as  the  sons  of  God."    The  duration  of  this  temper  of  uncerity  and


1«  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN3.  [oh.  1. 1—30.

inoffensiveness  is  "  against  the  day  of  Christ " — the  day  of  final  accouot  before  the
Judge,  as  if  to  imply  the  undeviaiiiig  consistency  of  a  life  thus  divinely  ordered
4.  Positive  fruitfulness  in  Christian  life.  "Being  filled  with  ihe  Iruit  of  righteousness,
which  is  by  Jesus  Christ,  unto  the  glory  and  praise  of  God."  There  is  more  needed
than  mere  harmlessness :   there  must  be  a  positive  development  of   Christian  life.

(1)  The  fruit  of  righteousnesa.  The  righteousness  is  not  of  nature,  but  of  grace ;  it  is
not  of  the  Law,  but  of  faith ;  and  is  essentially  fruitful.  Therefore  those  who  possess
it  are  "  trees  of  righteousness,"  and  the  quality  of  the  tree  is  known  by  its  fruit.  The
whole  system  of  redemption  has  for  its  end  to  make  men  "fruitful  of  good  worku."

(2)  This  fruit  is  by  Jesus  Christ,  because  it  is  bound  up  with  the  life  of  Christ.  "A*
the  branch  cannot  bear  fruit  of  itself  except  it  abide  in  the  vine,  no  more  can  ye  except
ye  abide  in  me"  (John  xv.  4).  (3)  The  end  to  which  all  is  directed — "to  the  glory
and  praise  of  God."  The  glory  is  the  manifestation  of  Gud's  grace,  the  praise  is  the
recognition  by  men  of  God's  attributes.  (4)  It  is  imjilied  that  believers  are  to  be
"filled"  with  the  fruit  of  ri,i;hieoMsness.  Not  a  branch  here  and  there,  but  all  our
branches  are  to  be  loaded  with  fruit.    Thus  there  will  be  the  more  glory  and  praise  to

God.— T.a

VetB.  12 — 14. — Furikeranot  of  the  gospel  through  the  aposfl^s  imprisonment.  He
now  proceeds  to  infOiUi  his  converts  of  his  condition  at  Rome,  with  his  hopes  and  his
fears  for  the  future.  His  imi  risonmeiit  had  in  two  irajjortant  respects  signally  pro-
moted the  growth  of  Christianity  in  the  great  metropolis  of  the  world.

L  His  sufferings  for  Christ  had  become  known  to  the  soldiers  of  thb  Pbjb-
TORIAN  GoARD  AND  TO  OTHEBS.  "  My  bonds  have  become  manifest  in  Christ  through-
i  ut  the  Pratorian  Guard,  and  to  all  the  rest."  This  was  important  for  two  reasons.
1.  Because  these  solliers  were  connected  with  "  Ccesar's  household."  We  may  well
suppose  that  the  saints  in  that  household  referred  to  afterwards  (ch.  iv.  22)  owed
their  conversion  to  the  apostle's  ministry.  2.  Because  Christianity  would  thus  he
brought  under  the  eye  of  the  world.  Thise  soldiers  were  part  of  an  army  which  then
covered  the  world  w  ith  its  conqui  sts.  3.  But  tho  special  importance  lay  in  the  foci
thai  he  was  recognized  as  a  prisoner,  not  for  theft,  or  murder,  or  ili-doiny,  hut  for  his
profession  of  the  gospel.

II.  His  sufferings  fob  Christ  had  the  effect  of  inspiring  ministers  with
OBEATER  COURAGE  IN  PBEAOHiNQ  THE  Gosi'EL.  "  Aud  the  greater  part  of  the  brethren,
having  in  the  Lord  confidence  in  my  bonds,  are  more  abundantly  bold  to  preach  the
gospel  without  fear."  This  implies:  1.  That  the  ministry  was  then  a  dangerous  service,
for  it  exposed  pnachers  to  violence  and  death.  2.  That  the  example  of  triumphant
faith  and  joyful  endurance  cannot  he  without  its  effect.  The  courage  of  the  apostle^  in
a  fearfully  critical  time,  breathed  new  strength  into  "  the  brethren."— T.  0.

Vers.  15 — 18. — A  significant  difference  among  the  apostle's  brethren.  They  were  all
actively  engaged  in  preaching  the  gospel,  but  they  were  not  actuated  by  the  same
motives.

I.  The  different  spirit  op  the  two  classes  op  fbeachers.  "Some  indeed
preach  Christ  even  of  envy  aud  strife ;  and  some  also  of  good  will."  The  one  class  were
actuated  by  a  genuine  good  will  to  Christ  and  his  apostle.  The  other  class  were
actuated  by  envy  and  discord.  They  envied  the  popularity  of  the  apostle  among  the
Gentile  Churches,  and  showed  a  disagreeably  quarrelsome  temper.  They  were  evidently
Judaists  who  could  little  brook  the  overihrow  of  the  Mos-aio  institute  and  Jewish
commonwealth  which  seemed  to  be  involved  in  the  triumph  of  the  apostle's  gospel.  Yet
they  preached  Christ.

IL  The  motives  of  the  two  classes.  "The  one  do  it  of  love,  knowing  that  I  am
set  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel;  but  the  other  proclaim  Christ  of  faction,  not  sincerely,
thinking  to  raise  up  affliction  for  me  in  my  bonds."  Notice :  1.  The  pure  motive  of  the
one  class — love — ^which  ought  to  be  the  spring  of  all  gospel  action.  Love  to  Christ,  love
to  the  truth,  love  to  the  souls  of  men,  ought  to  be  the  abiding  motive  of  all  preachers.
These  brethren  had  special  regard  for  the  apostle  on  account  of  his  destined  place  in  the
evangelization  of  the  world.  2.  The  impure  motive  of  the  other  clas$ — a  base partisamhip
deiigned  to  make  the  aj^oiG^t  bonds  more  galling.  There  are  allusionB  to  this  fierce  parte


OH.  L 1—30.]  THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   PHTLIPPIANS.  17


spirit  among  the  Judaists  in  most  of  the  apostle's  writings,  aggiavateil  as  it  often  was  by
iatense  bitterness  to  the  apostlo.  3.  Yet  both  dcisses preached  Christ.  The  language  of
the  apostle  is  applied  to  both  clMSses.  It  is  sad  to  think  of  men  preaching  Christ  from
bad  motives,  especially  where  such  motives  may  imply  a  tinge  of  doctrinal  imperfeofion
ill  the  method  of  preaching  him.  Yet  the  Lord  accepts  the  services  of  weak,  imperfect,
sinful  men  in  his  vineyard.

III.  The  joy  of  the  apostle  at  this  widespread  activity  of  the  two  classes.

1.  It  mitjht  appear  more  natural  for  him  to  denounce  these  Jadaists  with  words  of  sharp
rebuke.  Perhaps  his  own  enforced  inactivity  as  a  preacher  may  have  led  him  to  rejoice
in  the  Cliristian  labours  of  men  who  knew  Christ  "  only  after  the  flesh."  2.  His  joy
shows  a  large  and  forgiving  nature.  "  What  then  ?  only  that  in  every  way,  whether
with  masked  design  or  in  truth,  Christ  is  proclaimed,  and  therein  I  rejoice,  yea,  and
will  rejoice."  The  conduct  of  the  apostle  teaches  us :  (1)  That  the  preaching  of  Christ
is  higher  truth  than  the  secondary  questions  of  polity  and  worsliip  which  often  cause
dissension  among  Christians.  (2)  That  Christians  ought  to  rejoice  in  the  successes
of  other  Christians  who  follow  different  methods  of  doctrine  or  polity.  (3)  That  it  is
right  to  condemn  the  base  motives  or  unworthy  insincerities  that  sometimes  mingle
with  good  work.  (4)  That  we  ought  to  show  special  consideration  to  those  who  preach
Christ  of  good  will,  and  eschew  all  sorts  of  by-ends  and  manoeuvres. — T.  0.

Vers.  19,  20. — The  bearing  of  his  various  trials  upon  his  aaloation.  "And  I  know
that  this  will  turn  out  to  my  salvation."

I.  CoNsiDEtt  THE  apostle's  concebn  FOB  HIS  OWN  SALVATION.  He  docs  not  refer
here  to  his  release  from  captivity,  but  to  the  salvation  of  his  soul.  1.  Salvation  hns
several  significations  in  Scripture.  It  sometimes  means  conversion,  sometimes  sanctifi-
cation,  sometimes  glorification,—  that  is,  some  one  or  other  of  three  different  parts  of  it ;
or  it  signifies  all  three  together.  In  the  fii'st  sense  it  is  a  past  act  and  complete ;  in  the
second,  it  is  a  present  experience  and  progressive;  in  the  third,  a  blessed  expectation.
1'he  apostle  does  not  use  the  word  here  in  the  first,  but  in  the  second  and  third  senses.

2.  We  are  not  to  suppose  that  he  had  any  doubt  concerning  his  salvation,  but  merely
that  he  sought  that  spiritual  growth  and  that  enlargement  of  spiritual  labours  that
would  determine  the  degree  of  his  blessedness  hereafter.

II.  His  SALVATION  WAS  TO  BE  PROMOTED  BY  SANCTIFIED  TRIALS.  He  refers  here
evidently  to  the  perplexities  and  troubles  by  which  ungentle  and  unloving  bretliren  had
tried  "  to  raise  up  affliction  to  his  bonds."  1.  Affliction  has  no  naturally  sanctifying
tendency.  It  embitters,  it  hardens,  it  deadens  the  soul.  2.  It  is  affliction  sanctified  by
a  loving  Father  that  deepens  and  purifies  spiritual  experience.  (Heb.  xii.  7 — 11.)  There
are  two  means  suggested  towards  this  end.  (1)  Intercessory  prayer.  "  This  shall  turn
out  to  my  salvation  through  your  prayer ; "  for  even  a  great  apostle  was  dependent  upon
the  intercession  of  the  humble  disciples  of  Philippi.  (2)  The  supply  of  the  Spirit.
"  And  the  abundant  supply  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ."  This  supply,  as  the  answer  to  their
prayers,  would  minister  to  him  joy,  peace,  holiness,  strength,  patience,  and  zeal.  It  is
the  Spirit  proceeding  from  Christ,  sent  by  Christ,  who,  taking  the  things  of  Christ,
shows  them  unto  us,  and  so  establishes  our  safety.

III.  This  salvation  is  identified  with  his  successful  promotion  of  the  gospel.
"According  to  my  earnest  desire  and  hope,  that  in  nothing  I  shall  be  ashamed,  but  as
always,  so  now  also  with  all  boldness,  Christ  shall  be  magnified  in  my  body  whether  by
life  or  by  death."  1.  The  supply  of  the  Spirit  justified  his  desire  and  hope  that  he
would  boldly  proclaim  Ghrist.  He  was  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ  (Uom.  i.  16 ;
2  Tim.  i.  12).  2.  It  would  ensure  the  glorification  of  Christ  in  his  body,  by  his
labours  if  he  lived,  by  his  edifying  patience  and  peace  if  he  died.

IV.  His  conviction  of  this  fact.  "  I  know  that  this  will  turn  out  to  my
salvation."  He  knew  it:  1.  From  his  knowledge  of  the  discipline  of  the  covenant.
2.  From  his  knowledge  of  Ood's  promises.  3.  From  his  own  past  experiences  of  OotPs
dealings  with  himself. — T.  C.

Ver.  21i— 2%e  gra/nd alternatives.    "To  me  to  live  is  Christ,  to  die  is  gain."    This

eiicidates  as  well  as  confirms  his  previous  statement.

I.  His  natural  life  finds  its  supreme  object  in  Christ.     The  apostle  does  not

PHiLIPPIANS.  "


18  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [ch.  1. 1— «&

litre  assert  that  Christ  is  hiz  spiritual  life,  for  the  reference  is  strictly  limited  to  his
"life  in  the  flesh."  That  life  is  supremely  devoted  to  Clirist.  1.  In  all  its  thouyli'x.
There  never  was  a  man  whose  intellectual  life  was  so  wrapped  up  in  his  Saviour ;  hia
plans,  his  anxieties,  his  hopes,  centred  in  him ;  every  thought  was  brought  into
subjection  to  him ;  therefore  his  thoughts  were  not  vain,  or  selfish,  or  earthly.  2.  In
all  its  deeds.  The  apostle  abounded  in  labours  more  than  the  other  apostles.  Yet
Christ  was  the  object  of  such  holy  activity.  His  ceaseless,  exhausting  works  of  love
found  their  spring  in  the  love  of  Christ  as  they  marked  his  supreme  devotion.  Thua
Christ  was  his  life.  It  ought  so  to  be  with  us  all.  "For  whether  we  live,  we  live
unto  the  Lord."

II.  His  death  would  be  gain.  "To  die  is  gain."  1.  This  ahseilion  seems  hard
to  reconcile  with  human  feeling.  Death  always  involves  loss  of  some  sort.  To  the
saint  it  involves  the  loss  of  m.iuy  pure  enjoymeuts  of  life,  of  happy  domestic  ties,  of  the
means  and  o[)portunities  of  wuikiug  for  Christ ;  while  to  the  sinner  it  is  utter,  irreparable
loss.  2.  The  assertion  is  not  that  of  a  mere  pessimist,  who  asks,  "Is  lil'e  worth  living?"
nor  of  a  worn-out  roti^,  who  has  outlived  the  very  sensation  of  enjoyment ;  nor  of  a
holy  man  wearied  out  with  exhausting  labours  and  anxious  to  get  quit  of  trials  and
persecutions.  There  is  nothing  in  the  apostle's  writings  to  justify  the  conclusion  that
lie  was  sour,  or  morose,  or  cynical,  or  merely  attached  to  the  scene  of  human  existence
at  the  point  of  duty;  for  he  possessed  hearty  liuiiian  sympathies  and  entered  with  spirit
into  ail  the  schemes  of  true  Christian  life.  3.  His  assertion,  marks  the  true  connection
that  exists  between  deith  and  the  believer's  gain.  Death  is  pure  gain ;  for  it  puts  an  end  to
all  the  losses  which  so  largely  shake  human  comfort  in  this  life,  to  all  the  evils  of  siu,
and  to  all  temptations  to  sin ;  and  it  puts  the  believer  inpossessionof  his  lull  inheritance
with  the  perfection  of  grace,  the  blessed  vision  of  God,  the  society  of  the  just  maile
perfect.  It  is  gain  :  (1)  Immediate;  for  "absence  from  the  body "  is '"  presence  with
the  Lord."  (2)  incalculable;  for  "eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  what  God  hath
prepared  for  them  that  loie  him  "  (I  Cor.  ii.  9).  (3)  Everlasting;  for  God  himself  is
the  eternal  Portion  of  his  people. — T.  C.

Vers.  22 — 24. — The  apostle's  dilemma.  The  last  sentence  touched  his  more  personal
life;  but  now  he  thinks  of  his  official  relation  to  others,  with  its  large  promise  of
blessing  to  the  world.  This  thought  creates  his  dilemma.  He  does  not  know  whether
to  choose  life  or  death.     Let  us  mark  tho  two  sides  of  the  dilemma.

I.  The  choice  of  life.  This  had  no  relation  to  himself.  It  had  exclusive  relation
to  others.  1.  His  life  would  be  more  fruitful  in  labours  for  others.  "  But  if  I  live  in
the  flesh,  this  is  the  fruit  of  my  labour."  That  is,  his  life  would  be  fruitful  through  his
unceasing  labonis.  "The  life  of  a  pious  minister  is  far  more  profitable  for  his  people
than  his  death."  The  Church  wants  him,  the  world  wants  him,  his  family  wants  him.
There  was  no  leis\ire  in  the  long  career  of  the  apostle.  Uis  life  was  brimful  of  labf.ur
to  the  last.  2.  His  life  wi.uld  be  more  advantageous  to  others  than  his  death.  "  Never-
theless, to  abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  on  your  account."  On  the  shoulders  of
this  apostle  rested  the  care  of  all  the  Churches ;  he  was  in  the  front  of  battle  all  his
life;  the  Christians  every wliere  looked  to  him  for  help  and  guidance  ;  while  there  weio
still  many  dark  spots  of  tarth  to  which  he  might  carry  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation.
The  apostle  was  not  one  of  those  men  who  live  too  long  alike  for  their  reputation  and
their  happiness;  he  had  not  outlived  his  power  of  work;  he  had  shown  no  signs  of
failure,  for  he  was  still  abundant  in  labours  and  in  consolations  and  in  the  strength
which  inspires  confidence.

II.  The  choice  of  death.  "I  am  hemmed  in  on  both  sides,  having  a  desire  to
depart,  and  be  with  Christ,  which  is  very  iar  better."  1.  The  desire  of  death  is  not
sirful,  but  rather  commendable,  as  a  sign  of  faith  and  fearlessness.  There  is  a  longing
for  death  on  the  part  of  the  miserable,  who  are  "  weary  of  their  life,''  and  only  anxious
to  escape  from  its  evils.  The  longing  sometimes  deepens  into  the  madness  that  leads
to  suicide.  This  longing  is  sinful,  because  it  is  selfish,  and  seems  to  argue  a  weak  trust
in  the  Divine  hand  which  supports  our  life.  But  there  is  a  longing  without  any
selfish  element,  that  springs  out  of  the  desire  to  esca[io  from  sin  into  a  state  of  perfect
holiness.  Sucli  a  desire  for  death  argues  our  belief  in  a  future  state,  our  faith  in  the
Lord'»  mercy,  our  love  to  him,  and  our  interest  in  his  manifested  glory.     2.  Bwth


OH.  1.1—30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  »

involve!  our  immediate  translation  into  Christ's  presence.  "  Having  a  desire  to  depart^
and  be  witli  Christ."  There  is  uo  ground  for  the  supposition  of  a  long  sleep  of  the
soul  between  death  and  the  resurrection,  however  difficult  it  "may  be  to  conceive  tha
conscious  existence  of  a  disembodied  spirit.  "Absent  from  the  body,  present  with
the  Lord."  To  be  with  Christ  implies:  (1)  That  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is.  (2)  That
we  shall  enjoy  him  when  we  see  him  in  the  fulness  of  joy  that  is  at  his  right  hand.
(3)  That  we  shall  never  be  parted  from  him.  It  is  the  glory  of  the  heavenly  state
that  believers  "shnll  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord"  (1  Thess.  iv.  17).  3.  Presence  with
Christ  is  far  letter  than  anything  life  can  give.  It  Is  better  (1)  in  respect  of  exemption
■  from  sin  and  sorrow ;  (2)  in  respect  of  honour  and  dignity,  for  the  saints  shall  reign
with  him  ;  (3)  in  respect  of  profit,  for  they  are  joint  heirs  with  him;  (4)  in  respect  of  the
perpetuity  that  is  stamped  upon  all  the  realities  of  heaven. — T.  0.

Vers.  25,  26. — The  apostle's  personal  conviction  as  to  Ms  future  courm.  He  might
be  uncertain  as  to  which  he  should  choose,  but  he  was  fully  confident  as  to  what
would  befall  him.     Notice —

I.  The  knowledge  of  his  contdiuanob  with  his  converts.  "And  being  con-
fidently persuaded  of  this  [that  his  life  would  be  for  their  spiritual  advantage]  I
know  that  1  shall  abide,  and  abide  with  you  all."  His  knowledge  was  not  necessarily
derived  from  special  revelation  or  from  mere  presentiment,  but  represents  his  firm
personal  conviction  that  he  would  survive  his  present  imprisonment.  His  assurance
was  eventually  fulfilled,  as  we  know  by  his  labours  during  the  remaining  years  of  his
life.  He  knew  that  his  times  were  in  God's  hands,  and  that  the  same  Lord  who  fore-
told the  manner  of  Peter's  end  would  fix  the  time  of  his  own  end.  He  could  feel  he
was  immortal  till  his  work  was  done.

II.  The  effect  of  his  contikubd  labours.  "For  your  furtherance  and  joy  of
faith."  The  life  of  a  minister  is  intimately  associated  with  the  spiritual  comfort  of  his
fiock.  1.  Ths  apostle  would  he  the  means  of  increasing  their  faith.  (1)  By  his
imparting  of  new  truth  ;  (2)  l>y  his  skilful  application  of  old  truth  to  new  circum-
stances ;  (3)  by  deepening  the  dependence  of  his  converts  on  that  Lord  whom  the  twelve
apostles  once  unanimously  addiessed  with  the  words,  "Increase  our  faith"  (Luke
xvii.  5)  ;  (4)  by  imparting  spiritual  gifts  (Bom.  i.  11).  2.  The  apostle  would  contribute
to  the  joy  of  their  faith.  (1)  This  joy  is  essentially  connected  with  faith  as  its
source ;  for  the  God  of  hope  fills  us  "  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing"  (Bom.  xv.  13).
(2)  Faith  in  its  fulness  inspires  a  deep  joy  in  proportion  to  its  thorough  realization
of  Divine  realities  and  blessings.  "  In  whom,  though  now  ye  see  him  not,  yet  believing,
ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable"  (1  Pet.  i.  8).  (3)  The  apostle  would  thus  promote
their  spiritual  strength;  fur  "the  joy  of  the  Lord"  would  become  "  their  strength."

III.  The  ultimate  desisn  of  his  continuance.  "  That  your  matter  for  boasting
[in  the  fact  of  your  condition  as  Chrisiians]  may  abound  in  Christ  Jesus  in  me
through  my  coming  to  you  again."  1.  2'Ae  element  of  increase  in  Christian  living  and
Christian  privilege  is  in  Christ  Jesus ;  for  it  is  in  virtue  of  its  connection  with  the
head  "that  the  body  maketh  increase  of  itself  in  love"  (Eph.  iv<  16).  2.  2%«
instrumental  source  of  increase  is  "in  me" — through  the  apostle's  continued  labour.
3.  It  would  be  still  more  marked  by  his  personal  visits  to  his  converts;  for  he  would
come  to  them  in  fulness  of  the  blessing  of  the  gospel  of  Christ, — T.  C.

Vers.  27,  28. — Practical  counsel  for  holy  and  consistent  living.  "  Only  let  your
manner  of  life  be  as  it  beoometh  the  gospel  of  Christ."

I.  The  gospel  of  Christ  is  the  true  standard  of  Christian  pibtt  as  well  as
"  'J  UB  power  of  God  to  salvation."  It  is  so  t  1.  By  virtue  of  the  doctrines  it  reveals
for  our  comfort.  2.  By  virtue  of  the  precepts  it  inculcates  for  our  guidance ;  for  it
embodies  in  itself  that  which  is  at  once  "  the  law  of  Christ,"  "  the  law  of  love,"  "  the
law  of  liberty."  3.  Py  virtue  of  the  privileges  it  confers  to  secure  holy  living.  4.  Bt/
virtue  of  the  prospects  it  holds  out  as  "  a  recompense  of  reward."

II.  Christian  life  must  be  ordered  AccoEDtNa  to  this  standard.  The  original
term  suggests  membership  in  a  society,  according  to  the  idea  of  privilege  which  makes
believers  "  fellow-citizens  of  the  saints."  Our  practice  must  accord  with  our  profession.
Like  the  gospel  of  Christ,  we  must  be  true  and  faithful,  peaceful  and  loviag,  gracious


20  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  1. 1—30

and  humble.     Our  walk  must  be  consistently  the  same,  whether  our  religious  guides

are  present  or  absent.

III.  The  Chkistian'walk  is  to  manifest  itself  in  a  fibm  and  solid  uNiir.
"That  ye  stand  fast  in  one  spirit."  There  were  divergences  of  action,  if  not  of
thought,  manifest  among  the  jiious  Philippians,  which  made  it  necessary  to  counsel
them  to  a  steadfast  unity  ot  position  and  etiort.  We  cannot  grew  in  grace  unless  we
live  in  peace,  and  we  cannot  hold  our  ground  against  the  rushing  tides  of  worldliness
and  sin  which  threaten  to  overwhelm  us  unless  we  are  strongly  rooted  in  Christ  and
his  gracious  gospel.  This  stability  of  position  will  have  a  twofold  effect.  ].  It  will
enable  us  to  fight  in  concert  for  the  faith  of  the  gospel.  ".With  one  soul  striving  in
concert  with  the  faith  of  the  gospel."  If  there  was  to  be  striving  at  all,  it  must  not  be
in  a  way  of  contention,  but  of  united  endeavour  to  promote  and  defend  the  cause  of
Christ.  Unity  immensely  enhances  the  power  of  the  truth.  This  language  implies
(1)  that  there  is  "one  faith;"  (2)  that  it  is  worth  striving  for,  as  it  contains  the
message  of  mercy  to  man;  (3)  that  it  is  injurious  to  piety  to  undervalue  truth ;  (4)
that  the  stability  of  Churches  as  well  as  individuals  depends  much  upon  unity  of  faith ;
(5)  that  there  may  be  a  oneness  of  heart  under  intellectual  differences.  2.  It  will  make
you  superior  to  th^  fears  of  adversaries.  "  And  in  nothing  terrified  by  your  ad  versaries."
There  will  be  no  wavering  on  your  part,  through  the  assaults  of  unbelieving  Jews  or
Gentiles.  There  is  a  double  argument  or  encouragement  here  presented:  "seeing  it
[your  fearlessness]  is  to  tliem  an  evident  token  of  destruction,  but  to  you  of  salvation,
and  that  of  God."  (1)  'i'heir  fearless  maintenance  of  the  truth,  implying  as  it  did
the  power  of  the  gospel  in  their  hearts,  would  be  a  proof  to  the  adversaries  that  they
merit  destruction  by  rejecting  it  and  by  continuing  steadfast  in  their  wickedness.  The
sentiment  is  parallel  with  that  in  the  Thessalonian  Epistle,  in  which  the  suffering
endured  through  the  envy  of  the  Jews  was  "  a  token  or  proof  that  God  will  inflict
heavy  punishment  on  the  adversaries  of  the  Christian  faith"  (2  Thess.  i.  5).  (2)  It
was  also  a  proof  that  the  God  who  now  sustaiiied  them  would  tinally  reward  them.
This  implies  (a)  that  suffering  Christians  will  certainly  be  saved,  (6)  and  that  their
salvation  will  be  great  as  well  as  certain. — T.  0.

Vers.  29,  30, — The  prthilege  of  suffering.  There  is  reason  given,  by  way  of
encouragement,  for  their  steadf  istness  in  suffering.  "  For  unto  you  it  was  freely  given
on  the  behalf  of  Christ,  not  only  to  believe  upon  him,  but  alsu  to  suffer  for  his  sake."

I.  The  dispknsation  of  suffebino  assigned  to  the  saints.  Their  sufferings  fall
not  out  by  chance.  They  are  divinely  ordered.  They  are  even  divinely  given.  1.
Their  ability  to  endure  these  sufferings  is  the  gift  of  Christ.  "In  the  world  ye  shall
have  tribulation ;  in  me  ye  shall  have  peace."  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ
which  strengtheneth  me."  2.  Their  comforts  in  suffering  are  the  gift  of  Christ.  Thus
they  are  led  to  rejoice  in  tribulation,  for  he  has  sent  his  Comforter  to  dwell  in  their
hearts.  3.  The  sifft-rings  in  question  are  profitable  to  themselves  as  well  as  honouring
to  the  Lord.  He  doth  not  afflict  willingly,  but  for  our  profit.  Through  otir  suffering  we
may  glorify  the  Lord  by  encouraging  and  confirming  the  faith  of  others.  4.  The  suffer-
ings will  not  he  without  reward.  "If  we  suffer  with  him,  we  shall  also  reign  with
him "  (2  Tim.  ii.  12).  "  Blessed  are  you  when  men  persecute  you  ...  for  great  is
your  reward  in  heaven  "  (Matt.  v.  11,  12).

II.  Faith  in  Christ  must  go  before  suffering  fob  him.  "  Unto  you  it  is  given
...  to  believe  upon  him."  1.  Faith  is  Ood's  gift,  as  it  is  the  first  effect  of  regeneration,
which  is  God's  work.  Christ  purchased  for  us,  not  merely  salvation,  but  all  the  means
thereunto.  It  is  the  Lord  who  opens  our  eyes,  renews  our  wills,  and  persuades  and
enables  us  to  accept  Christ  in  the  gospel.  2.  It  is  by  this  faith  we  are  enabled  to  suffer
patiently.  Without  the  shield  of  faith  we  could  not  resist  the  anger  of  persecutors.
By  faith  we  are  made  strong  at  the  root  like  the  seaweed  that  grows  on  the  rock,  nc
matter  how  much  it  may  be  lashed  hither  and  thither  by  the  ceaseless  action  of  the
waves.

III.  Encouragement  to  patient  perseverance  bt  the  example  op  the  apostle.
"  Having  the  same  conflict  which  ye  saw  in  me,  and  now  hear  to  be  in  me."  There
must  be  a  right  spirit  as  well  as  a  good  cause  to  suffer  for.  1.  Tlie  similarity  between
the  sufferings  of  the  apostle  and  those  of  his  conuerts.     (1)  It  was  in  the  same  place—


DILI.  1—30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  21

Philippi.  (Acts  xvi.  19.)  (2)  It  was,  probably,  from  the  same  adversaries.  Gentiles
and  Jews.  (3)  It  was  a  conflict  in  both  cases  trying  to  flesh  and  blood.  2.  Tfie  suffer-
ings of  the  ministers  of  Christ  ought  to  encoura^fle  their  people  to  like  patience  and
firmness. — T.  C.

Ver».  1,  2. — Saints,  bishops,  and  deacons.  In  the  beginning  of  this  earliest  Epistle
of  the  captivity,  according  to  the  showing  of  Lightfoot,  the  apostle  does  not  deem  it
needful  to  declare  his  apostleship  or  to  indulge  in  even  the  semblance  of  self-assertion.
Brackfting  Timotheus  with  himself,  he  simply  declares  that  they  are  slaves  (SouAoi)  of
Jesus  Christ,  and  as  such  desire  to  address  the  constituents  of  the  Philippian  Church.
The  contents  of  this  Epistle  are  eminently  joy-inspiring ;  it  is,  in  fact,  marvellous  that
such  consolation  should  come  from  captivity  to  those  enjoying  freedom.  But  God's
ways  are  oftentimes  surprising.

I.  Let  us  look  at  Christ's  slaves.  (Ver,  1.)  Paul  and  Timothy,  as  the  slaves
of  Christ,  felt  that  they  were  not  their  own,  but  bought  with  a  price.  They  were,  there-
fore, bound  to  glorify  God  in  their  bodies,  in  their  spirits,  and  in  all  their  possessions.
And  to  such  wide  responsibilities  they  cheerfully  responded,  sQ  that  it  was  their  con-
stant joy  to  live  for  Jesus.  He  was  their  Lord ;  hence  the  title  is  given  to  him  in  the
second  verse.  But  they  felt  this  slavery  to  be  perfect  freedom,  and  rejoiced  in  the
thought  that  the  raaik  or  brand  of  Christ  was  upon  them  (cf.  Rom.  vi.  18 — 22 ;  2  Cor.
iii.  17).  As  the  slaves  of  Christ,  moreover,  it  was  impossible  for  them  to  be  the  slaves
of  men  (1  Cor.  vii.  23).  And  truly  it  is  only  when  we  are  possessed,  body  and  soul,
by  Christ,  and  when  we  have  merged  our  will  in  his,  that  we  rise  into  lordship  over
ourselves  and  become  heirs  of  all  things.  It  is  this  slavery  to  Christ  which  proves  tha
real  emancipation  of  the  spirit.

II.  Let  us  look  at  the  Chuech  at  Philipw.  (Ver.  1.)  Now,  it  was  composed  of
saints  (aytois).  These  consecrated,  dedicated  souls  formed  the  staple  of  the  Church  at
Philippi.  While  Paul  does  not  assert  that  saintliness  characterized  them  all  without
exception  who  professed  membership  in  the  Church,  he  plainly  indicates  that  it  ought
to  characterize  them  all.  As  Lightfoot  expresses  it,  "Though  it  does  not  assert  moral
qualifications  as  a  fact  in  the  persons  designated,  it  implies  them  as  a  duty."  Moreover,
Paul  in  his  charity  addresses  himself  to  all  these  saints;  so  as  to  heal  any  divisions
which  may  have  arisen  among  them  and  to  bind  them  all  into  a  unity  of  spirit  and  of
aim.  The  sphere  of  their  saintliness  is  Christ  Jesus.  It  is  through  their  union  with
the  Lord  that  they  become  the  consecrated  men  he  means  them  to  be.  But  in  the
Church  there  were  two  kinds  of  officers — "  bishops  and  deacons."  That  these  "  bishops  "
are  synonymous  with  "presbyters  "must  be  admitted  by  all,  especially  after  the  Bishop
of  Durham's  candid  note.  They  were  spiritual  overseers  of  the  flock  of  God,  and  tha
plurality  of  them  in  such  a  little  place  as  Philippi  shows  how  desirable  it  is  to  have  a
plurality  of  persons  in  a  congregation  charged  with  its  spiritual  oversight  and  doing  all
they  can  to  promote  its  spiritual  welfare.  Lastly,  there  were  "deacons"  in  Philippi,
men  charged  with  the  temporal  interests  of  the  congregations  and  administering  these
most  faithfully.  This  "  division  of  labour"  was  introduced  after  the  experiment  of  the
commune,  and  was  found  to  work  so  well  that  it  was  continued  in  the  apostolic  Church
long  after  the  experiment  of  communism  had  proved  a  failure  (Acts  vi.).  The  simple
organization  of  these  primitive  Churches  is  most  instructive.  With  "saints  and
bishops  and  deacons  "  the  congregation  was  complete.

III.  Let  us  look  at  Paul's  desire  for  them.  (Ver.  2.)  Though  saints  in
character,  though  bishops  or  deacons,  as  the  case  might  be,  by  virtue  of  their  ofiSce,
they  needed  constant  "  grace  "  from  God  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  with  it-s
resultant  "  peace."  Gk)d  establishes  relations  with  our  souls,  not  that  we  may  become
at  any  time  independent  of  him,  but  that  we  may  realize  constant  dependence  on  him.
As  children  we  are  to  gather  round  his  feet  and  rejoice  in  his  paternal  favour.  And
Jesus  Christ  is  to  be  our  Lord,  so  that  in  submission  to  his  holy  will  we  may  find  our
path  of  peace.  It  is  only  by  this  due  subordination  to  the  Divine  that  we  can  grow  in
peace  and  enjoy  life  to  the  full.  As  our  lives  are  thus  united  to  the  infinite  Fountain,
we  can  grow  in  all  the  elements  of  spiritual  power.  Such  a  benediction  was  the  best
experience  for  the  saints  at  Philippi,  as  it  is  the  beat  experience  for  Chuich  membert
everywhere. — R.  M.  Et


*»  fSE  EFIStLE  to  tfiB  PHlLTPflANS.  [""•  i-  ^~^-

Vers.  3 — 11. — The  apostle's  intercession  and  assurance.  Having  saluted  a  well-
organized  Church  with  its  bishops  and  deacons,  Paul  proceeds  to  express  his  thanks-
givings and  his  intercessions.  From  this  Church  at  Philippi  alone  had  he  received
supplies.  By  the  hand  of  Epaphroditus  they  had  forvparded  their  love-tokens  to  the
inaprisoned  apostle,  and  he  rejoiced  in  the  sympathy  this  showed  with  the  furtherance
of  the  gosiiel.  Accordingly  he  proceeds  to  prayer,  and  pours  out  his  significant  inter-
cessions for  these  saints.     And  here  let  us  notice —

I.  His  intercession  fob  their  fellowship  in  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel.
(Vers.  4,  5,  Revised  Version.)  The  intercession  of  the  apostle  was  joyful.  Our  prayers
should  be  less  complaints  than  jubilations.  It  must  have  been  delightful  for  Paul  to
dwell  upon  the  missionary  spirit  which  the  saints  at  Philippi  exhibited,  and  to  intercede
for  its  increase.  As  the  firstfruits  of  the  European  mission,  they  entered  most  heartily
into  Paul's  aspirations  and  did  all  they  could  to  strengthen  his  hands.  It  was  a
missionary  Church  which  he  had  established  at  Philippi.  And  after  all,  is  not  this  the
prime  purpose  which  should  animate  every  Church?  A  congregation  is  nothing  if  not
missionary.  It  must  die  of  paralysis  if  it  is  not  seeking  to  extend  the  gospel.  What  we
need  is  to  be  filled  with  something  like  the  enthusiasm  of  the  apostles  in  the  propaga-
tion of  the  faith.

ri.  Paul's  inteeoession  was  backed  cp  by  the  assubanci!  that  GKjd  would
enable  them  to  persevbbb  in  their  blessed  policy.  (Ver.  6.)  The  relation  of
assurance  to  intercession  is  one  of  great  interest  as  well  as  importance.  A  ceri  ain  and  sure
hope  makes  prayer  joyful  and  prevailing.  Suppose  that  Paul  had  been  uncertain  about
the  perseverance  of  the  Philippians  in  the  policy  of  evangelization,  how  difi'erent  must
his  intercessions  have  been !  But  because  he  was  certain  of  it,  he  prayed  pi-evailingly.
But  we  must  observe  the  grotmd  of  his  assurance.  The  "  good  work  "  bej;un  in  them
is  evidently  the  missionary  spirit.  For  every  one  that  receives  the  gospel  is  led
instinctively  to  seek  to  propag;ite  the  gospel.  The  alisence  of  the  niis>ionary  spirit  is
proof  positive  that  the  gospel  has  only  been  nominally  received.  Well,  the  apostle
argues  that  when  God  begins  a  work,  he  means  to  finish  it.  Incompleteness  is  but  a
promise  in  any  Divine  work  of  subsequMit  perfection.  God's  plans  are  not  so  poorlj
formed  as  to  fail.  Until  the  day  of  Jesus  Chrisc,  therefore,  a  spiritual  work  begun  in
men's  hearts  will  be  carried  on.  The  poetess  strikes  the  true  note  when  she  ends  her
poem  on  "  Incompleteness  "  with  the  words —

•  Nor  dare  to  blame  God'i  g^fts  for  incompleteness ;
In  that  want  their  beauty  lies;  they  roll
Towards  some  infinite  depth  of  love  and  sweetness,
Bearing  onwards  man's  reluctant  soul."

(Procter's  '  Legends  aud  tiyTios.*)

The  perseverance  of  the  saints,  therefore,  in  their  large-hearted  policy  rests  upon  God's
ability  to  make  them  persevere.  Left  to  themselves,  they  could  not  stand  or  persevere
an  hour;  but,  helped  by  God,  they  continue  steadfast,  immovable,  always  abounding
in  the  work  of  the  Lord.

III.  Their  sympathy  with  the  apostle  had  proved  and  was  pRoviNa  a  means
OF  GRACE.  (Vers.  7, 8.)  Between  Paul  and  the  Philijipians  there  was  ihe  most  thorough
sympathy.  They  sorrowed  over  his  imprisonment,  they  sympathized  with  him  in  all
his  struggles  and  apologies  for  the  gospel.  The  hearts  in  Philippi  beat  in  unison  with
the  great  heart  in  Eome.  And  this  secured  their  spiritual  progress.  It  was  a  means  of
grace.  Paul's  experience  was  reproduced  in  them.  Sympathy  was  the  means  of  s.ino-
tiflcation.  It  is  so  always.  When  we  learn  to  "  weep  with  those  that  weep  "  and  to
"  rejoice  with  those  that  do  rejoice,"  we  get  a  wider  experience  than  is  possible  with
the  self-centred  and  self-contained.  Progress  in  all  the  elements  of  spiritual  power
must  result.

IV.  Paul  pbats  still  further  for  theib  symmetry  of  Christian  chabaoter.
(Vers.  9,  10.)  His  desire  is  that  they  may  grow  symmetrically.  Love  is  to  abound  in
knowledge  and  in  judgment ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  to  be  intelligent  and  discriminating,
so  that  they  may  test  the  things  that  are  excellent,  and  be  sincere  and  without  offence
till  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ.  I'he  symmetry  of  Christian  character  is  a  most  important
fact  of  experience.    The  graces  do  not  manifest  monstrosities.    They  grow  harmoniously,


ott.tl— 36.]  THU  fiPISTLE  TO  tUB  PHILIPPIANS.  23

Hence  it  is  the  desire  of  the  progressive  soul  that  others  may  experience  a  kindrerl
progress,  and  with  duly  balanced  powers  may  pass  onwards  towards  the  perfection
wliicli  is  to  synchronize  with  the  day  of  Jesus  Ohript.

V.  And  buoh  progress  implies  PRUiTPnLNBSS.  (Ver.  11.)  The  fruits  of  right-
eoii.«ness  are  what  God  looks  for.  He  plants  the  trees  of  righteousness  that  he  may
bo  glorified  in  their  fruitfulness.  His  garden  shall  yet  be  filkd  with  fruitful  trees.
Every  barren  curaberer  shall  yet  be  rooted  out,  that  its  place  may  be  duly  filled. — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  12 — 20. — The  gospel  promoted  hy  persecution.  Paul,  having  stated  the  sub-
stance of  his  intercession  for  the  Philippian  saints,  proceeds  to  show  how  his  apparently
unfiirtunate  imprisonment  was  being  providentially  overruled  for  what  they  had  so
much  at  heart,  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel.  It  is  most  instructive  to  notice  how  his
great  heart  transmutes  adversity  into  gold,  and  sees  encouragement  where  others  would
glean  only  despair.

I.  As  A   NOTABLE   PRISONER,  PaUL  WAS   DRAWING   THE   ATTENTION   OF   MANY   TO  THE

GOSPEL  OF  Christ  por  which  he  sdffbred.  (^'ers.  12,  13.)  Persecution  only  draws
attention  to  t!ie  objects  of  it.  The  Prjetorian  Guards  at  the  palace  and  many  otlier
individuals  had  their  attention  turned  to  the  cause  .for  which  Paul  suffered,  through
his  presence  as  the  prisoner  in  Rome.  In  no  way  could  the  world  better  advertise  the
Christian  cause.  In  fact,  persecution  empliasizes  any  cause.  It  drives  it  of  necessity
into  prominence.  On  the  other  hand,  the  gospel  shows  its  Divine  wisdom  by  its
tolerance.  For  while  the  gospel  has  an  intolerant  side  in  brooking  no  possible  rival,
it  lias  its  tolerant  side  in  refusin<;  to  use  force  and  in  charitably  claiming  those  not
agiinst  it  as  for  it.  Now,  in  this  abstinence  from  all  persecution,  there  is  in  the  Chris-
tian policy  the  subtlest  wisdom.  It  is  a  refusal  to  make  rival  systems  famous.  It  is
a  judicious  allowance  of  them  to  die  a  natural  death,  instead  of  resuscitating  them  by
emphatic  opposition.

II.  Paul's  imprisonment  led  to  increased  preaching  op  Christ.  (Vers.  14 — 18.)
This  happened  in  two  directions :  those  who  sympathized  with  Paul  were  led  to  show  a
bolder  front  and  fearlessly  to  preach  Christ ;  those  who  envied  him  and  tried  to  checkmate
him  hailed  his  imprisonment  as  their  opportunity,  and  preached  Christ  in  hope  of
vexing  him.  It  seems  at  first  a  strange  notion  of  the  gospel  being  faithfully  preached
from  such  a  motive.  But  we  must  remember  that  men  may  be  orthodox  as  a  matter
of  policy  and  for  party  purposes,  when  they  have  no  heart  in  the  substance  of  their
(jitliodoxy  at  all.  The  Judaizers,  therefore,  who  troubled  Paul  so  much  seem  to  have
taken  an  orthodox  "  fit "  when  he  got  imprisoned,  thinking  thereby  to  get  the  more
hold  over  his  converts.  But  Paul  rejoices  at  the  preaching  of  Christ,  even  though  some
of  the  preaching  is  from  party  motives.  He  knows  how  important  a  knowledge  of  that
dear  Name  is,  and  how  the  great  Spirit  can  acknowledge  an  enemy  as  an  instrument
juot  as  well  as  a  friend.  Let  the  knowledge  of  Christ  be  proiiagated  by  all  means.
Even  when  his  enemies  undertake  the  work,  let  us  rejoice  in  it,  for  souls  are  better  to
hear  truth  even  from  the  lips  of  the  poorest  partisans  than  not  to  hear  it  at  all.

III.  Paul's  s  a  notification  throhgh  the  process  was  assured.  (Ver.  19.)
Paul's  salvation,  like  ours,  is  a  continuous  process,  manifesting  its  reality  in  increasing
sanctification.  Now,  his  imprisonment  and  its  blessed  results  were  being  sanctified  to
him  through  the  intercessions  of  his  friends  at  Philippi  and  through  the  unfailing
su|.iply  of  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  blessed  Spirit  can  make  seeming  adversities
tc  be  glorious  sanctifications  for  his  people.  Paul  was  made  by  imprisonment  more
spiritual,  more  earnest,  more  faithful  to  his  Master.  The  prison  was  the  path  upwards
to  heaven.

IV.  His  confident  and  Chbist-glorifying  bearing  unto  the  end.  (Ver.  20.)
Paul  did  not  yet  know  the  issue  of  his  trial.  But  whether  he  went  to  the  block  or
regained  liberty,  Christ  would  be  magnified  by  the  courageous  bearing  of  his  servant.
So  that  he  saw  the  glory  of  the  Master  shining  clear  as  a  star  above  and  through  hie
bondage.  What  became  of  Paul  was  nothinj;  to  him  ;  but  what  the  world  wonld
think  of  Christ  was  all  in  all.  When  the  Lord  was  magnified,  all  was  indeed  well.
Paul's  poor  "  body  "  had  now  no  other  business  in  the  world  than  to  be  an  instrument
fur  the  magnifying  of  the  Master.  Let  it  be  crushed  or  regain  liberty,  it  would  in
patience  or  by  jerieyering  work  promote  the  glory  of  him  who  had  bought  it  and  th«


24  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [en.  1. 1— 3Q

epiiit  it  enshrined  with  his  blood.  The  nobility  and  magnanimity  of  the  apostle  in
this  passage  are  worthy  of  all  imitation  and  praise.  Such  a  spirit  deserves  to  succeed
iT  the  subjugation  of  the  world  for  Christ. — E.  M.  E.

Vers.  21 — 26. — Life  here  and  hereafter.  The  brave  apostle,  awaiting  the  slow  issue
of  his  case  at  Rome,  has  been  speaking  of  the  good  effect  of  his  imprisonment  upon  the
promulgation  of  the  gospel.  He  can  see  the  good  beneath  the  apparent  evil.  And  now
he  speaks  of  the  life  he  lives  on  earth  and  of  the  other  life  beyond  the  shadow  of  death.
Let  us  notice  the  lessons  as  tliey  are  set  before  us  here.

I.  Paul's  SELF-ABANDONMENT  TO  Christ.  (Ver.  21.)  He  surrendered  himself  in  a  spirit
of  entire  consecration  to  Je.sus,  that  he  might  do  as  he  pleased  with  him.  As  in  the
parallel  passage,  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ :  nevertheless  I  live ;  yet  not  I,  but  Christ
liveth  in  me"  (Gal.  ii.  20),  Paul's  life  was  one  of  inspiration.  Christ's  Spirit  etjteied
into  him  and  took  possession  of  it,  and  moulded  it  according  to  his  own  gracious  pur-
poses. Of  course,  Paul's  life  was  not  a  perfect  realization  of  this  inspiration,  but  it  was
an  approximate  realization.  "Ti  f]jv- signifies  here,"  says  Rilliet,  in  loco,  "  the  life  par
excellence — the  life  alone  worthy  of  this  name,  in  opposition  tori  Qv  iv  aapKl — this  life;
it  is  Chritt,  'O  Xpunhs,  ri  fm^  rj/j.wi'  (Col.  iii.  4).  But  the  Christian,  so  long  as  he  is  hero
below,  so  long  as  he  lives  in  the  fiesh,  possesses  Christ  only  incompletely,  and  has,  con-
sequently, only  an  imperfect  life  (cf.  2  Cor.  v.  6 — 8)."  Yet  there  is  nothing  that  helps
this  approximation  more  than  to  face  honestly  the  ideal  that  our  lives  ought  to  be  lives
abandoned  to  Christ  and  inspired  by  his  Holy  Spirit.

IL  Paul's  gain  after  death.  (Ver.  21.)  For  it  is  the  aorist  which  is  here  used,
rh  airoBaviiy,  and  SO  the  apostle's  meaning  manifestly  is,  to  use  Alford's  words,  that
"  the  state  after  death,  not  the  act  of  dying,"  is  the  gain.  Death  in  itself  is  no  gain,
but  it  leads  to  gain  liieyond  it.  The  imperfect  conditions  of  the  present  state  being
removed,  the  inspiration  will  have  freer  play,  and  all  the  gain  which  it  necessarily
entails.  We  can  only  feebly  image  the  glorious  condition  beyond  death  ;  but  to  escape
sin  and  be  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  Christ  must  be  gain  incalculable.

in.  Paul's  pause  upon  the  brink.  (Ver.  22.)  He  now  speaks  about  the  probability
of  his  abiding  some  time  longer  in  the  flesh,  and  he  shows  that,  it  the  fruit  of  his  work
dejiended  upon  this  continuance  in  life,  he  dare  not  complainii.gly  desire  to  be  released.
He  consequently  pauses  and  leaves  the  issue  in  the  higher  hands  of  God.  So  that,  as
one  writer  sententiously  puts  it,  he  was  "  willing  to  wait,  but  ready  to  go."  Bengel's
remark  is  also  most  beautiful:  "Alius  ex  opere  fructum  quserit;  Paulus  ipsum  opus
pro  fructu  habet."  Let  it  be  ours  not  to  seek  our  reward  out  of  our  work,  but  always
in  it  I

IV.  Paul's  equilibrium.  (Ver.  23.)  The  two  desires  which  were  so  nicely  balanced
were — to  depart  and  be  with  Cln-ist  which  is  very  far  better,  and  to  abide  in  the  flesh.  The
one  would  be  a  personal  experience  altogether  blissful ;  the  other  would  be  a  patience
still  fruitful  in  the  welfare  of  others.  Between  the  two  he  maintains  a  holy  equilibrium.
In  either  alternative  he  can  be  happy  with  his  Lord.

V.  Paul's  assurance  or  more  work  in  the  present  world.  (Vers.  24 — 26.)  Paul
did  not  hesitate  to  affirm  that  his  life  was  a  valuable  one  to  the  Philippian  Church.  There
was  no  false  modesty  about  the  man.  Moreover,  his  work  for  them  would  be  with  a
view  to  their  progress  and  joy  in  believing.  Especially  would  this  be  promoted  if  he
were  allowed  to  visit  the  Macedonian  Church  again.  If,  then,  this  be  the  first  Epistle  of
the  captivity,  as  Lig^tfoot  seems  to  think,  the  present  assurance  of  Paul  would  corre-
spond to  these  premonitions  nhowt  recovery,  \^■hich  the  Lord's  servants  often  have  ia
times  of  sickness.  Is  there  not  often  an  impression  that  a  sick  person  will  recover
because  of  his  own  confident  assurance  of  it  ?  And  when  this  is  allied  to  such  a  holy
and  wholesome  desire  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  Lord's  work  among  men  as  Paul  here
maiiifests,  it  becomes  intensely  beautiful.  We  thus  see  that  the  life  here  and  the  life
hereafter  only  tally  when  they  are  consecrated  to  Christ.  It  can  consequently  be  left
to  the  all-wise  Lord  whether  meauwhile  he  would  have  our  service  there  or  here.
Those  who  by  his  grace  are  willing  to  serve  him  with  their  whole  hearts  have  nothing

to  fear,  but  everything  to  hope  for,  in  the  unending  future  with  all  its  opportumtiec

B.  M.  K.


oaH— 30.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILTPPIANS.  26

Vers.  27 — 30. — The  gifts  of  faith  and  of  sufering.  Paul's  release  is  Btill  pro-
blematical J  it  is  needful,  therefore,  that  he  should  make  provision  in  case  he  should
still  be  absent  from  them.  He  calls  them  consequently  to  citizenship  (iroAiTe^eirfle)
worthy  of  the  gospel,  and  to  the  acceptance  of  those  gifts  which  that  citizenship
implies.

i.  Tub  Philippians  ake  to  be  faithful  citizens  op  God's  kingdom.  (Ver.  27.)
Now,  what  is  it  which  is  prized  in  God's  kingdom  as  of  prime  importance  ?  It  is  "  the
faith  of  the  gospel;"  that  is,  the  body  of  truth  of  which  the  gospel  is  the  expression.  It
is  not  for  territory  nor  for  treasure  God's  faithful  citizens  fight,  but  for  truth.  Hence  the
spirit  which  befits  the  kingdom  is  unity  in  struggling  for  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus,
When  the  Philippians  were  able  to  keep  this  belore  them  as  the  first  anxiety  and  con-
cern, then  would  they  be  acting  in  some  measure  worthy  of  their  high  calling.  And
after  all,  there  is  nothing  worth  fighting  for  but  truth.  Wars  of  aggrandizement  ai'e
now  discredited  throughout  the  civilized  world ;  and  some  pretext  related  to  truth  must
now  be  set  forth  as  the  ground  of  war.  If  the  citizens  of  this  world  and  its  kingdoms
are  brought  to  this,  the  citizens  of  the  nobler  kingdom  should  contend  earnestly  and
only  for  the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints.

II.  They  abb  to  be  fbaeless  citizens  as  well.  (Ver.  28.)  In  contending  for
truth  we  must  expect  opposition  ;  but  before  our  adversaries  «e  are  bound  to  be  fearless.
Courage  is  a  grace  peculiarly  fitted  for  God's  witnesses.  His  people  can  say  surely
"  Greater  is  he  that  is  for  us  than  all  they  that  be  aiiainst  us."  And  in  this  matter  of
Christian  courage  Paul  and  Silns  had  given  the  Philippians  excellent  example.  Impri-
soned on  the  occasion  of  their  first  visit,  they  had  aroused  the  attention  of  the  entire
prison  by  singing  praises  at  midnight  as  their  feet  were  fast  in  the  stocks.  And  in  this
more  serious  imprisonment  of  Paul  out  of  which  this  Epistle  came,  he  was  illustrating
that  heroism  which  he  looked  for  in  the  Philippians.  It  was  the  fearless  and  dauntless
citizen  of  God's  kingdom  who  was  calling  for  fearlessness  from  his  fellows.

III.  'J'hkib  feaulessnbss  would  be  a  token  at  once  of  thbib  own  salvation  and
OF  their  opponents'  doom.  (Ver.  28.)  The  courage  and  heroism  of  God's  witnesses  was
a  sign  of  coming  victory  and  salvation.  It  was  also  a  sign  of  defeat  and  doom  to  their
adversaries.  A  triumphant  spirit  often  carries  the  day  against  frarful  odds.  God
seems  to  give  his  people  assurance  of  victory,  and  then  to  make  that  assurance  a  most
powerful  element  in  the  issue.  The  dauntless  are  carried  through  discouragement  to
triumph.

IV.  Belibvinq  and  sufferinq  are  twin  gifts  or  God.  (Ver.  29.)  This  arrange-
ment brings  the  whole  cour.se  of  God's  administration  before  us.  He  gives  his  people
on  Christ's  behalf,  not  only  to  believe  on  him,  but  also  to  suffer  for  him.  It  is  sweet  to
think  of  faith  being  thus  the  pi/if  of  God.  The  suspicion  which  we  cherish  by  nature
gives  place  to  the  trust  which  comes  through  grace.  And  with  trust  there  comes
suffering.  It  is  a  most  precious  gift.  In  Miss  Procter's  '  Legends  and  Lyrics '  we  have
an  exquisite  piece  entitled  "  Treasures,"  where  the  following  verse  will  help  to  elucidate
this  passage:^

"  Suffering  tliat  I  dreaded,
Ignorant  of  lier  charms.
Laid  the  fair  child,  i'ity,
Smiling  in  my  arms."

v.  The  smiLAEiTT  of  experience  between  Paul  a»id  the  Philippians.  (Ver.  30.)
For  Paul's  experience  had  embraced  the  twin  gilts  too.  He  had  learned  to  believe  on
Christ  and  to  suffer  for  him.  There  had  nothing  happened  unto  him,  therefore,  but
that  which  is  common  to  men;  and  he  wishes  the  Philippians  to  appreciate  this.  Our
temptation  is  to  represent  our  trials  as  unparalleled.  The  truth  is  that  they  can  be
paralleled  and  exceeded  by  the  experience  in  the  next  house  or  next  street.  Paul  at
Philippi  and  Paul  at  Kome  presents  the  common  inheritance  of  faith  and  trial  which
the  people  of  God  everywhere  experience.  Let  us  consequently  take  kindly  to  what
Q«d  gives — lie  sends  us  trial  and  he  sends  us  faith  in  such  blessed  proportions  as  to
ensure  a  charactei  in  some  way  worthy  of  his  kingdom. — E.  M.  E.

Vers.  1,  2. — Introduction.  This  Epistle  of  Paul  breathes  throughout  the  tenderest
•ffection  and  most  passionate  lunging  toward  the  Philippians,    It  was  called  forth


26  teE  £t>lsrLE  To  TflE  PtTlLit'PlAKS.  toa.i.  1— SCi

by  a  token  of  their  affection  in  a  contribution  for  his  support  sent  by  Epaphro-
dilus.  It  is  pervailed  by  adeeper  tone  of  satisfaction  tiian  any  other  of  his  Ei;i»tlea,
It  is  characteristically  epistolary  in  its  freedom  of  plan  and  familial ity  of  expression.
Written  without  a  dogmatic  purpose,  there  is  one  important  doctrinal  passage  in  it;
a  d  there  is  a  breaking  off  to  warn  against  two  antagonistic  types  of  error — Judaic  for-
malism and  antinomian  licence.  With  all  that  was  commendable  in  the  Philip]iiaas,
there  was  something  of  the  spirit  of  rivalry  among  them.  The  counteiaccing  ot  this
gives,  in  several  places,  a  turn  to  the  thought.

I.  Address.  1.  The  writers.  "Paul  and  Timothy,  servants  of  Christ  Jesns."
The  Philippians  are  bo  loyal  to  Paul  that  he  does  not  need  to  make  use  of  his  official
designation.  He  associates  with  himself  Timothy,  as  both  of  them  standing  in  a
common  subordination  to  Christ  as  Saviour.  They  are  both  his  servants,  i.e.  bound  to
carry  out  the  ends  of  his  salvation.  Timothy  was  known  to  the  readers  of  this  Epistle,
as  having  assisted  in  the  foundation  of  their  Church  and  as  having  subs'-quently
visited  them.  From  the  natural  interest  he  thns  had  in  them  he  was  to  he  at  no
distant  period  Paul's  ambassador  for  the  purpose  of  inquiring  into  their  state.  There
can  be  no  doubt  that  Paul  is  properly  the  writer  of  the  Epistle ;  for,  in  the  third  verse,
I'imothy  is  lost  sight  of,  and,  when  he  is  afterward  referred  to,  it  is  in  the  third  person.
At  the  same  time,  'J'imothy  must  be  regarded  as  joining  with  Paul,  not  only  in  the
salutation,  but  in  the  whole  sentiment  of  the  E|jistle.  Written  down  by  him,  or  read
over  by  him  or  tp  him,  he  was  of  one  mind  with  Paul  in  every  expression  he  used  to
the  Philippian  Church.  2.  The  persons  addressed.  (1)  The  m'-mhers  of  the  Church.
"  To  all  the  saints  in  Christ  Jesus."  They  were  saints,  not  by  nature,  but  through  the
cleansing  efficacy  of  Christ's  blood.  They  were  saints,  not  so  much  in  actuality,  as  in
idea,  in  aspiration.  They  regarded  purity,  separation  from  the  world,  as  their  distinc-
tive badge.  They  were  like,  the  wearers  of  the  white  robes  in  the  temple,  appointed  to
dwell  under  the  Infinite  Purity.  They  might  not  be  all  genuine;  but  the  apostle
addresses  them  with  a  studied  universality  according  to  what  they  professed  lo  be.
Locality.  "Which  are  at  Philippi."  The  city  of  Philippi  \yas  situated  in  Macedonia,
on  the  borders  of  Thrace ;  it  derived  its  name  from  the  great  Philip  of  Macedon,  who,
about  B.C.  356,  founded  it  on  the  site  of  the  ancient  Crenides,  or  Wells.  The  phiin  on
which  it  was  situated  was  watered  by  the  Gangites,  a  tributary  of  the  Strymon.  1  n
the  battle  of  Philippi,  fought  in  b.o.  42,  between  Antony  and  Octavius  against  Brutus
and  Cassius,  the  fortunes  of  the  Roman  Republic  were  finally  lost,  and  the  place,  thus
made  memorable,  soon  afterwards  became  what  it  is  styled  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,
a  Roman  colony.  It  is  especially  memorable  for  the  Christian  Church  as  the  first  place
in  Europe  where  the  gospel  was  preached.  This  was  about  the  year  53,  in  the  course
of  Paul's  second  missionary  journey.  Brought  by  a  compulsion  from  "the  Spirit  ol
Jesus"  opposite  the  European  coast,  in  a  night  vision  there  appeared  to  Paul  a  man  of
Macedonia  beseeching  him,  and  saying,  "Come  over  into  Macedonia,  aud  help  us."
Without  delay,  he  crossed  the  sea,  and  from  the  port  of  Noapolis  pressed  on  to  Philippi.
On  the  sabbath  day  he  sought  the  Jewish  place  of  prayer,  which  was  without  the  gate
by  the  banks  of  the  Gangites;  and,  sitting  down,  he  addressed  the  assembled  women.
The  baptism  of  an  Asiatic  proselytess,  Lydia,  and  her  household  is  mentioned  as  the
first  triumph  of  the  gospel  on  European  ground.  The  first  European  converted  on
European  ground,  of  which  the  record  tells  us,  was  a  Python-possessed  slave-girl.
And  this  led  on  to  the  conversion  of  the  Roman  jailor.  Amid  a  storm  of  persecution
Paul  had  to  leave  Philippi ;  at  a  distance  of  five  years  he  paid  them  a  double  visit,  and
at  a  distance  of  ten  years  from  his  first  visit  he  writes  this  letter.  (2)  The  office-
hearers.  "With  the  bishops  and  deacons."  There  was  a  regularly  constituted  Church
at  Philippi.  Two  orders  of  office-bearers  are  mentioned.  The  deacons  who  attended
to  the  temporal  affairs  of  the  Church  are  included  in  the  salutation,  as  to  them  it  would
specially  fall  to  see  to  the  contribution.  The  retention  of  the  title  "bisliops"  in  the
Revised  translation  is  objectionable  on  the  ground  of  ambiguity.  No  one  imagines
that  within  ten  years  there  was  a  plurality  of  bishops,  as  a  third  order  of  office-bearers.
In  the  Christian  community  of  Philippi.

II.  The  salutation  (same  as  in  Ephesians).  1.  The  two  words  of  salutation.
"Grace  to  you  and  peace."  The  best  security  for  others  being  blessed  is  the  Divine
graciousness  which  makes  all  the  Divine  dealings  mean  peac ;.    2.  The  twofold  towce  tc


oto.tl— 30j  tHte  ElPlSTLte  TO  THE  ttllLTPlTANS.  ^1

which  we  look  in  salutation,  "  From  God  our  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."
The  Father  who  has  blessed  us  bless  them  too.  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  revealed  the
Father's  power  to  bless,  as  Lord  dispense  to  them  out  of  the  stores  in  his  Father's
house  as  he  has  dispensed  to  us. — E.  F.

Vers.  3 — 11. — Expression  of  interest.  I.  Thanksgivino.  1.  Whom  he  thanked.
"1  tliank  my  God."  As  it  was  in  connection  with  their  matters  that  he  thauked  God,
he  might  have  said,  "I  thank  your  God."  As  he  made  common  cause  with  them,  he
might  have  said,  "I  thank  our  God."  As  he  felt  personally  indebted  to  God  on  their
aocuuut,  what  he  says  is,  "I  thank  my  God."  2.  Upon  what  he  proceeded  in  thanks-
giving. "  Upon  all  my  remembrance  of  you."  This  was  a  gracious  word  with  wliich,
as  a  wise  overseer,  to  bespeak  a  hearing  from  them.  It  was  the  hijihest  praise  he  could
have  bestowed  upon  them.  His  relations  with  them  had  been  of  the  happiest  nature.
Not  a  hhadow  had  passed  over  their  intercourse.  There  was  nothing  in  their  past
history  as  a  Church  that  he  recalled  with  regretfulness.  His  whole  recollection  of
them  maile  him  thank  his  God.  3.  How  he  thanked  God.  "  Always  in  every  supplica-
tion of  mine  on  behalf  of  you  all  making  my  supplication  with  joy."  His  interest  in
them  carried  him  to  the  thrime  of  grace.  It  was  his  habit  to  pray  for  them,  as  for  all
the  Churches  he  had  founded.  He  had  a  means  of  reaching  them  through  heaven.  And
wh'enever  he  prayed  on  their  behalf  (and  this  was  a  care  which  came  upon  him  daily)
the  remembrance  of  them  called  forth  his  thanksgivings,  which  gave  a  tone  of  joy  to
his  prayers.  What  was  uniformly  in  his  i>rayers  could  not  but  come  out  in  his  Epistle.
And  so  it  has  been  remarked  by  Bengel,  "  The  sum  of  the  Epistle  is,  '  /  rejoice ;
rejoice  ye.' "  4.  For  what  particularly  he  thanked  God.  "  For  your  fellowship  in
fiutherance  of  the  gospel  from  the  first  day  until  now."  They  were  partners  with  him
fur  a  holy  end.  That  end  was  to  further  the  gospel.  They  could  not  accomplish  this
end  in  the  same  way  that  Paul  did.  But  they  could  contribute  for  his  support;  and,
thus  relieving  him  from  the  necessity  of  working  with  his  own  hands,  they  [)Ut  him  in
a  better  position  for  furthering  the  gospel.  They  also  helped  by  the  prayers  they
offered  up  to  God  on  his  behalf.  They  especially  hulped  in  what  they  evinced  in  their
lives  of  the  power  of  the  gospel.  That  was  putting  a  powerful  argument  into  the
mouth  of  the  apostle.  In  trying  to  persuade  others  he  could  point  to  what  the  gospel
had  done  for  them.  All  that  help  in  the  gospel  they  had  rendered  him  from  the  first
day  they  had  heard  until  then.  He  had  continually  been  held  up  by  them-  in  the
proclamatiou  of  the  !j;ospel.

ii.  Confident  hope.  1.  To  what  directed.  "  That  he  which  began  a  good  work
in  you  will  perfect  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  good  work  immediately
referred  to  was  co-operation  with  the  apostle  in  furthering  the  gospel.  But  the
language  is  general,  and  may  be  referred  to  the  work  of  trraoe  as  a  whole.  (I)  Sow
the  work  can  he  said  to  he  good,  (a)  It  is  a  work  wrought  in  us.  "  In  you,"  says  the
apostle.  There  is  a  work  to  be  wrought  on  external  nature.  We  are  to  subdue  the
earth,  according  to  the  primeval  command ;  we  are  to  turn  It  to  good  uses.  But  that
is  really  accidental,  relative  to  the  work  that  is  to  be  wrought  In  us.  What  is  essential
is  that  we,  the  workers,  the  subduers  of  the  earth,  should  be  in  our  normal  state.  And
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  is  what  will  be  looked  into  when  we  have  done  with  earth
and  all  its  works.  What  with  all  our  working  have  we  wrought  in  ourselves?  (6)  .'t
is  a  work  which  consists  in  giving  forms  of  goodness  to  our  nature.  A  man  of  cultivated
taste  can  make  the  bare  ground  assume  forms  of  beauty.  He  can  turn  it  into  a  garden
— the  surface  taken  advantage  of,  the  soil  highly  cultivated,  flowers  and  trees  disposed
of  with  reference  to  season,  colour,  size — all  so  arranged  as  to  be  pleasing  to  the  eye
So  our  nature  has  to  be  made  to  assume  Divine  forms.  It  has  to  be  charactered  by
God — its  peculiarities  preserved,  its  powers  cultivated,  all  so  ordered  under  his  plastic
hand  as  to  be  a  garden  in  which  he  can  take  delight,  (c)  It  is  a  work  which  consifts
in  the  emancipation  of  our  nature  from  evil  forms.  This  earth  of  ours  in  its  natural
state  needs  much  subduing  by  the  iron,  directed  by  the  mind  of  man.  Our  nature  is
to  be  compared  to  a  piece  of  ground  in  its  natural  wiUlness,  which  is  ill  to  subdue  to
usefulness  and  loveliness.  It  needs  much  subduing  by  the  grace  of  God,  that  it  may
be  delivered  from  the  evil  that  is  in  it,  while  brought  forth  into  all  goodness.  Our
mn&fi  need  to  be  delivered  from  vanity,  and  brought  into  captivity  to  Christ.    Our


28  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIA1J8.  [ch.  1. 1— 30

memories  need  to  be  delivered  from  treacherousneBS,  and  made  reliable  and  ready  in
the  service  of  Christ.  Our  affections  need  to  be  weaned  from  the  world,  and  set  on
Christ.  Our  consciences  need  to  be  delivered  from  searedness,  and  endued  with  ten«
derness.  Our  wills,  especially,  need  to  be  delivered  from  weakness,  and  endued  with
power.  It  is  throughout  a  work  of  liberation,  emancipation,  the  transforming  of  tha
waste  so  that—

"  Flowers  of  grace  in  freshness  start,
Where  onoe  the  weeds  of  error  grew."

(2)  How  God  can  he  taid  to  begin  the  good  work  in  us.  (a)  It  is  to  he  traced  to  the
Father's  love.  Take  one  who  has  experienced  something  of  the  "  good  work  "  in  his
heart — what  is  its  history?  If  it  is  traced  back  and  back,  its  beginnings  are  to  he
found  in  the  motions  of  the  Father's  love.  It  goes  further  back  than  even  the  Divine
counsels.  For  it  was  the  love  behind,  essentially  belonging  to  him  as  Father,  that
made  him  think  of  and  decree  our  salvation.  (6)  It  is  to  he  traced  to  the  work  of  the
Son.  This  is  not  going  so  far  back  as  the  Father's  counsels ;  it  is  rather  the  carrying
out  of  these  counsels.  The  work  of  Christ  ontside  of  us  is  the  reason  tuhy  the  good
work  can  go  forward  in  us.  The  Son  of  God,  coming  into  our  nature  and  grappling
with  all  the  difficulties  of  our  position,  obtained  for  us  redemptive  virtue.  That  is
the  decisive/act  to  which  the  good  work  in  us  is  to  be  traced  back,  just  as  the  healing
of  men's  bodies  of  old  was  to  be  traced  back  to  the  miraculous  virtue  that  was  iu  Christ.
(c)  It  is  to  he  traced  to  the  operations  of  the  Spirit.  This  is  God  coming  into  closest
contact  with  iis.  Left  to  ourselves  the  redemptive  work  of  Christ  would  have  been  a
dead  work.  But  it  was  followed  up  by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  coming  into  our  heart,  pro-
ducinc  in  us  the  desire  for  salvation,  holding  up  before  us  saving  merit,  saving  trutli.
And  the  good  work  in  us  is  to  be  traced  back  to  his  gracious  working.

"And  every  virtue  we  possess.
And  every  victory  won.
And  every  thought  of  holiness,
Are  his  alone."

(3)  Owr  ground  of  confidence  in  Ood  that  he  will  perfect  the  good  work  in  usi  Tk»
work  is  emphatically  God's.

"The  transformation  of  apostate  man
From  fool  to  wise,  from  earthly  to  Divine,
Is  work  for  him  that  maile  him."

(o)  We  confide  in  the  infinitude  of  the  Father's  love.  If  we  had  only  our  own  interest
in  our  salvation  to  look  to,  we  might  be  afraid  of  it  dying  out.  But  sooner  will  lighl
die  out  of  the  sun  than  love  die  out  of  the  heart  of  God.  And  we  have  that  inex-
tinguishable love  to  rely  upon  to  complete  our  salvation  for  us.  (6)  We  confide  in
the  infinitude  of  the  Saviour's  merit.  If  we  had  only  our  own  worthiness  to  think  of,
we  might  often  enuugh  hide  our  head  in  the  dust.  But  fuller  than  the  sea  is  of  water
is  Christ  of  merit.  And  infinitely  beyond  our  need  does  his  merit  extend.  And  to
kis  far-reaching  merit  can  we  look  for  the  completion  of  our  salvation,  (c)  We  confide
in  the  infinitude  of  the  Spirit's  power.  If  we  had  only  ourselves  to  look  to,  we  might
well  despair,  considering  the  elements  of  weakness,  of  fickleness,  that  are  in  our  hearts.
But  more  penetrating,  subduing  than  fire  is  the  working  of  the  Spirit.  And  when  we
are  ready  to  stand  aghast  at  the  evil  we  discover  in  our  hearts,  let  us  look  away  to  the
might  of  the  Spirit  that  can  infinitely  more  than  conquer  it  all.  (4)  Our  ground  of
confidence  in  Ood  especially  as  having  legun  the  good  work,  (a)  I/e  is  hound  hy  his
wisdom.  When  he  began  the  good  work  he  must  have  had  a  distinct  end  in  view.
And  he  must  have  known  all  the  difficulties  in  the  way  beforehand,  especially  the
badness  of  our  hearts.  In  the  knowledge  of  all  difficulties  he  must  have  seen  his  way
to  the  desired  end  all  dear.  To  begin  to  build  without  knowing  how  to  finish  is
foolishness,  with  which  only  man  is  chargeable.  There  are  no  half-finished  worlds  in
God's  universe.  (6)  ffe  is  bound  hy  his  faithfulness.  There  is  the  Old  Testament
promise,  "  For  the  Lord  God  is  a  sun  and  shield :  the  Lord  will  give  grace  and  glory :
no  good  thing  will  he  withhold  from  thera  that  walk  uprightly."  Such  a  word  as  this
is  encouraging:  "Simon,  Simon,  behold,  Satan  hath  desired  to  have  you,  that  he  may


CH.  I.  1—30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  29

sift  you  as  wheat :  but  I  hare  prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  fail  not."  And  the  very
fact  that  he  has  begun  a  go.iil  woik  ia  us,  apart  from  any  word  of  promise,  may  be
taken  as  a  pledge  tliat  he  will  see  to  it  heiag  completed.  Observt  the  nexus  of  our
experience.  It  is  when  we  have  experienced  something  of  the  good  work  in  us  that
we  can  assure  ourselves  in  God  that  he  will  complete  it.  We  have,  therefore,  in  the
first  place,  to  satisfy  ourselves  about  the  reality  of  our  experience.  Are  there  the  si-jna
of  a  good  work  begun  in  our  hearts  ?  Is  there  the  seeking  after  God  for  the  blessing  ?
Is  there  the  endeavour  to  do  the  Divine  will?  If  we  cannot  satisfy  ourselves,  wa  are
not  beyond  hope  while  we  can  say —

"Love  of  God,  bo  pure  aud  changeless;
Bliiod  of  Clirist,  so  rich  and  free ;
Grace  of  God,  so  strong  and  boundless.
Magnify  them  all  in  me —

Even  me,"

(5)  Th«  time  toward  which  we  look  for  the  completion  of  the  work.  He  says  not  "day  of
our  death ; "  fur,  though  it  is  practically  that  to  each  of  us,  yet  that  signifies  nothing  as
to  the  completion  of  tlie  work.  But  he  says  "day  of  Jesus  Christ,"  because  the  work  is
to  be  completed  in  connection  with  the  saving  power  of  Christ  upon  us ;  and  not  ouly
so,  but,  more  definitely,  in  connection  with  the  full  manif  station  of  the  saving  power  of
Christ  upon  us.  For,  as  is  said  in  Colossians,  "  When  Christ  who  is  our  Life  shall  be
manifested  [as  he  is  not  now  manifested],  then  shall  ye  also  with  him  be  manifested  in
glory."  2.  Its  Justification.  (1)  Love  resting  on  participation.  "  Even  as  it  is  right
!■  r  me  to  be  thus  minded  on  belialf  of  you  all,  because  I  have  you  in  my  heart,  inas-
much as,  biith  in  my  bonds  and  in  the  defence  and  confirmation  of  the  gospel,  ye  all  are
partakers  with  me  of  grace."  It  was  right  for  him  to  cherish  a  confident  hope  regarding
one  and  all  of  them,  because  he  felt  the  warmest  love  toward  them.  He  uSes  a  strong
expression — he  had  them  in  his  heart.  "Open  mv  heart,"  says  B.  Browning,  "and
you  will  see  graven  on  it, '  Italy.'"  So  on  the  opened  heart  of  the  apostle  to  this  hour  in
heaven  may  be  seen  graven  on  it,  among  other  names,  "  Philippi.  Grace  operated  in
them  as  it  did  in  him.  In  his  Jonds  they  helped  him  by  their  symiiathy  with  him.
In  his  exertions  for  the  gospel  they  also  helped  him.  When  he  stood  up  in  defemce  of
the  gospel,  before  heathen  magistrates  and  unbelieving  Jews,  he  was  emboldened  by  the
thought  of  their  unwavering  confidence  in  him.  And  when  he  was  engaged  in  confirma-
tion of  the  gospel  by  his  teaching  among  those  who  came  under  his  influence,  he  was
indebted  to  them  for  what  he  could  point  to  in  them  of  the  power  of  the  gospel,  and
especially  for  their  spontaneously  contributing  to  his  support.  They  were  thus  in  a
remarkable  manner  partners  with  him  in  grace.  And  as  he  hoped  for  himself,  so  as
confidently  did  he  hope  for  them,  that  there  would  be  a  completion  of  the  good  work
begun.  (2)  Love  going  out  in  longing.  "  For  God  is  my  witness,  how  I  long  after  you
all  in  the  tender  mercies  of  Christ  Jesus."  Love  longs  for  its  object.  He  could  call
God  to  witness  that  he  longed  eagerly  altfir  one  and  all  of  them.  This  was  not  merely
a  longing  to  be  prestnt  with  them,  but  a  longing  after  communion  with  them  in  the
Spirit  in  their  increasing  ap|iroximation  to  Christ.  For  he  longed  after  them  in
sympathy  with  Christ.  He  notes  i>  wonderful  identity;  it  was  as  though  Christ  were
yearning  in  him.  Christ,  in  Paul,  had  a  yearning  after  the  Philippian  community,
though  it  was  not  conspicuous  for  its  numbers,  and  had  only  been  ten  years  in  existence.
Dues  he  not  yearn  yet  after  Christian  societies,  however  humble,  and  through  Christian
hearte?

III.  Petition.  1.  For  increase  of  love,  associated  with  knowledge  and  discernment.
"  And  this  I  pray,  that  your  love  may  abound  yet  more  and  more  in  knowledge  and  all
discernment."  He  has  already  given  them  credit  for  love  in  its  manifestations.  He
here  assumes  that  their  love  abounded.  Still,  he  wished  higher  things  for  them  in  love.
Especially  did  he  wish  to  see  it  associated  with  knowledge  and  discernment.  The
former  points  more  to  fulness  of  contents ;  the  latter  more  to  quickness  of  perception.
The  former  is  used  generally ;  the  latter  distributively — all  discernment,  ».«.  every  act
of  the  spiritual  sense,  or  its  application  to  every  occasion.  We  need  not  wonder  that
love,  in  order  to  be  perfected,  needs  to  be  brought  under  the  influence  of  truth.  Love
is  regulated  by  truth.    In  proportion  to  its  force  it  is  apt  to  be  erratic.    We  need


30  THE   KPTSTLE  TO  THE    PHTT/rrTANS.  [ch.  L  1— 10

sometimes  to  drag  it  at  the  heels  of  duty.     We  need  to  keep  it  from  being  placed  on

unworthy  objrcts.  We  need  to  keep  it  from  seeking  worthy  objects  in  unworthy  ways.
Christ  needed  to  rebulje  Peter's  love  to  him,  which  mistakenly  forbade  him  to  die.
Love  is  nourished  by  truth.  With  imperfect  knowledge  our  luve  must  be  starved.
We  need  to  have  the  field  of  truth  ever  opened  up  belbre  us,  that  love  may  be  fed.
We  must  see  beauty  in  Christ  in  order  that  we  may  desire  him.  The  apostle  then
prayed  for  the  Philippiaus,  that  they  nii^ht  have  an  enlarged  knowledge  and  a  finer
perception,  in  order  that  their  hearts  might  be  more  warmly  affected,  especially  toward
him  who  is  the  altogether  Lovely.  2.  Aim  in  the  elements  associated  with  luve.  "That
ye  may  approve  the  things  that  are  excellent."  Some  translate,  "  That  ye  may  prt've
the  things  that  differ."  But  the  apostle  is  a  point  beyond  that.  The  object  of  eularg.  d
knowledge  and  a  fine  spiritual  sense  is  that  love  may  be  combined  with  the  approba-
tion of  excellent  tilings,  or  things  that  stand  out  amongst  the  good.  And  is  that  nut
necessary  to  a  rounded  character?  Is  it  not  necessary  in  a  world  like  this,  if  love
would  have  its  virgin  purity  and  due  warmth,  that  we  should  have  a  l;een  eye  to  detect
the  spurious,  the  base,  that  we  should  set  aside  for  our  highest  approbation  the  things
that  tower  up  among  the  good?  3.  Ultimate  design.  (I)  Inward  state.  "That  ye
may  be  sincere  and  void  of  offence  unto  the  day  of  Christ."  "  Sincere,"  in  its  deiivation
points  to  honey  without  any  admixture  of  wax.  So  are  we  to  have  heavenly  excellence
without  any  admixture  of  eavthliness.  Unmixed  in  our  motives  (which  is  a  condition
of  excellence),  we  shall  not  be  chargeable  with  giving  others  offence,  or  putting  obstacles
in  their  way.  Especially  in  view  of  the  day  of  Christ  does  it  become  us  to  see  that
we  are  clear  fiom  the  blood  of  all  men.  (2)  Outward  results.  "Being  filled  with  the
fiiiits  of  rigliteousness,  which  are  through  Jesus  Christ,  unto  the  glory  and  praise  of
God."  Righttiiusness  is  the  holy  habit  already  presupposed.  He  refers  to  it  now  in
connection  wiih  its  fruits.  These  Philippians  had  already  exhibited  good  fruits  in
what  they  ha.l  done  for  the. furtherance  of  the  gospel.  He  wished  to  see  the  idea  of
fruitfulness  fully  realizeil.  Let  them  be  like  trees  laden  with  golden  fruit,  that  fruit
[iroduced  through  the  inflowing  of  the  virtue  of  Christ-like  sap  into  the  tree,  and  tend-
ing to  the  glory  of  God  and  its  due  recognition. — B.  F.

Vers.  12 — 30. — Thoughts  suggested  hy  his  captivity.  I.  Proqeess  of  the  gospbi,  in
I'oME.  1.  Qenerally.  "  Now  I  would  liave  you  know,  brethren,  that  the  things  which
happened  imto  me  have  fallen  out  rather  unto  the  progress  of  the  gospel."  It  might
have  been  expected  that  his  imprisonment,  which  is  principally  referred  to,  would  have
fallen  out  to  the  hindrance  of  the  gospel.  But  Paul  would  have  his  Philippian  brethren
know,  for  their  comfort  and  confirmation,  that,  though  to  some  extent  it  had  been  a
disadvantage,  yet  to  a  greater  extent  it  had  been  an  advantage.  It  was  with  it  as  uiih
the  early  persecutions  as  a  whole.  They  were  intended  by  the  Church's  enemies  to  be
for  its  destiuctiun ;  but  Divine  wisdom  overruled  them  for  its  increase.  The  scattering
of  the  disciples  brought  about  the  fulfilment  of  tlie  prophecy  in  Daniel,  "Many  shall  run
to  and  fro,  and  knowledge  shall  be  increased."  The  imprisonment  of  the  ark  was  the
fall  of  Dagon.  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  was  the  seed  of  the  Church.  2.  In  two  par-
ticulars. (I)  Increased  publicity.  "Ho  that  my  bonds  became  manifest  in  Christ
throughout  tlie  whole  Prajtorian  Guard,  and  to  all  the  rest."  It  was  by  a  singular  com-
bination of  circumstances  that  this  was  brought  about.  His  adversaries  would  have
liked  to  have  wreaked  their  vengeance  upon  him  in  Palestine.  But,  asserting  his  rights
as  a  Roman  citizen  in  appealing  to  Cajsar,  he  was  delivered  out  of  their  hands.  Taken
to  Eome,  which  he  may  have  had  in  view  in  his  appeal — for  he  had  a  desire  to  see
Rome — his  trial  there  was  long  delayed.  And  while  lie  was  awaiting  his  trial,  he  was
not  subjected  to  the  worst  form  of  imprisonment — confined  in  a  dungeon  with  his  feet
fast  in  the  stocks,  as  had  been  the  case  with  him  in  Pliili|)pi.  Nor  was  he  subjected  lo
the  mildest  form — allowed  to  go  about,  on  getting  a  friend  to  answer  for  his  appearance.
But  he  was  subjected  to  an  intermediate  form,  which  was  known  as  military  imprison-
ment. He  was  under  the  charge  of  the  prefect  of  the  Prajtorians,  or  commander  of  the
imperial  regiments,  who  allowed  him  to  dwell  in  his  own  hired  house,  with  complete
freedom  of  access  to  him,  but  ap|ointi;d  him  to  be  chained  day  and  night  to  a  Praetorian
soldier,  who  was  res|  onsible  for  his  safe  keeping.  One  Prsetorian  relieving  another,
the  »|)OStle  would  sopn  be  brought  into  contact  v.ith  niauy  of  their  number,  who  wo<vl<i


OH.  1.  1—30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   PHILIPPIANS.  31

Bpeak  of  him  to  their  companions,  so  that  it  would  become  literally  true  that  his  honds
weie  raauilest  throughout  the  whole  Prjetorian  Guard.  And  not  only  were  they  mani-
fest, but  they  were  manifest  in  Christ,  i.e.  as  endured  in  the  service  of  Christ,  who  thus
became  linown  to  the  soldiers,  in  the  way  set  forth  by  Paul  in  his  teaching,  as  the  Son
of  God  who  died  for  the  salvation  of  all  men,  and  rose  from  the  dead  to  sit  at  the  right
hand  of  God,  and  to  be  the  future  Judge  of  all  men.  And  not  only  were  his  bonds
manifest  in  Christ  throughout  the  whole  Prsetorian  Guard,  but  it  is  added,  indefinitely,
"and  to  all  the  rest."  That  is  to  say,  thiough  Praetorians  and  others,  many  were
induced  to  pay  a  visit  to  Paul,  and  to  hear  from  him  an  exposition  of  gospel  doctrine,
according  to  the  concluding  words  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  "  And  he  abode  two
whole  years  in  his  own  hired  dwelling,  and  received  all  that  went  in  unto  him,  preach-
ing the  kingdom  of  God,  and  teiicliing  the  things  &  ncerning  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with
all  boldness,  none  forbidding  hira."  Thus,  while  Paul's  enemies  got  his  mouth  stopiied
in  Judaaa,  they  nnwittinu;ly  became  the  occasion  of  his  niouth  being  opened  in  the  city
that  commanded  the  world.  (2)  Increased  courage  in  his  companions.  "And  that
most  of  the  brethren  in  the  Lord,  being  confident  through  my  boi  ds,  are  more  abun-
dantly bold  to  speak  the  word  of  God  without  fear."  The  sphere  of  Paul's  personal
activity  was  very  large,  considering  that  he  was  a  prisoner.  It  was  circumscribed  in  so
far  as  he  was  not  free  to  go  IVom  place  to  place  througliout  the  city.  His  comiianions
made  up  for  this  by  being  feet  for  him  to  places  whi-re  he  could  not  go.  They  fulfilled
for  him  the  word,  "How  beautiful  are  the  feet  of  them  that  bring  glad  tidings  of  gond
tilings ! "  This  was  true  of  most  of  the  brethren  in  the  Lord.  He  excepts  a  fow  who,
from  their  general  character,  were  entitled  to  be  called  brethren  in  the  Lord,  but  who
had  apparently  yieldc  d  to  the  influence  of  fear.  Of  the  most  of  those  to  whom  he  could
hold  out  the  hand  of  brotherhood,  he  could  say,  to  their  honour,  that  they  got  con-
fidence through  his  bonds.  The  natural  effect  of  these  bonds  was  to  teriify  them,  as
showing  them  what  they  might  meet  in  the  service  of  Christ.  But  Divine  grace  ma'la
them  to  act  contrary  to  their  nature,  and  to  be  rather  the  means  of  imparting  courage.
There  is  an  accumulation  of  language  pointing  to  imparted  courage.  They  were  "moi-e
abundantly  bold  to  speak  the  word  of  God,"  i.e.  than  if  Paul  had  not  been  in  bonds.
When  their  leader  was  bound  they  felt  that,  more  devolved  upon  them.  They  were
"  more  abundantly  bold  to  speak  the  word  of  God  without  fear."  They  were  raised
above  thinking  of  their  own  safety  ;  they  thought  only  of  the  word  of  God  being,  in  all
suitable  places  and  in  all  suitable  forms,  proclaimed.  Thus,  directly  and  indirectly,  was
the  apostle's  imprisonment,  against  the  intentions  of  his  enemies,  a  powerful  instrument
in  the  hand  of  God  in  ad  vancing  Christianity  in  Rome.  3.  More  detailed  staiement  in  con-
nection with  the  second  particular.  "  Some  indeed  preach  Christ  even  of  envy  ami  strife;
and  some  also  of  good  will :  the  one  do  it  of  love,  knowing  that  I  am  set  for  the  defence
of  the  gospel :  but  the  other  proclaim  Christ  of  faction,  not  sincerely,  thinking  to  raise  up
affliction  for  me  in  my  bonds."  The  first-mentioned  class  here  is  not  to  be  identified
with  the  minority  of  the  verse  just  considered.  For  they  could  not  be  characterized  as
brethren  in  the  Lord,  and  then  as  insincere.  But  the  general  class  of  those  who  spoke
the  word  being  suggested,  we  are  told  of  some  of  them  that  they  were  actuated  with
unfriendly  feelings  towards  Paul,  and  of  others  of  them  that  they  were  aetuaied  with
friendly  feelings.  It  showed  the  strength  of  the  gospel  movement  in  Rome,  that  it  dr.  w
into  it  even  those  who  were  not  friendly  to  Paul.  Their  first  feeling  was  that  of  envy.
Who  would  have  thought  of  Paul  becoming  an  object  of  envy  in  his  bonds  ?  Yet  so  it
was,  to  the  praise  of  an  all-wise  God,  he  conducted  a  movement  in  Rome  from  his  very
priso!',  personally  and  by  his  agents,  with  so  much  success  that  some  were  drawn  into
the  movement  from  very  envy  toward  him.  Their  further  feeling  was  that  oi  mischief.
As  Satan,  envious  of  our  first  parents,  desired  to  destroy  their  bliss  by  introducing  sin,
80  they,  filled  with  envy  because  of  the  (iood  movement  carried  on  by  Paul,  desired  to
destroy  it  by  introducing  division.  To  this  badness  of  motive  they  did  not  add  badness
ol  doctrine.  If  they  were  Judaists  at  heart,  they  did  not  put  ibiward  Judaism  in  their
teaching.  That  would  have  been  to  have  defeated  their  ends,  in  view  of  the  strong
Christian  character  of  the  movement.  No,  they  were  more  cunning.  They  were  false
prophets,  inwardly  ravening  wolves,  but  they  knew  to  appear  in  sheep's  clothing.  They
preached  Christ,  as  the  others  preached  Christ.  They  were  Pauline  in  their  doctrine;
bijt  i%  was  to  gain  influence,  in  ofder  to  use  it  for  the  subverting  of  Pa^uL    The  othet


82  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  1. 1—30.

class  mentioned  here  is  to  be  identified  with  the  majovity  previously  mentioned.    They
were  his  brethren  in  the  Lord,  anil  they  were  brotherly  toward  him.     Tlreir  feeling  was
tliat  oi good  will.     And,  loving  Paul  and  sym[iathiziug  with  liim  in  his  strivings,  they
preached  Christ.     Talcing  tlie  two  classes  in  an  inverted  order,  of  the  latter  he  now
says  that  they  preached  Christ  of  love.     As  love  is  the  great  moving  cause  in  God,  so
it  was  in  them  as  under  his  iiifluence.    Love  worked  in  them,  along  with  the  knowledge
of  the  position  for  which  Paul  was  destined.     He  was  set  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel.
He  was  appointed  to  make  a  stand  against  worldly  powers,  to  bear  the  brunt  of  their
opposition  to  Christ.     It  was  a  perilous  position,  requiring  extraordinary  courage,  and
its  perilousness  was  not  yet  past;  but  they  were  willing  to  subsirve  him  in  it,  in  cheer-
ing his  heart  by  the  preaching  of  Christ.     Turning  now  to  the  first  class,  he  declares
that  their  feeling  was  a  spirit  of  faction,  such  as  rules  only  in  unregenerate  hearts.
They  did  not  preach  Christ  sincerely,^  i.e,  from  love  for  him,  or  desir'e  to  extend  the
knowledge  of  his  Name.    But  what  moved  them  to  preach  Christ,  or  rather — for  another
word  is  now  used  with  a  slight  change  in  meaning — to  make  Christ  fully  known,  was
the  thought  (not  knowledge,  as  in  the  previous  clause,  and  the  apostle  seems  to  indicate
that  it  was  nothing  more  than  a  thought)  that  it  would  never  be  realized — the  thought
of  raising  up  affliction  for  him  in  his  bonds,  apparently  by  undermining  his  influence
and  forming  an  antagonistic  party.     4.  Feelings  of  the  apostle  in  view  of  luhat  has  been
stated.     (1)   So  far  as  Christ  was  concerned.    "  What  then  ?  only  that  in  every  way,
whether  in  pretence  or  in  truth,  Christ  is  proclaimed ;  and  therein  I  rejoice,  yea,  and
will  rejoice."     Had  the  persons  last  referred  to  put  forward  Judaism,  then  he  would
have  been  bound  to  have  opposed  to  it  the  true  gospel.    But  as  they  concealed  their
real  purinise,  viz.  to  counterwork  Paul  under  the  cloak  of  proclaiming  Christ,  he  was
not  dis|puaed  to  join  issue  with  them.    Nay,  in  the  fact  that,  however  bad  their  motive,
the  knowledge  of  Christ  was  by  them  extended,  he  found  cause  for  rejoicing.     And  in
the  extended  knowledge  of  Christ,  however  brought  about,  he  was  determined  to  rejoice.
Let  all  false  and  true  alike  go  on  proolainaing  Christ ;  it  would  rejoice  his  heart.    (2)
As  far  as  he  was  personally  concerned,     (a)  Assurance  that  it  would  result  in  good  to
him.    "  For  I  know  that  this  shall  turn  to  my  salvation,  through  your  su|)plication  and
the  supply  of  the  S|)irit  of  Jesus  Christ."    The  apostle  seems  to  have  in  view  the  whole
state  of  matters  described.    His  imprisonment  is  in  the  background,  and  in  the  fore-
ground this  on  which  he  has  been  dwelling,  that  there  were  around  him  in  his  imprison-
ment many  who  preached  Christ  from  friendly  feelings  toward  him,  but  some  also  who
made  the  preaching  of  Christ  only  a  cloak  for  designs  against  him.     He  knew — liis
tone  is  that  of  certainty — that  this  would  turn  differently  from  what  it  was  in  part
intended  to  do,  to  his  highest  good.     But  they  must  give  him  their   prayers.     He
needed  them  in  the  critical  position  in  which  he  was  placed.     Yes,  Grod,  who  knew  all
the  movements  that  affected  him,  and  could  counterwork  all  the  designs  of  his  enemies,
must  extend  his  help.     He  must  especially,  through  their  prayers  for  this,  supply  the
Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ.    Then  would  he  be  able  to  act,  even  as  Christ  acted,  so  that  all
that  happened  to  him  would  turn — though  that  might  not  be  its  nature — to  his  good.
(6)   Hopefulness  as  to  his  accomplishing  his  destiny.    "According   to   my   earnest
expectation  and  hope,  that  in  nothing  shall  I  be  put  to  shame,  but  that  with  all  boldness,
as  always,  so  now  also  Christ  shall  be  magnified  in  my  body,  whether  by.  life,  or  by
death."    God  had  wrought  for  him  in  the  past,  and  so  he  was  not  without  hope  for  the
future.   Nay,  he  had  an  earnest  expectation  and  hope.   His  eye,  taken  off  everything  else,
was  strained  toward  this,  that  in  nothing  he  should  be  put  to  shame,  in  not  exhibiting
the  proper  spirit  or  carrying  out  his  proper  destiny.     The  proper  spirit  for  his  circum-
stances was  boldness.     God  had  always  enabled  him  to  be  bold  in  the  past;  he  would
not  allow  him  to  be  faint-hearted  now,  when  he  was  looking  forward  to  his  trial.     And
his  proper  destiny,  as  he  conceived  it,  was  this,  that  Christ  should  be  magnified  in  his
body,  whether  that  body  should  be  preserved  alive  for  the  future  service  of  the  Master,
or  whether  it  should  be  given  up  in  martyrdom.     Thus  through  one  instrumentality
viz.  Paul's  imprisonment,  it  was  true,  that  God  wrought  various  ends.    Let  us,  even
when  we  do  not  see  what  he  is  doing,  trust  in  him  as  all-wise.     "  What  I  do  thou
knowest  not  now,  but  thou  shalt  know  hereafter."    The  forces  of  evil  may  seem  to  hold
the  ('hur'ch  in  imprisonment ;  but  let  us  trust  that  from  the  imprisoned  Church,  made
to  feel  the  cruel  hand  of  worldliness  and  scepticism,  there  shall  go  forth  a  wider,  mora


OH.  1. 1—30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  88

glorious  proclamation  of  Christ,  as  alone  meeting  the  wants  of  men.  And  let  ns
trust,  too,  that  the  Church  shull  come  forth  purified,  saved,  and  more  hopeful  against
the  forces  of  evil.  And  if  we  feel  individually  as  in  a  prison-house,  from  evil  without
or  within,  let  us  look  to  the  all-wise  God  to  make  our  prison-house  the  means  of
Christ  being  better  known,  and  of  our  souls  being  blessed  with  more  of  the  elements
of  salvation,  and  with  more  hopefulness  of  accomplisliing  our  destiny  to  the  glory  of
Christ.

II.  He  calmly  contemplates  the  question  op  life  or  death.  1.  He  feds  that
the  advantage  to  himself  is  in  dying.  (1)  He  has  made  dhrist  the  end  of  his  life.  "  For
to  me  to  live  is  Christ."  (a)  What  it  is  to  ,nake  Christ  the  end  of  our  life.  It  is  to
make  everything  a  means  toward  the  advuncemrnt  of  the  glory  of  Christ.  This  is  the
aspect  in  wliich  it  is  regarded  in  the  context,  and  to  which  the  connecting  word  refers
us.  It  was  the  ambition  of  the  apostle  that  Christ  should  be  magnified  in  his  body
■  by  life  or  by  death.  We  are  to  seek  nearer  ends,  such  as  self-preservation,  proficiency
in  our  earthly  calling,  but  not  as  ends  in  themselves.  There  is  only  one  absolute  end,
and  that  is  Ciirist.  Everything  is  to  be  set  aside  as  useless,  impertinent,  which
cannot  be  directed  to  Christ.  Even  a  life  devoted  to  science,  to  philanihropy,  must  be
rejected  as  unworthy,  unless  it  is  humbly  lived  for  Christ.  All  our  efforts,  as  all  our
prayers,  must  be  In  his  Name,  all  the  fruits  of  our  life  we  must  lay  at  his  feet.  We
have  to  plan  our  lives  differently  ;  for  that  is  dependent  on  our  natural  capacities  and
on  our  circumstances ;  but  there  is  to  be  this  unity  in  them  all,  that  they  are  to  be
planned  so  that  they  shall  bring  the  largest  revenue  of  glory  to  Christ.  Let  us,  then,
have  cur  end  clearly  in  view,  and  let  us  pursue  it  intelligently,  and  with  all  the
simplicity  and  abandonment  with  which  men  of  the  world  sometimes  pursue  their  ends.
(6)  Why  Christ  is  the  end  of  our  life.  It  was  Christ  who  was  the  reason  for  our  being
originally  brougtit  into  existence.  And  as  we  came  from  his  hand  (for  by  him,  as
well  as  for  him,  were  all  things  made)  we  were  rich  in  opportunity.  By  sin,  however,
our  existence  became  so  heavily  weighted,  that,  left  to  ourselves,  it  would  have  been
better  if  we  had  not  been  bom.  We  owe  it  to  Christ  that,  by  coming  into  our  natuie
and  dying  for  us,  he  has  made  our  life  worth  living.  He  has  redeemed  it  from  the
disability  of  sin,  and  has  made  it  rich  in  the  opportunity  of  everlasting  glory.  And  on
account  of  what  he  has  done  for  us,  he  is  entitleil  to  be  the  end  of  our  life,  (c)  How
Christ  is  fitted  to  he  the  end  of  our  life,  (o)  He  fllls  the  imagination.  In  him  we
have  One  to  liVe  for,  who  combines  in  his  character  every  excellence,  and  in  the  super-
lative degree,  who  leaves  every  other  immeasurably  behind,  who  towers  high  above  the
highest  flittht  of  the  strongest  imagination.  And  while  the  story  of  his  life  is  more
wonderful  than  is  to  be  found  in  romance,  it  has  ail  the  charm  of  reality.  (j8)  He
appeals  to  the  heart.  Love  is  the  great  argument  by  which  he  makes  his  appeal  to  us.
He  goes  down  to  the  lowest  depths  for  us,  and  then,  coming  up,  he  beseeches  us  by  his
tears  and  agonies.  In  life's  trials,  from  his  own  txperience  of  them,  he  encourages
us  and  beckons  us  on :  "  In  the  world  ye  have  tribulation :  but  be  of  good  cheer ;  I
have  overcome  the  world."  (y)  He  calls  forth  the  energies.  Worldly  objects  call  forth
the  energies  of  men.  "  Fame  is  the  spur  that  the  clear  spirit  doth  raise  (that  last
infirmity°of  noble  minds)  to  scorn  delights  and  live  laborious  days."  To  have  a  loved
one  to  labour  for  has  been  the  spur  to  many  a  man's  energies,  which  otherwise  would
have  flagged.  It  is  the  glory  of  Christ  that,  though  he  is  viewless,  he  calls  forth  our
energies  purely,  equally,  in  the  highest  degree,  with  the  greatest  pleasureableness.  PhuI
tells"us  that  Christ  was  the  end  of  his  life.  When  he  was  thirty  years  of  age,  he
suddenly  discovered  that  he  had  been  entirely  mistaken  in  the  end  of  his  life,  and
that  he  had  lived  all  these  years  to  no  purpose.  Then,  in  a  miraculous  manner,
the  claims  of  Christ  asserted  their  power  over  him,  and  from  that  point  the  crucified
One  became  the  magnet  of  his  course.  To  him  to  live  was  Christ.  Grasping  the
plan  of  his  life,  he  marie  everything  subservient  to  the  magnifying  of  the  Saviour,
in  the  making  of  him  known.  It  was  Christ  who  ever  came  into  the  study  of  his
imagination.  It  was  Christ  whose  Name  was  branded  into  his  heart.  It  was  his
unseen  Saviour  who  drew  forth  from  him  a  power  of  work  beyond  what  has  ever  been
witnessed.  (2)  Having  made  Christ  the  end  of  life,  the  advantage  to  himsdf  is  in
dying.  "  And  to  die  is  gain."  To  die  involves  great  loss.  It  involves  the  loss  of  all
gratification  through  the  senses,  the  loss  of  all  earthly  possessioDg,  the  loss  of  all

PHILIPPIAN8.  ■


34  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [ch.  i,  1— 30.

earthly  friends.  When  the  apostle,  then,  says  that  to  die  is  gain,  he  must  mean  that
what  is  gained  by  death  more  than  counterbalances  the  loss.  The  result,  when  ^urery-
thing  is  computed,  is  not  loss;  it  is  gain.  He  does  not  tell  us  how  much  gain  it  is;
but  he  uses  the  word  with  a  certain  absoluteness.  It  is  not  a  mere  slight  excess  of
gain  over  loss;  but  it  is  gain  without  mention  of  limitation.  It  is  gain  such  as
swallows  up  the  sense  of  loss.  This  is  conditional  on  our  having  made  Christ  our
end.  K  we  have  made  any  worldly  object  our  final  end,  then  to  die  is  loss,  and  with
a  certain  absoluteness  of  meaning.  It  is  total  earthly  loss  without  any  gain  that  can
be  set  against  it  in  the  next  world.  It  is  what  Christ  calls  the  loss  of  the  sout  It  is
the  loss  of  the  great  end  and  joy  of  existence.  But  if  we  have  made  Christ  the  end
of  our  life,  then  to  die  is  to  have  succeeded  in  life.  It  is  to  have  been  climbing  the
mountain  and  to  have  gained  the  summit.  It  is  to  have  been  contending  in  the
arena  and  to  have  gained  the  prize.  It  is  to  have  been  living  for  Christ  and  to
have  come  to  Christ  as  otir  supreme  Reward.  2.  The  consideration  of  advantage
to  others  by  his  continuing  in  life  makes  him  undecided.  "But  if  to  live  in  the
flesh, — if  this  is  the  fruit  of  my  work,  then  what  I  shall  choose  I  wot  not.  But  I  am
in  a  strait  betwixt  the  two,  having  the  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ;  for
it  is  very  far  better."  He  has  shown  a  leaning  to  the  alternative  of  dying.  But  had
the  other  alternative,  viz.  livihg  in  the  flesh,  no  hold  upon  him?  How  did  it
stand  related  to  his  work,  i.e.  the  work  given  him  on  earth  to  do?  Had  he  yet
accomplished  all  the  good  to  others  that  was  intended  by  his  labours?  Let  it  be
Bupposed  that  his  living  in  the  flesh  was  the  condition  of  carrying  out  his  life-task  in
its  fruitfulness  to  others,  then  he  felt  at  a  loss  which  alternative  to  choose.  He  was  ia
a  strait  betwixt  the  two.  He  felt  the  obligation  of  finishing  his  life-work  with  all  the
good  that  might  result  from  it  to  others.  But  he  felt,  on  the  other  hand,  a  desire  to
depart  and  be  with  Christ,  which  was  very  far  better.  Let  the  form  of  the  desire  be
noted.  He  had  a  desire  to  depart.  The  reference  is  to  breaking  up  a  camp.  Our  body  is
the  earthly  tabernacle  in  which  we  live.  We  have  a  natural  aversion  to  break  up  our
earthly  encampment.  We  become  attached  to  our  dwelling  and  its  surroundings,  even
by  long  use.  The  apostle  had  triumphed  over  this,  so  as  even  to  desire  to  break  up  his
earthly  encampment.  Severe  or  long-continued  sickness  may  bring  on  the  desire  for
death.  "  As  a  servant,"  says  Job,  "  earnestly  desireth  the  shadow,  and  as  an  hireling
looketh  for  the  reward  of  his  work :  so  am  I  made  to  possess  months  of  vanity,  and
wearisome  nights  are  appointed  to  me.  When  I  lie  down,  I  say.  When  shall  I  arise,
and  the  night  be  gone?  and  I  am  full  of  tossings  to  and  fro  until  the  dawning  of  the
day."  Old  age  may  make  us  feel  that  we  are  becoming  unfitted  for  life.  "  I  am  this
day  fourscore  years  old:  ...  can  I  hear  any  more  the  voice  of  singing  men  and  singing
women  ?  "  Or  our  uncongenial  surroundings  may  make  us  sigh  for  a  change.  "  Woe
is  me,  that  I  sojourn  in  Mesech,  that  I  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Eedar  I "  What  had
principally  influence  with  the  apostle  was  the  attraction  of  the  life  beyond.  The
earthly  breaking  up,  or  what  he  elsewhere  calls  his  absence  from  the  body,  would  be
his  presence  with  the  Lord.  He  felt  drawn  to  the  Lord,  with  whom  he  had  vital
union  and  communion,  and  to  the  invisible  world  over  which  he  presided,  and  to  the
people  who  were  tliere  hajjpy  with  him.  He  felt  that  to  have  face-to-face  and
affectionate  intercourse  with  him,  to  have  a  new  comprehension  of  his  mind  and  a
new  reception  of  his  Spirit,  was  better  than  being  here.  It  was  far  better.  Nay,  he
uses  a  triple  comparative,  and  his  language,  deliberately  chosen,  is,  that  it  is  "  very  far
better."  It  is  to  have  Christ  in  his  incomparable  worth  and  glory  disclosed  to  us  and
enjoyed  by  us  as  he  cannot  be  here.  3.  The  consideration  of  advantage  especially  to
the  Fhilippians  by  his  continuing  in  life  ultimately  prevails  with  him.  "  Yet  to  abide
in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  for  your  sake.  And  having  this  confidence,  I  know  that  I
shall  abide,  yea,  and  abide  with  you  all."  While  he  had  a  strong  tending  toward  the
Lord,  it  was  not  an  impatient,  precipitate  tending.  He  was  not  mutinous  against  the
Divine  disposal  of  him.  There  was  wisdom  in  his  state  of  mind.  He  saw  clt-arly  that
it  was  for  his  own  advantage  to  depart.  But  he  saw,  at  the  same  time,  that  it  was
more  needful,  for  such  as  the  Phvlippians,  that  he  should  abide  in  the  flesh.  And  when
it  came  to  be  a  question  between  personal  bliss  and  work  to  be  done  by  him,  there
could  be  BO  doubt  on  what  side  his  decision  would  be  given.  He  had  enough  of  the
spirit  of  the  Master,  like  him,  to  forego  heavenly  bliss  for  earthly  work.     He  was  not


CTi.1.1— 30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANa  S5

one  to  decline  present  duty,  and  to  grasp  at  the  prize  without  having  run  the  pre-
scribed race.  "While  he  was  even  desirous  to  embrace  the  gain  of  dying,  he  could  not
refuse  the  obedieuce  of  life.  Out  of  the  confidence  that  ho  had  work  to  do  rose  the
knowledge  that  he  would  abide  with  the  Philippians,  and  still  abide  with  them.  The
decisiveness  with  which  he  thus  speaks  of  abiding  shows  that  he  contemplated  a
successful  termination  to  his  trial.  He  would  abide  after  the  great  crisis  was  past.
We  are  not  to  understand  him  speaking  with  prophetic  certainty.  He  knew  that  the
Ephesians  would  see  his  face  no  more  when  he  parted  with  them  at  Miletus ;  he  Icnno
that  he  would  abide  for  the  sake  of  the  P))ilippians,  There  is  reason  to  think  that  he
was  mistaken  in  the  first  case,  and  that  he  was  right  in  the  second  case.  In  both  cases
he  simply  proceeded  on  his  own  reasonings.  In  the  former  case  it  was  anticipated
evil  at  Jerusalem  which  weighed  with  him.  In  the  latter  case  it  was  the  consideration
of  work  to  be  done  especially  among  the  Philippians.  Twofold  object  contemplated  in
his  continuance.  (1)  On  his  part.  "  For  your  progress  and  joy  in  the  faith."
(o)  Progress  in  the  faith.  He  had  rendered  them  assistance  in  the  past.  He  had
introduced  them  into  the  faith  of  the  gospel.  He  had,  by  visits  to  them  and  agents
sent  to  them,  helped  them  forward  in  the  faith.  He  here  intimates  to  them  that  it
would  be  his  object,  when  released  from  imprisonment,  of  which  he  was  confident,  to
pay  them  a  visit,  and  to  present  Christ  so  that  their  faith  would  become  more
enlightened,  more  lively,  more  steadfast.  (6)  Joy  in  the  faith.  This  is  the  blessed
result  of  believing.  "  Tlie  God  of  hope  fill  you  with  all  joy  and  peace  in  believing."  If
we  believe  that  God  goes  out  toward  us  in  infinite  love,  that  in  Christ  he  is  favourable
to  us  as  sinners,  and  has  laid  up  for  us  everlasting  happiness,  then  there  is,  in  what  we
believe,  foundation  for  a  joy  which  should  be  ecstatic.  (2)  On  their  part.  "  That  your
glorying  may  abound  in  Chiist  Jesus  in  me  through  my  presence  with  you  again."  He
wanted  for  them  increased  matter  of  glorying,  within  Christ  as  its  sphere  and  therefore
of  a  holy  nature,  in  him  as  its  seat,  and  by  his  presence  with  them  again.  It  would
be  an  abundant  cause  for  glorying  to  see  him  after  his  release  from  imprisonment,  after
they  had  prayed  for  his  release,  and  in  expectation  of  the  benefit  to  be  derived  from  a
visit  in  such  circumstances.

III.  Hb  exhorts  them  to  perform  theib  DtJTiES  AB  Christian  citizens.
1.  Oenerally.  "  Only  let  your  manner  of  life  be  worthy  of  the  gospel  of  Christ."  The
leading  word  in  the  original  means,  "perform  your  duties  as  citizens,"  and  the  further
thought  is  that  we  are  to  perform  our  duties  in  a  manner  worthy  of  the  gospel  of
Christ  which  has  made  us  members  of  so  great  a  commonwealth.  And  it  need  not  be
wondered  at  that  the  apostle  should  adopt  the  form  of  expression,  writing  from  the
Soman  metropolis  to  a  city  which  was  invested  with  the  Roman  franchise.  The  citi-
zens of  Philippi  could  appreciate  the  force  of  an  appeal  founded  upon  their  possession  of
the  political  franchise.  It  was  this  ground  which  they  took  up  against  Paul  and  Silas :
"  These  men  set  forth  customs  which  it  is  not  lawful  for  us  to  receive  or  to  observe,
being  Romans."  The  apostle  here  proceeds  upon  their  being  members  of  a  greater  com-
monwealth than  the  Roman.  It  was  a  commonwealth  presided  over  by  a  greater  than
Csesar,  even  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  It  was  a  commonwealth  where  members  were
admitted  to  greater  privileges  than  Rome  could  bestow,  viz.  sonship  with  right  of
access  to  God,  right  of  Divine  protection,  right  of  Divine  direction,  right  of  Divine
strengthening,  and  right  of  dwelling  with  God  at  last.  Let  them  perform  their  dutiee
as  citizens,  then,  in  a  manner  worthy  of  the  gospel  which  had  admitted  them  to  so
great  privileges.  2.  Their  performance  of  their  duties  as  Christian  citizens  to  le  inde-
pendent of  his  presence  with  them.  "  That,  whether  I  come  and  see  you  or  be  absent,
I  may  hear  of  your  state."  This  brings  out  the  force  of  the  foregoing  "only."  Their
performance  of  their  duties  was  not  to  be  dependent  on  his  presence  with  them.  He
proceeds  upon  the  supposition  of  his  being  released.  When '  released,  it  would  be  his
endeavour  to  come  and  see  them.  But  it  was  ppssible  that  Providence  might  direct  his
steps  elsewhere.  And  even  though  he  came  and  saw  them,  it  could  only  be  for  a  time.
He  could  not,  in  justice  to  others,  be  always  with  them.  But  whether  he  came  and
saw  them,  or  was  absent,  he  would  hear  (by  attraction  to  latter)  of  their  state,  whether
they  were  performing  their  duties  as  Christian  citizens  or  not.  3.  Se  specifies  two
duties  which  devolved  upon  them  as  citizens  in  connection  with  military  service,  (1)
Unh-oJten  unity.    "  That  ye  stand  fast  in  one  apirit,  with  one  soul  striving  for  the


86  THE   EPISTLE   TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN3.  [oh.  l  1—30,

foith  of  the  gospel,"  As  enfranchised  citizens  it  would  devolve  upon  them  to  fight
The  object  for  which  they  would  have  to  fight  was  the  faith  of  the  gospel.  An
attempt  would  be  made  to  make  them  believe  a  lie.  They  were  to  present  an
unbroken  front  to  the  etiemy.  They  were  to  stand  fast,  striving  fur  the  faith  of  the
gospel.  In  one  spirit  they  were  to  stand  fast.  The  spirit  is  the  reason,  conscience,
that  which  governs  in  our  nature.  A  common  principle,  the  will  of  Christ  as  their
Commander,  was  to  regulate  them.  With  one  soul  they  were  to  strive.  The  soul  is
that  which  is  goveined  in  oiir  nature.  Under  common  regulation  there  was  to  be  con-
cordant thought,  feeling,  action,  as  in  an  army  engaged  in  warfare.  (2)  Undaunted-
ness.  "  And  in  nothing  affiiglited  by  the  adversaries."  Attempts  would  be  made  to
intimidate  them.  All  forms  of  pressure  would  be  brought  to  bear  upon  them,  to  make
them  give  up  the  faith  of  the  gospel.  Their  very  life  would  be  placed  in  danger.
But  in  nothing  were  they  to  be  affrighted,  turned  aside  in  fright  from  what  they
believed.  Twofold  con sii/eration.  (o)  Their  undauntedness a  Divine  token.  "Which
is  for  them  an  evident  token  of  perdition,  but  of  your  salvation,  and  that  from  God."
It  was  a  Divine  token  with  a  double  meaning.  It  was  a  token  of  perdition  to  the
adversaries.  It  was  a  proof  that  they  were  in  the  wrong,  seeing  that,  by  all  their
threatenings  and  tortures,  they  could  not  make  the  Christians  blench.  And  it  was  a
token  of  salvation,  of  final  victory,  to  the  Christians.  It  was  a  proof  to  them  that  they
were  in  the  right,  and  would  be  shown  to  be  in  the  right,  seeing  that  their  faith  raised
them  above  the  influence  of  fear.  (6)  Called  to  a  high  destiny  which  they  shared  with
Paul.  "  Bi  cause  to  you  it  hath  been  granted  in  the  behalf  of  Christ,  not  only  to
believe  on  him,  but  also  to  suffer  in  his  behalf:  having  the  same  conflict  which  ye  saw
in  me,  and  now  hear  to  be  in  me."  To  all  who  deserve  the  name  of  Christians  it  is  given
to  witness  for  Christ  by  their  faith.  To  some  it  is  given  to  witness  for  Christ  by  their
sufferings.  Of  this  number  was  Paul,  who  had  earned  the  name  of  confessor  when
at  Philippi,  and  was  bearing  the  same  name  at  Rome.  He  was  in  painful  conflict
with  the  powers  of  the  world.  And  the  same  conflict  these  Philippian  Christians
endured.  Let  them  rejoice  in  their  high  destiny,  that  thereby  they  were  enrolled  in
the  noble  army  of  confessors  and  martyrs. — R.  P.

Vers.  1,  2. — PanVs  salutation.  "This  Epistle,"  says  the  learned  Lewin,  "was
written  during  Paul's  captivity,  en  te  tois  desmois  mon  (oh.  i.  7),  and  at  Rome  (ch.  iv.  22).
And  Paul  had  been  long  enough  a  prisoner  to  have  produced  great  effects  both  in  the
Prsetorium  and  elsewhere  (ch.  i.  13).  The  long  captivity  of  the  apostle  before  the  date
of  the  letter  appears  also  from  this.  The  Philippians  had  heard  of  his  imprisonment  at
Rome,  and  bad  sent  him  pecuniary  relief  by  the  hands  of  Epaphroditus  (ch.  i.  7  ;
iv.  18) ;  and  Epaphroditus  had  fallen  ill  at  Rome  (ch.  ii.  27),  the  Philippians  heard  of
it,  and  the  report  to  that  effect  bad  gone  back  from  Philippi  to  Rome  (ch.  ii.  26).  In
short,  the  Epistle,  was  written  when  Paul  was  in  such  confident  expectation  of  his
release  tliat  he  was  making  arrangements  for  his  departure,  and  he  tells  us  that  his
intentions  were,  immediately  on  being  released,  to  send  off  Timothy  to  Philippi  to  learn
their  state  and  to  bring  back  word  to  Paid  in  the  West,  and  then  both  were  to  sail
together  to  the  East,  and  after  some  little  interval  Paul  hoped  to  visit  Philippi  in
person."    In  this  salutation  we  have  three  subjects  for  thoujj;ht —

I.  The  most  dignified  of  all  offices.  "  Paul  and  Timotheus,  the  servants  of
Jesus  Christ."  The  apostle  does  not  here  assert  his  apostleship  as  in  some  other  places,
but  speaks  of  himself  and  Timotheus  simply  as  the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ  Now,
whilst  to  be  a  servant  of  some  men  and  institutions  implies  degradation,  to  be  the
servant  of  Jesus  Christ  is  to  sustain  an  office  the  most  honourable  and  glorious ;  for
note  the  following  things  connected  with  this  service : — 1.  It  meets  with  the  full  con-
currence of  conscience.  There  are  many  services  in  which  men  are  engaged,  some  most
lucrative,  some  associated  with  worldly  honours,  yet  they  fail  to  enlist  the  full  con-
currence of  conscience,  nay, .conscience  often  raises  its  protest  against  them,  and  it  often
hapjiens  that  the  protests  are  so  strong  that  men  have  felt  bound  to  resign.  But  in
this  service  conscience  goes  with  every  effort  put  forth ;  for  to  serve  Christ  is  to  run
with  the  principles  of  eternal  right,  to  render  to  the  Almighty  his  claims,  and  to  all
creatures  their  due.  2.  It  affords  ample  scope  for  the  ftdl  development  of  the  $oul'$
faculties.    In  how  many  services  have  men  to  be  engaged  in  this  world  which  only


om.1.1— 30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANa  87

excite  and  employ  certain  powers  of  the  mind,  leaving  all  the  others  in  «  state  of  decay
and  torpor  1  Milliims  feel  that  the  work  in  which  they  are  engaged  is  so  unworthy  of
theirnatures  that  they  lack  both  self-sal  isfaotion  and  I'reedom.  The  services  make  no
demand  upoa  their  powers  of  investigation,  speculation,  invention,  creation,  and  their
central  moral  sensibilities ;  all  is  machinery.  But  in  the  service  of  Christ  there  is  both
an  urgent  demand  and  an  immeasurable  scope  for  the  wonderful  powers  and  possibili-
ties of  the  human  soul.  In  this  service  men  advance  with  every  effort,  not  as  the  mere
creatures  of  time,  but  as  the  offspring  of  God  and  the  citizens  of  the  universe.  By
this  service  we  grow  up  into  him.  3.  It  is  a  service  that  contributes  to  the  well-being
of  all  and  the  Hi-being  of  none.  In  all  the  selfish  services  of  time,  whilst  there  may  be
a  contributing  to  the  temporal  interests  of  some,  there  is  an  injury  inflicted  on  others ;
what  one  gains  the  other  loses.  What  man  has  ever  made  a  fortune  or  risen  to  power
that  has  not  invaded  the  rights  and  damaged  the  interests  of  others?  But  in  this
service  good  is  rendered  to  all  and  evil  to  none.  It  is  a  service  of  universal  benevolence,
a  service  for  the  common  weal,  a  service  that  goes  against  all  the  ills  that  afflict  the
race,  and  for  all  the  blessings  that  can  enrich  and  ennoble.  4..  It  is  a  service  that
tnsures  the  approbation  of  God  and  of  all  consciences  in  the  universe.  Does  the  service
of  the  politician  or  the  ecclesiastic  or  the  warrior  secure  the  approval  of  Almighty
God  ?  Not  as  such ;  nor  do  they  secure  the  approbation  of  universal  conscience.  But
the  service  of  Christ  does.  He  says,  "  Well  done,  thou  good  and  faithful  servant  1 "  and
all  consciences  with  every  effort  echo  the  approval.  Policy,  passion,  and  prejudice
often  condemn  the  genuine  servants  of  Christ,  but  their  consciences  never.  The  law  of
their  moral  constitution  compels  them  to  say,  "  Well  done!  "  to  the  right.  5.  It  is  a
service  whose  worth  is  determined,  not  by  result,  but  by  motive.  The  service  of  •  man  in
the  employ  of  human  masters  is  estimated,  not  by  motive,  but  by  results.  If  the  motiv*
be  corrupt,  utterly  selfish,  so  long  as  the  results  contribute  to  the  interests  of  the  master,
the  servant  is  pronounced  a  good  one.  Not  so  with  the  service  of  Christ.  Motive  is
ever^  thing ;  though  a  man  may  effect  in  Christianity  what  may  be  considered  wonderful
success,  prophesy  in  abundance,  and  cast  out  devils  by  hosts,  he  is  deemed  utterly
worthless,  only  as  stubble  and  fit  for  the  fire.  "Though  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned,
and  have  not  charity,"  etc.  What  service,  then,  approaches  this,  ay,  is  comparable
to  this,  in  its  sublime  dignity?  To  be  a  servant  of  Christ  is  to  be  the  sublimest  of
prophets,  the  most  Divine  of  priests,  the  most  glorious  of  kings.

II.  The  most  exalted  of  all  states.  "  To  all  the  saints  in  Christ  Jesus  which  are
at  Philippi,  with  the  bishops  and  deacons.''  "  Bishop  "  and  "  presbyter  "  are  equivalents
in  the  apostolic  Epistles,  though  the  two  terms  have  different  origins — the  one,  pres-
byter, or  elder,  a  Jewish  title ;  the  other,  bishop,  or  overseer,  of  heathen  origin,  used  in
classic  Greek  for  commissioner.  Deacons  we  find  the  origin  of  in  Acts  i.  6,  7.  Now,
while  it  is  noteworthy  that  the  Philippian  Church  had  its  two  officers — the  bishop  and
the  deacon — these  officers  were  spiritually  in  the  same  state  as  the  private  members.
What  was  that  state ?  "In  Christ  Jesus."  The  distinction  between  them  and  the
others  was  not  a  distinction  of  state  but  simply  of  service  or  of  office,  and  unless  their
state  had  been  identical  their  office  would  have  been  invalid.  A  true  Church  and  all
its  members  must  be  in  Christ  Jesus.  What  does  this  mean  ?  It  is  an  expreifion  of
very  frequent  occurrence  in  the  writings  of  the  apostle.  In  Christo.  What  meaneth
it?  We  can  attach  three  intelligible  ideas  to  the  expression.  1.  In  his  affections  as
hi*  friends.  When  we  say  that  a  child  is  in  the  heart  of  its  parent,  or  such  a  sister  is
in  the  heart  of  her  brother,  or  such  a  wife  in  the  heart  of  her  husband,  we  know  what
it  means.  In  fact,  all  that  we  really  love  live  in  our  hearts ;  they  often  prompt  us  to
thought  and  inspire  us  to  act.  Now,  Christ  loves  all  men,  and  all  men  are  in  his
heart ;  but  his  love  for  his  friends  is  special,  deep,  and  tender.  "  Ye  are  mv  friends."
Every  genuine  disciple  is  in  the  heart  of  Christ.  2.  In  his  school  as  his  pupils.  Christ
is  a  Teacher  of  absolute  truth,  a  Teacher  of  humanity.  He  has  estalilislied  a  school,
and  to  all  he  gives  the  invitation,  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest.  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me;  for  I  am
meek  and  lowly  in  heart :  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls.  For  my  yoke  is  easy,
and  my  burden  is  light."  Now,  all  who  enter  this  school  are  his  disciples.  What  a
Teacher  is  Chiist  1  "  A~ever  man  spake  like  this  Man."  What  an  inexpressible  privilege
to  be  in  this  school  1   i.  In  his  character  a$  their  Example.    Without  figure  man  every-


M  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILI1>PIANS.  [oh.  1. 1— 3a

where  lives  in  the  character  of  man.  The  present  age  lives  in  the  character  of  the  past,
and  so  back;  the  millions  of  unrenewed  men  live  in  the  cliaraoter  of  Adam,  imbibe  hia
selfishness,  and  practise  his  disloyalty.  All  regenerate  men  live  in  the  character  of
Christ,  appropriate  his  grand  ideas,  chtrish  his  spirit,  and  imitate  his  Divine  virtues;
thus  they  become  like  him.  Much  more  is  included  in  being  m  Christ,  but  this  is
sufficient  to  indicate  and  to  show  that  it  is  the  most  exalted  of  all  states.  The  man
who  is  in  Christ  has  broken  away  from  the  enthralling  influence  of  materialism,  is
rising  to  a  mastery  over  external  circumstances,  and  over  his  carnal  passions  and  lusts,
is  towering  higher  and  higher  into  the  regions  of  unclouded  light  and  of  ineffable  joy»
and  imperishable  delights.

III.  Thk  most  PHiLANTHKOPio  OP  ALL  ASPIRATIONS.  "  Grace  he  uuto  you,  and  peace
from  God  our  Father,  and  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  This  is  Paul's  general  saluta-
tion, and  is  found  in  almost  every  Epistle.  It  is  also  often  employed  by  i'eter  and
John.  "Grace"  means  favour,  and  the  wish  expressed  by  the  apostle  is  that  the
Divine  favour  and  peace  may  flow  to  them  from  the  Father  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.
What  greater  blessings  than  these — God's  favour  and  God's  peace  1  And  what  wishes
more  philanthropic  than  these  can  be  conceived  of  1  Most  men  express  philanthropic
wishes  towards  their  fellow-men  at  times :  some  wish  health,  riches,  long  life,  and
great  enjoyment ;  but  he  who  wishes  the  favour  and  peace  of  God  wishes  inflnitely
more  than  all  these.  The  patriot  wishes  men  to  be  free,  the  total  abstainer  wishes
men  to  be  sober,  the  religious  denominationalist  wishes  men  to  join  his  sect;  but  Paul's
wish  here  is  grander,  more  comprehensive  and  Divine  than  these — he  wishes  men  to
have  the  favour  and  the  peace  of  God.  "  Grace  be  unto  you,  and  peace  from  God  our
Father,  and  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."

Conclusion.  The  fundamental  question  which  presses  on  us  is — Are  we  "  in  Christ
Jesus  "  ?  Not — Are  we  in  this  system  or  that,  in  this  Church  or  that  ?  but — Are  we  "  in
Christ  Jegus "  ?  If  so,  we  are  secure  from  all  dangers,  ripe  for  all  worlds,  and  fof
tuturities,  on  the  march  of  everlasting  progress,  light,  and  blessedress.

I  would  live  my  life  in  Christo,

In  his  holy  thoughts  and  love,
I  would  cherish  his  high  purpose,

In  his  Sph'it  live  and  move.
I  would  fight  my  foes  in  Christo,

They  are  many,  they  are  strong ;
In  his  strength  I'll  bear  the  contest.

Striving  ever  'gainst  the  wrong.
Aid  me,  Lord,  to  live  in  Christoj
Oh  I  in  Christo  let  mo  live.

I  would  find  my  joy  in  Christo,

Joy  which  earth  cannot  afford ;
1  would  drink  of  that  life-river

Streaming  from  his  quickening  Word,
I  would  gain  my  rights  in  Christo —

Bights  of  freedom  and  of  peaos  j
From  my  guilt  and  from  my  be  ndage

He  alone  can  give  release.
Aid  me,  Lord,  to  serve  in  Christo;
Ob  I  in  Christo  let  me  serve.

I  would  die  my  death  in  Christo,

Breathing  in  his  love  I'm  blest;
When  this  frame  to  dust  returneth,

I  shall  enter  into  rest.
In  that  rest  I  shall  adore  him

In  the  strains  of  sacred  love,
Vith  thu  ransom'd  of  all  races

fiather'd  in  the  heavens  above.
Aid  me.  Lord,  to  die  in  Christo  t
Oh  I  in  Christo  let  me  die.

IX  T.


0H.1. 1— 30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHIL^-PIANS.  39

Vera.  3 — 5. — PauVs  gratitude /or  good  men.  "  I  thank  my  God  upon  every  remem-
brance of  you,  always  in  every  prayer  of  mine  for  you  all  making  request  with  joy,
for  your  fellowship  in  the  gospel  from  the  first  day  until  now."  There  are  two  things
noteworthy  here  at  the  outset.  1.  A  minister's  hearty  recognition  of  the  moral  worth
of  hit  people.  "  I  thank  my  God  upon  every  remembrance."  This  implies  on  the
writer's  part  a  very  high  appreciation  of  the  spiritual  excellence  of  those  to  whom  he
wrote.  The  recognition  of  worth  in  others  is  the  indication  of  a  generous  nature,  an
incumbent  obligation,  and  in  truth  is  a  rare  virtue.  So  selfish  is  human  nature  that
the  majority  of  mankind  not  only  ignore  the  virtues  of  others,  but  eagerly  mark  snd
magnify  their  imperfections.  It  is  said  that  Enoch  had  this  testimony,  that  "  he
pleased  God,"  and  we,  like  our  Maker,  should  readily  bear  testimony  to  worth  wherever
it  appears.  2.  A  minister's  lively  vigilance  over  the  interests  of  his  people.  "  Upon
every  remembrance,"  and  "in  every  prayer,"  "for  your  fellowship  in  the  gospel  from
the  first  day  until  now."  He  watched  over  them,  not  with  the  eye  of  curiosity  or
censorship,  anxious  to  discover  and  expose  their  defects,  but  with  the  eye  of  tender
love,  yearning,  as  it  were,  for  the  sight  of  moral  beauty,  and  heartily  thankful  when-
ever it  appeared.  There  are  two  things  connected  with  Paul's  gratitude  as  here
disclosed,  very  remarkable  and  worthy  of  imitation.

L  It  was  gratitude  to  men  expressed  en  prater  to  Almighty  God.  It  is  common
to  express  our  gratitude  for  services  to  others  by  florid  utterances  or  kindly  offices,  but
somewhat  rare  to  give  it  voice  in  prayer  to  Almighty  God.  "I  thank  my  God  upon
every  remembrance  of  you,  always  in  every  prayer  of  mine  for  you  all  making  request
with  joy  "  or,  as  it  would  be  better  rendered,  "  I  thank  my  God  upon  all  my  remem-
brance of  you  at  all  times  in  every  prayer  of  mine  for  you  all."  Mark:  1.  The  fervour
of  the  prayer.  What  intense  earnestness  breathes  through  this  utterance!  the  man's
soul  seems  aglow  with  devout,  philanthropic  zeal.  2.  The  universality  of  the  prayer.
"For  you  all."  A  similar  expression  Paul  uses  in  relation  to  the  Thessalonians
(1  Thess.  i.  2) :  "  We  give  thanks  to  God  always  for  you  all."  There  is  not  one  of
you  for  whom  we — that  is,  Paul  and  Timotheus — do  not  give  thanks.  Now,  what
better  way  is  there  to  show  gratitude  to  men  than  by  interceding  for  them  all  with  the
common  Father?  There  is  no  way  more  practicable.  We  may  be  to*  poor  or  too
weak  to  return  their  favours,  but  none  are  too  poor  or  weak  to  pray.  There  is  no  way
more  effective.  If  the  all-merciful  Father  confer  on  them  his  favour  they  will  have
more  than  worlds  can  bestow.

II.  It  was  gratitude  to  men  on  account  or  contributions  to  the  common  good.
"  For  your  fellowship  in  the  gospel,"  or  towards  the  gospel.  Dr.  Samuel  Davidson
renders  it,  "For  your  fellowship  in  respect  of  the  gospel."  What  is  meant  is,  I
presume,  for  your  fellow-working  or  your  working  with  us  in  the  fellowship  of  the
gospel.  Some  suppose  that  the  special  reference  is  here  to  the  contribution  that  they
made  towards  his  temporal  needs  as  referred  to  in  ch.  iv.  15,  "  Now  ye  Philippiana
know  also,  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  gospel,  when  I  departed  fmm  Macedonia,  no
Church  communicated  with  me  as  concerning  giving  and  receiving,  but  ye  only."  B.it
if  he  refers  to  this  specially,  the  high  probability  is  that  he  also  refers  to  tlek-
co-operation  with  him  in  the  general  service  of  the  gospel.  The  apostle  felt  tjiat,
whatever  services  they  rendered  him,  they  were  rendered,  not  for  his  own  sake,  bu*  foi
the  sake  of  the  grand  cause  in  which  they  were  mutually  interested.  As  a  private
disciple  it  mattered  little  or  nothing  to  him  whether  he  fared  well  or  ill,  died  ol
starvation  or  martyrdom ;  but  inasmuch  as  he  was  entrtisted  with  the  gosijel  he  felt  the
continuation  of  his  existence  of  some  moment  to  the  common  good.  "  Nevertheless,"
he  Says,  "to  abide  in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  for  you;  and  having  tliis  confidence,  I
know  that  I  shall  abide  and  continue  with  you  all  for  your  furtherance  and  joy  of
faith  "  (vers.  24,  25).  His  gratitude,  then,  was  not  on  account  of  any  favour  they  had
shown  to  him  as  an  individual  saint,  for  personal  comforts,  but  to  him  as  a  public  man
labouring  for  the  common  good.  What  a  lofty  gratitude  is  this:  so  unselfish,  so  sub-
limely generous  1  When  will  the  time  come  when  men  shall  be  thankful  to  each  other,
not  merely  for  personal  benefits,  but  for  the  services  they  rendered  to  the  general  weal?
Every  man  who  helps  on  the  cause  of  truth,  Christly  virtue,  and  human  happiness  in
the  world,  whether  he  belongs  to  our  nation,  our  Church,  or  not,  deserves  our  gratitude.
In  truth  the  beat  way  for  us  to  serve  ourselves  as  individuals  is  to  serve  the  race  by


40  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  1. 1—30.

diffusing  that  system  of  moral  and  remedial  truth  which  alone  can  crush  the  demon  ilU
aiid  create  the  Divine  beatitudes  of  the  race.  Never  can  we  be  sufficiently  thankful
to  Heaven  for  the  mere  existence  of  good  men  in  this  nrorld  of  ours.  They  are  tha
"  salt  of  the  earth,"  counteracting  that  corruption  in  which  all  impenitent  souls  find
their  hell.  They  are  the  ozone  in  the  moral  atmosphere  of  life.  They  are  the  highest
revelation  of  God  on  this  earth  and  the  highest  exemplification  of  duty.  Like  stars,
they  reveal  the  infinite  above  us,  and  throw  light  upon  our  path  below. — D.  T,

Vers.  6 — 8. — Personal  Oliristianity.  "  Being  confident  of  this  very  thing,  that  he
which  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  yon  will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ:
even  as  it  is  meet  for  me  to  think  this  of  you  all,  because  I  have  you  in  my  heart ;
inasmuch  as  both  in  my  bonds,  and  in  the  defence  and  confirmation  of  the  gospel,  ye
all  are  partakers  of  my  grace.  For  Gfod  is  my  record,  how  greatly  I  long  after  you
all  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ."  These  words  bring  under  our  notice  personal
Christianity.

L  In  this  the  greatest  apostle  had  thk  btbongkst  confidence.  "  Being  confident
of  this  very  thing,  that  he  which  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  you  will  perform  it."
The  apostle  seems  to  have  had  confidence:  1.  \n  its  character.  It  is  "a  good  work."
Genuine  religion  is  in  every  sense  a  good  thing.  (1)  Good  in  its  essence — supreme  love
to  the  supremely  good.  (2)  Good  in  its  influence.  In  its  influence  on  self,  elevating
the  soul  to  the  image  and  the  friendship  of  God.  Good  in  its  influence  on  society,
ameliorating  the  woes  of  the  race  by  enlightening  the  ignorant,  healing  the  afflicted,
enfranchising  the  enthralled.  Whatever  of  goodness  is  found  in  Christendom  unknown
in  heathen  lands  to-day  must  be  ascribed  to  this  "  good  work."  2.  In  its  internality.
"  In  you."  Some  would  read,  "  amongst  you,"  supposing  the  reference  to  be  to  the
influence  of  Christianity  on  Pbilippi  and  its  neighbourhood;  but  there  is  no  authority
for  this.  It  is  "in  you."  Christianity  is  a  good  thing  outside  of  us,  yet  unless  it
enters  into  our  natures,  permeates,  inspires,  dominates,  etc.,  it  is  of  no  service — no
more  service  than  the  noontide  sun  is  to  the  man  whose  eyes  are  sealed  in  darkness.
3.  In  its  divinity.  "He  which  hath -begun  a  good  work."  He,  undoubtedly  the
all-loving  Fifther.  Every  good  in  the  universe  begins  with  the  good  One.  The  first
good  thoughts,  sympathy,  volitions,  aims,  principles  of  action  in  the  human  soul,
originate  with  him,  from  whence  comes  every  "good  and  perfect  gift."  Per.sonal
Christianity  in  a  man  is  a  Divine  thing ;  it  is  the  eternal  Logos  made  flesh.  4.  In  its
perpetuity.  "  Will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ."  "  The  day  of  Jesus
Christ."  "So  also  in  ch.  i.  10;  ii.  16;  and  in  1  Cor.  i.  18,  'the  day  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ ; '  in  all  other  Epistles,  •  the  day  of  our  Lord  *  (as  in  1  Cor.  v.  5 ;  2  Cor.  i.
14 ;■  1  Thess.  v.  2;  2  Thess.  ii.  2),  or  still  more  commonly  both  in  Gospel  and  Epistles,
'  that  day.'  As  is  usual  in  the  Epistles,  the  day  of  the  Lord  is  spoken  of  as  if  it
were  near  at  hand.  St.  Paul  in  2  Thess.  ii.  2  declines  to  pronounce  that  it  is  near,  yet
does  not  say  that  it  is  far  away,  and  only  teaches  t);at  there  is  much  to  be  done  even
in  the  development  of  anti-Christian  power  before  it  does  come.  It  is,  of  course,  clear
that,  in  respect  of  the  confidence  here  expressed,  it  makes  no  rliflerence  whether  it  be
near  or  far  away.  The  reality  of  the  judgment  as  final  and  complete  is  the  one  point
important,  the  times  and  seasons  matter  not  to  us"  (Dr.  Barry).  Whatever  period  is
here  pointed  to,  it  must  not  be  supposed  as  conveying  the  idea  that  this  "good  wcjrk"
terminates  at  that  period,  "  until  the  day."  It  does  not  say  that  then  it  will  become
extinct.  The  idea  it  suggests  rather  to  me  is  that,  having  existed  up  to  that  period
under  most  inauspicious  circumstances,  struggling  with  awful  difficnlties,  after  that,
when  all  that  is  unfavourable  is  removed,  it  will  go  on  for  ever.  The  doctrine  of  final
perseverance,  as  it  has  been  called,  has  engaged  immense  discussion,  often  foolish,  some-
times acrimonious,  seldom  useful.  It  should  not  be  looked  upon  as  a  doctrine,  but
rather  regarded  as  a  duty,  and  as  a  law  of  spiritual  life.

II.  With  this  the  greatest  apostle  felt  the  intensest  btmpatht.  "Even  as  it  is
meet  [right]  for  me  to  think  this  of  you  all,  because  I  have  you  in  my  heart ;  inasmuch
as  both  in  my  bonds,  and  in  the  delence  and  confirmation  of  the  gospel,  ye  all  are
partakers  of  my  giaco;"  or  rather  as  in  the  margin,  "pxrtakers  with  me  of  grace."
His  sympathy  with  them  is  shown  by  the  fact  that:  1.  They  occupied  his  thoughts,
"  Even  as  it  is  meet ; "  diahion,  that  ia  just,  or  right,  to  have  this  prayerful  confidence


OH.  Li— 80.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  41

According  to  a  law  of  mind,  we  must  always  think  of  those  with  whom  we  hare  the
deepest  sympathy.  The  chief  object  of  love  is  ever  tlie  chief  subject  of  thought.
2.  They^Zfed  Ai's  Aeort.  "I  have  you  in  my  heart."  And  the  reason  he  assigns  ii
because  of  their  hearty  iilentifioatioa  with  him  in  his  ministry.  "  Inasmuch  as  both
in  my  .bonds,  Rnd  in  the  defence  and  confirmation  of  the  gospel,  ye  all  are  partakers  of
my  grace."  What  a  blessed  thing  it  is  for  a  man  to  have  himself  in  the  heart  of  a
true-hearted,  truly  generous  one  1  3.  They  inspired  his  Ohristliness.  "  For  God  is  my
record,  how  greatly  I  long  after  you  all  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  Christ."  The  word
"  bowels  "  should  be  translated  "  heart " — "  I  long  after  you  all  in  the  heart  of  Christ
Jesus  "  (Dr.  Samuel  Davidson).  In  another  place  the  apostle  says,  "  I  live ;  yet  not  I,
but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  Perhaps  what  the  apostle  means  here  is — All  that  I  have  in
me  of  the  ideas,  spirit,  and  aim  of  Christ  are  excited  to  a  yearning  for  your  good  when
I  think  of  you.  It  is  a  characteristic  of  a  genuine  disciple  that  he  is  under  the  inspira-
tion and  control  of  the  same  great  moral  passion  as  his  Master ;  viz.  disinterested,
self-sacrificing,  all-conquering  love.  "All  real  spiritual  love  is  but  a  portion  of
Christ's  love  which  yearns  for  all  to  be  united  to  him  "  (Dean  Alford). — ^D.  T.

Vers.  9^11. — The  augmentation  of  Christly  love  ensures  the  improvement  of  the
whole  man.  "  And  this  I  pray,  that  your  love  may  abound  yet  more  and  more  in
knowledge  and  in  all  judgment ;  that  ye  may  approve  things  that  are  excellent ;  that
ye  may  be  sincere  and  without  offence  till  the  day  of  Christ ;  being  filled  with  the
fruits  of  righteousness,  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ,  unto  the  glory  and  praise  of  God."
Here  again  the  apostle  prays  that  that  love  for  Christ,  which  they  had  shown  in  their
deep,  generous,  and  practical  sympathy  for  him  as  Christ's  minister,  might  not  merely
continue,  but  abound  yet  more  and  more.  "  The  original  verb  here,"  says  Dr.  Barry,
"signifies  to  overflow,  a  sense  which  our  word  'abound'  properly  has,  but  has  in
general  usage  partially  lost ;  and  St.  Paul's  meaning  clearly  is  that  love  shall  not  only
primarily  fill  the  heart,  but  overflow  in  secondary  influence  on  the  spiritual  under-
standing." The  words  suggest  that  the  augmentation  of  Christly  love  ensures  the
improvement  of  the  whole  man.    It  secures —

L  The  impeovbment  of  the  intellect.  It  promotes :  1.  Knowledge.  "  And  this
I  pray,  that  your  love  may  abound  ...  in  knowledge  (epignosei)."  The  knowledge  hero
must  be  regarded  as  spiritual  knowledge — the  knowledge  of  God  in  Christ.  "  Here  St.
Paul  singles  out  the  kind  of  love — the  enthusiasm  of  love  to  God  and  man,  which  he
knew  that  the  Philippians  had — and  prays  that  it  may  overflow  from  the  emotional  to
the  intellectual  element  of  their  nature,  and  become,  as  we  constantly  see  that  it  does
become,  in  simple  and  loving  characters,  a  means  of  spiritual  insight  in  knowledge
and  all  'judgment,'  or  rather,  all  perception."  Love  is  the  inspiration  of  all  true
knowledge.  As  we  love  an  object,  the  more  stimulus  has  the  intellect  to  inquire  into
everything  concerning  it  or  him.  The  more  love  for  God  abounds,  the  more  earnest
will  the  intellect  be  in  "  inquiring  in  his  temple  "  and  the  universe.  2.  Perception.
"And  in  all  judgment  (aisthesei)."  This  means,  perhaps,  discernment  or  insight.
There  is  evidently  a  distinction  between  mere  intelligence  and  intuition.  I  may  know
all  the  facts  of  a  man's  life,  and  yet  not  possess  that  insight  into  his  inner  springs  of
action  necessary  to  understand  him.  There  are  great  technical  theologians,  who  lack
the  spiritual  eye  to  peer  into  the  underlying,  eternal,  princi|iles  of  truth.  It  is  love
that  opens  and  quickens  this  eye  of  "judgment,"  or  spiritual  discrimination.  3.
Shrewdness.  "  That  ye  may  approve  things  that  are  excellent ; "  margin,  "  that  ye  may
try  things  that  differ."  Shrewdness  is  that  faculty  of  the  mind  which  enables  a  man
almost  without  the  use  of  the  critical  power  to  see  the  reality  under  all  the  forms  with
which  it  is  invested.  There  are  many  intelligent  men — men,  too,  of  intuition,  who
are  not  shrewd,  not  quick  and  accurate  in  the  discernment  of  the  worth  of  things.
Now,  love  to  God  promotes  this  intellectual  shrewdness  of  soul,  the  shrewdness  that
guards  it  from  all  imposture.  This  is  an  age  in  which  men  talk  much  of  intellectual
improvement,  and  numerous  mechanical  methods  are  proposed.  But  here  is  the
infallible  one.  Let  men's  love  to  God  abound  more  and  more,  and  all  the  wheels  of
intellect  will  be  set  agoing.

II.  The  impbov.'bment  of  the  conscience.  Here  the  language  of  the  text  Impliei
ibaX  this  love  impi»ves  the  conscience.    1.  By  giving  it  a  sympathy  with  the  true  only.


48  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [ca.  i  1—30,

"Things  that  are  excellent."  The  original  constitution  of  conscience  was  to  do  this
evermore.  It  does  this  in  heaven;  it  once,  perhaps,  did  this  on  earth;  but  now,  alas  I
throughout  the  greater  portion  of  the  race  in  all  lands,  its  sympathies  are  not  with  "the
things  that  are  excellent."  So  awfully  has  it  been  corrupted  that  it  yields  its  con-
currence to  idolatry,  cruelty,  priestcrafts,  frauds,  and  falsehoods  of  endless  kinds..  When
true  love  to  Grod  acts  upon  it,  nothing  hut  "  the  things  that  are  excellent "  will  do  for
it ;  it  rejects,  spuins,  and  damns  all  others.  2.  By  making  it  thoroughly  sincere.
"  That  ye  may  be  sincere  (eilikrineis)."  This  word  is  only  used  here  and  in  2  Pet.
i.  3  ;  and  the  corresponding  substantive,  "  sincerity,"  in  1  Cor.  v.  8  ;  2  Cor.  L  12 ;
ii.  17.  It  signifies  purity  tested  and  found  clear  of  all  base  mixtures,  a  genuine,
incorruptible  conscience — a  conscience  that  leads  a  man  to  sacrifice  all  he  has,  even,  life
itself,  rather  than  swerve  an  iota  from  the  right  and  the  true.  Love  to  God  promotes
such  a  conscience.  It  did  so  with  the  apostles,  with  all  the  holy  martyrs,  and  with  the
Divine  Man  himself.  3.  By  securing  it  from  hlameableness.  "  Without  offence."  In
the  Acts  we  read  of  a  "  conscience  void  of  offence  towards  God  and  man."  It  is  essential
that  such  a  conscience  should  rule  the  entire  man,  and  that  itself  should  be  ruled  by
the  will  of  the  great  God.  According  to  the  law  of  mind,  the  object  we  love  most
becomes  our  moral  monarch :  when  God  becomes  the  paramount  object  of  our  affection,
he  becomes  the  Ruler  of  our  conscience.  This  state  of  conscience  is  to  be  "  till  the  day
of  Christ."  It  does  not  mean  that  it  will  end  afterwards,  but  that  after  that  it  is  sure
to  be  perpetuated.

III.  The  improvement  of  the  life.  "  Being  filled  with  the  fruits  of  righteous-
ness," etc.  Paul's  language  in  Eom.  vi.  22  may  be  taken  as  a  commentary  on  this
expresgion  :  "  Being  made  free  from  sin,  and  become  servants  to  God,  ye  have  your
fruit  unto  holiness,  and  the  end  everlasting  life."  Observe :  1.  That  a  righteous  life
comes  to  us  through  Christ.  "The  fruits  of  righteousness,  which  are  by  Jesus  Christ."
Men  are  only  niade  morally  right  by  faith  in  Christ.  Philosophically  there  is  no  other
way  of  doing  so.  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  make  man  morally  right,  or,  to  use
Old  Testament  language,  to  establish  rectitude  or  judgment  on  the  earth.  2.  That  a
righteous  life  redounds  to  the  glory  of  Ood.  "  Unto  the  glory  and  praise  of  God."  It
is  the  highest  manifestation  of  God — it  is  God  "  manifested  in  the  flesh."  "  Let  your
light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father
which  is  in  heaven."  But  the  "  fruits  of  righteousness,"  or  a  righteous  life,  are  ensured
only  by  the  abounding  and  the  overflowing  of  love  to  God  in  the  soul.  All  must  be
love.  Love  is  not  only  the  inspiration  of  God,  the  root  of  the  universe,  but  the  foun-
tain of  all  virtue  and  happiness.     Let  love,  then,  abound. — D.  T.

Vera.  12 — 18. — A  grand  principle  and  a  splendid  example.  "  But  I  would  ye  should
understand,  brethren,  that  the  things  which  happened  unto  me  have  fallen  out  rather
unto  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel ;  so  that  my  bonds  in  Christ  are  manifest  in  all  the
palace,  and  in  all  other  places ;  and  many  of  the  brethren  in  the  Lord,  waxing  confi-
dent by  my  bonds,  are  much  more  bold  to  speak  the  word  without  fear.  Some  indeed
preach  Christ  even  of  envy  and  strife ;  and  some  also  of  good  will :  the  one  preach
Christ  of  contention,  not  sincerely,  supposing  to  add  affliction  to  my  bonds :  but  the
other  of  love,  knowing  that  I  am  set  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel.  What  then  ?  Not-
withstanding, every  way,  whether  in  pretence,  or  in  truth,  Christ  is  preached ;  and  I
therein  do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice."  In  ijl  probability  the  Philippian  Christians,
as  well,  perhaps,  as  most  other  of  the  existing  Churches  that  he  had  planted,  would
fear  that  his  imprisonment  at  Rome  would  prevent  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  Here  he
assures  them  of  the  contrary,  and  tells  them  that  it  had  "  fallen  out  rather  unto  the
furtherance  of  the  gospel."  In  these  words  we  discover  two  very  important  subjects
of  thought.

I.   A  GEAND  PEINCIPLE  IN  THE  GOVERNMENT  OP  THE  WORLD.      What  is   the  principle  ?

The  overruling  of  evil  for  good.  Nothing  would  seem  a  greater  evil  in  the  early  dawn
of  Christianity  than  the  imprisonment  of  St.  Paul.  There,  banished  from  his  own
country,  bound  in  bonds,  imprisoned  by  the  Prietorian  Guard,  chained  day  and  night  to
some  Roman  soldier,  utterly  unable  to  go  beyond  the  limited  scene  of  his  impiisonment,
or  to  address — as  he  had  often  done — vast  multitudes.  There  he  was  for  two  long
year*.     During  that  period  it  would  seem  as  if  the  sun  of  Christianity  had  gone  down


OH.  1. 1—30.3  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  43

to  rise  no  more,  leaving  the  world  to  go  back  into  Jewish  and  Gentile  darkness,  intoler-
ance, and  superstition.  But  here  the  apostle  says  it  was  not  so.  It  helped,  not  hin-
dered, the  onward  march  of  gospel  truth.  He  indicates  here  how  it  tended  in  this
direction.  1.  by  exttndmg  its  knowledge  in  the  imperial  city.  "  So  that  my  honds  iu
Christ  [margin, 'for  Christ']  are  manifest  in  all  the  palace,  and  in  all  other  places."'
Or,  as  Dr.  Samuel  Davidson  renders  it,  "  So  that  my  bonds  became  manifest  in  all  tho
Praetorian  Guard,  and  in  all  the  rest."  All  the  Praetorian  regiments,  who,  of  course,
were  the  most  numerous  and  influential  men  in  the  imperial  city — the  city  which  con-
quered the  world — would,  of  course,  guard  the  apostle  by  turns,  and  to  each  and  all
who  were  in  special  connection  with  him  at  the  time  he,  of  course,  would  not  only
reveal  his  own  morally  noble  and  soul-commandiug  character,  but  earnestly  expound
that  grand  system  of  world-wide  philanthropy  for  which  he  was  in  bonds.  In  this  way
the  gospel  would  spread  in  Eome  from  soldier  to  soldier,  and  from  the  soldiers  to  the
civilians.  Perhaps  there  could  have  been  no  way  more  efl'cctive  of  spreading  the  gospel
than  this.  2  By  encouraging  the  work  of  propagation.  "  Many  of  the  brethren  in  the
Lord,  waxing  confident  by  my  bonds,  are  muck  more  bold  to  speak  the  word  without
fear."  "  There  is,"  says  Dr.  Barry,  "  a  twofold  sense  here,  corresponding  to  the  two-
fold division  of  preachers  made  below.  Those  who  preached  Christ  '  of  contention '
trusted  in  St.  Paul's  captivity  as  giving  them  scope ;  those  who  preached  of  '  good
will '  found  in  it  a  striking  example  of  evil  overruled  for  good,  and  so  gained  from  it
fresh  encouragement."  The  expression,  "  many  of  the  brethren,"  of  course  implies  not
all,  and  those  who  did  not  were  Judaizing  Christians  and  were  affected  with  enmity
towards  Paul,  and  would  preach  in  their  own  spirit  and  iu  their  own  way  ;  whilst  the
others,  "  the  many,"  would  by  the  noble  conduct  of  Paul  as  a  prisoner,  and  by  the  con-
stantly extending  circulation  of  the  gospel  through  the  Prastorian  regiments  take
encouragement  and  catch  inspiration.  Here,  then,  is  an  example  of  the  principle  of  evil
being  overruled  for  good.  "  A  strange  chemistry  of  providence  this,"  says  Matthew
Henry,  in  his  quaint  way,  "  to  extract  so  great  a  good  as  the  enlargement  of  the  gospel
out  of  80  great  an  evil  as  the  confinement  of  the  apostle."  Three  remarks  may  be
offered  in  relation  to  this  principle.  (1)  That  the  known  character  of  Ood  authorizes
the  inference  that  this  would  be  the  principle  on  which  he  would  proceed  in  the  moral
management  of  the  universe.  It  is  scarcely  possible  to  entertain  the  belief  that  a
Being  of  infinite  holiness,  possessing  a  wisdom  that  nothing  can  baffle,  and  a  power  that
nothing  can  resist,  would  allow  evil  to  run  riot  for  ever  in  his  empire,  and  make  no
effort  to  subordinate  it  to  the  advancement  of  spiritual  excellence  and  happiness.
Shall  error  triumph  over  truth,  wrong  over  right,  the  devil  over  God?  Incredible.
Antecedently  I  am  bound  to  conclude  that  a  time  will  come  when  the  sun  of  goodness
shall  scatter  from  the  heavens  every  cloud  of  evil,  however  widespiead  and  dense.
(2)  That  the  Bible  supplies  abundant  statements  to  support  this  belief.  We  read  that
the  little  stone — that  is,  goodness — shall  not  only  shatter  the  colossal  image — that  is,
evil — but  shall  itself  grow  till  it  becomes  a  mountain  to  fill  the  whole  earth.  We  read
of  the  knowledge  of  God  covering  the  earth  as  the  waters  cover  the  channels  of  the
great  deep.  We  read  of  the  "  restitution  of  all  things."  We  read  of  the  "  kingdoms  of
this  world  becoming  the  kingdoms  of  our  Lord,  and  of  his  Christ ; "  and  of  things  being
put  into  subjection  to  Christ ;  of  "  all  things  working  together  for  good  to  them  that
love  God,"  etc.  (3)  That  the  history  of  the  world  is  a  grand  exemplification  of  thit
principle.  The  introduction  of  sin  into  the  world  is  a  tiemendous  evil ;  but  how  much
good  has  come  out  of  it !  What  glorious  manifestations  it  has  occasioned  of  God !  what
moral  heroes  it  has  been  the  means  of  creating  amongst  men  !  The  crucifixion  of  Christ
was  evil  in  the  most  gigantic  form ;  but  to  what  good  has  the  infinitely  good  One  turned
it!  "Him  being  delivered  by  the  determinate  counsel  and  foreknowledge  of  God,  ye
have  taken,  and  by  wicked  hands  have  crucified  and  slain."  I  rejoice  to  believe  in  this
principle  of  good  overruling  evil ;  it  inspires  in  me  the  hope  that  the  time  will  come
when  every  human  intellect  shall  be  freed  from  error,  every  human  conscience  from
guilt,  every  human  heart  from  pain,  when  all  the  groans  of  the  human  creation  shall  be
hushed  in  eternal  silence,  and  the  flames  of  all  hells  extinguished  for  ever.

II.  A  SPLENDID  EXAMPLE  roB  THE  iMiTATioK  OF  PBEACHEES.  "  Some  indeed  preach
Christ  even  of  envy  and  strife;  and  some  also  of  good  will,"  etc.  Observe:  1.  The
apostle  speaks  of  two  classes  in  his  day.    One  preached  from  a  factious,  or  a  party,


44  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHHilPPIANS.  [oh.  x.  1— 3a

spirit.  They  preached  from  "  envy  and  strife."  This  shows  beyond  question  that  the
Judaizing  party — the  bitter  antagonists  of  Paul — were  at  work  in  Eome,  preaching  in
their  way  the  gospel ;  preaching  it,  not  from  pure  love  to  Christ  and  souls,  but  to  gratify
their  own  factious  spirit  and  to  serve  their  own  little  sect.  A  sectarian  preaching  ol
the  gospel  has,  alas  I  ever  been  common ;  it  is  rampant  to-day  in  England — men  preach-
ing for  sects  rather  than  for  souls.  The  other  class  of  preachers  in  Rome  were  those
who  preached  of  "  good  will "  and  "  of  love."  These  had  in  them  that  love  of  Christ
which  constrained  them  to  proclaim  the  gospel.  They  had  no  factious  spirit ;  they
were  neither  of  the  party  of  Cephas  nor  of  Paul,  but  of  Christ  only ;  they  knew  "  nothing
amongst  men  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified."  Oh  that  we  had  more  of  such
preachers  in  this  agel  John  Wesley,  in  modern  times,  was  one  of  the  splendid
examples  of  this  class  of  preachers ;  he  broke  himself  off  from  all  sects,  and  would,  I
have  no  doubt,  have  recoiled  with  pain  at  the  idea  of  a  sect  ever  being  formed  bearing
his  name.  2.  The  apostle's  suhliTne  magnomimity  in  relation  to  aU  preachers.  "  What
then?  Notwithstanding,  every  way,  whether  in  pretence  or  in  truth,  Christ  is  preached ;
and  I  therein  do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice."  He  overlooks  the  motives  that  prompt
men  to  proclaim  Christ  in  his  exultation  in  the  fact  that  Christ  was  preached.  The
motives  belong  to  God,  and  he  will  deal  with  them;  the  message  is  for  humanity,  and
its  proclamation  by  every  tongue  would  render  service.  Should  we  not  enter  into  this
spirit  ?  If  the  gospel  is  preached,  whether  by  Papists  or  Protestants,  Ritualists  or
Evangelicals,  Churciimen  or  Dissenters,  what  matters  to  us  so  long  as  it  is  preached?
So  long  as  the  clarion  sends  its  blast  to  warn  those  who  have  never  before  heard  of  the
approaching  danger,  what  matters  it  whose  lungs  supply  the  breath?  Let  us  try  to
catcli  the  magnanimous  spirit  of  Paul,  and  to  imitate  bis  splendid  example  in  thi*
respect.

"  I  saw  one  man,  armed  simply  with  God's  Word,
TSnter  the  soul  of  many  fellow-men.
And  pierce  them  sharply  as  a  two-edged  sword.
While  censcience  echoed  back  his  words  again,
Till,  even  as  showers  of  fertilizing  rain
Sink  through  the  bosom  of  the  valley  clod.
Si)  their  hearts  opened  to  the  wholesome  pun,
And  hundreds  knelt  upon  the  flowery  sod,
One  good  man's  earnest  prater  the  liuk  'twixt  them  and  God*

D.T.

Vers.  19,  20. — The  magnifying  of  Christ  the  supreme  end  of  life.  "For  I  know
that  this  sliall  turn  to  my  salvation  through  your  prayer,  and  the  supply  of  the  Spirit
of  Jesus  Christ,  according  to  my  earnest  expectation  and  my  hope,  that  in  nothing
I  shall  be  ashamed,  but  that  with  all  boldness,  as  always,  so  now  also  Christ  shall  be
magnified  in  my  body,  whether  it  be  by  life  or  by  death."  Here  the  apostle
expresses  the  belief  tliat  all  the  endeavours  of  his  enemies,  especially  of  those  who,  he
said,  sought  to  add  "  affliction  to  his  bonds,"  will  turn  out  to  his  deliverance.  The
word  "salvaiion"  here  does  not  refer  to  salvation  of  the  soul,  but  to  Paul's  temporal
rescue  and  security.  In  the  twenty-fifth  and  twenty-sixth  verses  of  this  chapter  he  utters
very  clearly  his  assurance  that  he  should  be  delivered  from  bis  enemies  and  continue  with
the  Philippians  for  their  "  furtherance  and  joy  of  faith."  It  is  now  many  years  ago,
when  a  boy,  I  attended  the  ministry  of  Kev.  Caleb  Morris,  at  Fetter  Lane  Chapel,  and
the  sermon  he  preached  the  Sunday  previous  to  my  first  enleiing  his  church  was  on
this  text.  It  was  his  first  discourse  after  a  dangerous  and  protracted  illness,  and  the
jwoposition  he  drew  from  the  passage  and  laid  down  was  thai  "  usefulness  is  the  aim  of
every  genuine  evangelical  ministry."  He  then  went  on  to  remark  that  the  passage
suggested  that,  in  order  to  be  useful,  three  things  were  necessary.  1.  To  magnify
Christ.  "Christ  sh.->ll  be  magnified  in  my  body,"  etc.  2.  To  render  all  the  circum-
stances of  life  subservient  to  tliat  end.  3.  To  have  supplies  of  tlie  Spirit  of  Christ.
I  proceed,  in  a  somewhat  modified  form,  to  give  some  of  the  beautiful  thoughts  of  that
distinguished  preaolier.

I.  The  supreme  purpose  of  life  is  to  magnify  Chkist.  "  Christ  shall  be  magnified."
Every  living  man  is  either  an  injury  or  a  blessing  to  creation — every  bad  man  ii  an


CH.I.1— 30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  45

1 — L^  '  I       II  ■ »^^—— ^

injury,  every  good  man  is  a  blessing.  Goodness  is  at  once  the  cause,  the  evidence,  and
tlie  measure  of  mural  usefulness.  But  how  is  this  usefulness  achieved  ?  13y  magnifying
Christ.  But  how  are  you  to  magnify  Christ?  Not  by  making  him  greater  than  he  is.
This  would  be  impossible.  His  "name  is  above  every  name."  He  is  Lord  of  all;
"  Of  him,  and  to  him,  and  through  him,  are  all  things."  All  heaven  feels  that  he  is
the  greatest;  there  he  is  seen  as  he  is;  is  supremely  worshipped  and  adored.  Hell,
too,  feels  his  greatness  :  "The  everlasting  destruction  with  which  the  lost  are  punished,
cumes  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord  and  the  glory  of  his  jwwer."  It  is  to  be  done  :
1.  By  giving  him  the  pre-eminence  in  yottr  oron  soul.  Putting  him  on  the  throne  of
your  being,  and  crowning  him  Lord  of  all,  having  all  the  activities  and  faculties  ruled
by  him  as  the  moral  Monarch  of  the  soul.  2.  By  promoting  his  sovereignty  over
others.  Seeking  to  establish  his  kingdom,  the  kingiiom  of  peace  and  truth  and
righteousness  over  all  contemporaries.  Sad,  terribly  sad,  it  is  that  many  who  profess
to  maiinifybira  degrade  him.  They  degrade  him  by  flippant  and  irreverent  repetitions
of  his  holy  Name,  by  misrepresenting  his  work.  They  sfjeak  of  him  as  a  poor  Victim
on  the  cross  rather  than  as  a  triumpliant  Victor — One  who,  in  his  sufferings,  is  to  be
pitied  rather  than  applauded.  They  speak  of  him  as  a  Purchaser  of  Divine  love  for
m9n  rather  than  as  its  grand  Messenger  and  omnipotent  proof.  They  represent  him
as  One  who  seems  to  be  in  deep  need  <jf  man's  humble  services  ;  and  in  their  hymns
they  call  upon  their  hearers  to  "Stand  up  and  fight  for  Jesus,"  as  if  Jesus  were  in
difficulties  and  wanted  their  help  to  relieve  him.  They  seem  to  trade  in  his  holy
Name.  The  crafty  priest  employs  him  in  order  to  gain  power  over  the  people,
mercenary  preachers  and  authors  in  order  to  get  gain.  These  mHgnify  themselves
under  the  pretence  of  magnifying  Christ.  "The  false  teachers  to  who n  the  apostle
refers  in  this  chapter  were  guilty  of  this,  as  are  not  a  few  in  the  nineteenth  century.
For  instance,  they  who  take  up  Christianity  with  a  view  to  amass  wealth,  to  gain
honour,  or  to  subserve  political  designs.  This  is  very  wicked.  It  is  to  betray
Christianity  with  the  kiss  of  treachery,  in  order  to  dJliver  it  up  to  the  fury  of  its  foes.
It  is  to  purchase  earthly  toys  with  the  blood  of  souls.  It  is  to  drink  damnation  from
consecrated  vessels."

II.  In  order  to  magnify  Christ,  the  whole  of  cub  life  should  be  consecrated  to
THAT  PURPOSE.  Observe :  1.  The  eir(mmstance  of  life  here  indicated.  "  In  my  body,
whether  it  be  by  life  or  by  death."  (1)  lAfe  must  be  consecrated  to  the  work.  All
its  energies  shonld  be  directed  to  it ;  all  its  faculties  should  be  employed  in  its  interest ;
all  the  circumstances,  in  fact,  should  be  subordinated  to  its  advancement.  "  For  me
to  live  is  Christ,"  says  Paul.  "  I  long,"  said  Bernard,  "  to  be  as  a  flame  of  Are,
continually  glowing  for  the  service  of  the  Church,  preaching  and  building  it  up  to  my
latest  hour."  Paul  here  specifies  afSiction.  "  I  know  that  this  " — that  is,  his  imprison
ment — "  shall  turn  to  my  salvation."  "  Time  spent  in  affliction  is  not  lost.  To  a  man
who  stands  on  the  margin  of  eternity  the  world  appears  in  its  proper  light.  How
worthless  its  smiles !  How  absurd  its  fashions  1  How  trifling  its  all  1  Never  does
the  better  country  appear  so  inviting  as  when  we  linger  on  its  borders,  expecting  every
hour  to  plant  our  feet  on  its  happy  soil.  The  odours  wafted  from  its  shore  refresh  us
before  we  land."  (2)  Death  should  subserve  this  spiritual  usefulness.  "  Whether  by
life  or  by  death."  So  die — die  with  such  calmness,  resignation,  holy  serenity,  as  to
commend  Christ  to  the  spectators  of  the  event.  2.  The  intense  desire  that  it  should  be
so  is  here  indicated.  "  According  to  my  earnest  expectation  and  my  hope,  tliat  in
nothing  I  shall  be  ashamed,  but  that  with  all  boldness,  as  always,  so  now  also  Christ
shall  be  magnified  in  my  body."  This  was  his  "earnest  expectation" — an  expression
which  implies  an  intense  and  painful  longing,  not  only  expectation,  but  hope.  There
may  be  expectation  where  there  is  not  hope.  Hope  implies  desire  for  an  object  as  well
as  a  probability  of  obtaining  it.  "  That  in  nothing  I  shall  be  ashamed,  but  that  with
all  boldness,  as  always,"  etc.  This  was  his  grand  purpose,  and  he  would  not  have  that
purpose  frustrated  so  as  to  be  ashamed,  but  would,  with  wonted  bcldness  and  courage,
struggle  on  to  its  ultimate  triumph.

III.  In  order  to  consecrate  the  whole  of  our  life  to  that  purpose  we  require  the

KTEBCESSION  OF   THE   GOOD,  AND  A   SUPPLY   OF  THE   SPIRIT  OF  ChBIST  JbSUB.      1.    The

intercession  ofthegood.    "  Through  your  prayer,  and  the  supply  of  the  Spirit  of  Jesus
Clirist."    This  overruling  of  all  enmity  to  his  safety  he  hopes  for,  through  the  interces-


*«  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  1 1— 30

sion  of  the  Philippian  Church  (comp.  Philem.  23)  and  the  fresh  supply  of  grace  which,
through  such  intercession,  may  be  given  to  him.  For  the  word  "  supply  "  in  this  sense,
see  Eph.  iv.  15  ;  and  comp.  Gal.  iii.  5 ;  Col.  ii.  19.  "  Through  your  prayer."  By  an
instinct  of  our  nature  involuntarily  we  breathe  intercessions  to  heaven  on  behalf  of
those  in  whom  we  are  most  vitally  interested.  This  is  natural ;  this  is  right.  Whether
intercessions  of  any  kind  secure  direct  answers  or  not,  the  assurance  of  them  is  always
most  encouraging  to  their  object.  If  I  know  that  a  good  man  is  earnestly  interceding
for  me  in  my  mission,  I  have  an  assurance  that  he  will  use  every  effort  to  contribute  to
my  success.  Hence  Paul  always  felt  encouraged  by  the  prayers  of  the  good.  2.  The
supply  of  the  Spirit.  "  Of  the  application  of  this  name  to  the  Holy  Ghost  we  have
instances  in  Eora.  viii.  9 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  17  ;  Gal.  iv.  6  ;  1  Pet.  i.  11.  Of  these  the  first
is  the  most  notable,  since  in  two  clauses  of  the  same  sentence  we  have  first  the  Spirit
of  God  and  then  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  But  the  name  has  always  some  speciality  of
emphasis.  Thus  the  whole  conception  of  the  passage  is  of  Christ :  '  For  me  to  live  is
of  Christ ; '  hence  the  use  of  this  special  and  comparatively  rare  name  of  the  Holy
Ghost "  (Dr.  Barry).  These  two  things  Paul  felt  would  enable  him  to  consecrate  his
whole  life  to  the  life  of  Christ— "the  intercessions  of  the  good,"  and  the  "supply  of
the  Spirit  of  Christ."— D.  T.

Ver.  21. — An  ideal  life  hlooming  into  a  happy  death.  "  For  to  me  to  live  is  Christ,  and
to  die  is  gain."  Paul,  having  expressed  in  the  close  of  the  preceding  verse  his  supreme
resolve  that  Christ  should  be  magnified  in  his  body,  whether  it  be  by  life  or  by  death,
here  describes  the  life  he  was  determined  to  live,  and  the  death  which  he  was  certain  to
realize.  The  subject  of  these  words  is — An  ideal  life  hlooming  into  a  happy  death.
Here  is—

I.  An  ideal  lifb,  "  For  to  me  to  live  is  Christ."  An  utterance  this  terse  and
pithy,  carrying  the  divinest  idea  of  life.  The  meaning  may  be  thus  expressed:  living,
1  shall  live  Christ.  I  shall  live  as  he  lived,  with  the  same  master  purpose  and  inspira-
tion. In  relation  to  this  life  two  remarks  may  be  made.  1.  It  is  sadly  rare.  Indeed,
it  is  rare  to  live  at  all ;  living  and  existing  are  widely  different  conditions  of  being.  All
who  breathe,  sleep,  eat,  drink,  follow  out  their  animal  instincts,  exist ;  but  none  but
those  who  have  some  dominant  purpose  that  fires  their  passions  and  concentrates  their
faculties,  live.  To  live  means  earnestness  in  some  pursuit  or  other ;  the  pursuit  may
be  political,  martial,  mercantile,  literary,  artistic,  or  religious,  and  all  who  are  earnest
in  their  quest  may  be  said  to  live.  But  this  kind  of  life  is  rare.  Millions  exist  on
this  earth  for  seventy  years,  and  do  not  in  this  sense  live  one  day ;  whereas  those  who
have  lived  earnestly  have  become  grey  and  old  in  a  single  night.  The  martyr,  the
night  previous  to  his  execution,  lives  years  in  a  few  hours.  The  thoughtless  thousands
who  bowed  to  the  image  that  Nebuchadnezzar  had  set  up,  existed ;  the  three  Hebrew
youths  lived  an  age  the  night  before  they  were  thrown  into  the  fiery  furnace.  Saul  of
Tarsus  lived  the  three  days  and  three  nights  after  he  was  divinely  smitten  with  the
conviction  of  sin,  while  he  lay  still  and  sightless.  Indeed,  to  be  earnest  in  anything  is
to  live.  If  you  take  a  census  of  thooe  who  exist  on  the  earth,  you  have  only  to  count
the  numbers  that  breathe,  and  they  are  legion  ;  but  if  you  take  the  census  of  those  who
live,  you  must  count  the  souls  that  are  really  in  earnest,  and  they  are  in  a  terrible
minority.  But  whilst  it  is  rare  for  men  to  live  at  all,  it  is  far  rarer  for  men  to  live  to
Christ,  to  live  the  ideal  life,  the  life  in  which  all  bodily  impulses  are  governed  by  the
intellect,  and  all  the  intellectual  faculties  governed  by  the  conscience,  and  all  the  powers
of  the  conscience  ruled  by  the  will  of  God.  To  live  as  Christ  lived  is  to  become  incar-
nations of  him.  This  was  the  life  that  Paul  determined  to  live,  and  with  this  deter-
mination he  brought  all  the  rivulets  issuing  from  the  heart-ocean  of  his  being  into  the
majestic  stream  of  a  Christly  philanthropy  and  devotion.  Alas !  again,  how  rare  this
life  I  If  the  masses  of  men  who  are  really  in  earnest,  and  who  therefore  live,  were  t3
express  their  belief,  they  would  say,  "  For  us  to  live  is  wealth,  power,  science  ;  "—no
mure.  Christ  is  no  more  to  them  than  any  of  the  gods  of  Olympus.  2.  It  is  manifestly
impei-ative.  It  is  urged  on  every  man  by  the  authority  of  reason,  conscience,  and
the  gospel.

II.  An  idea]  life  bloomino  into  a  happy  death.  "  To  die  is  gain."  To  whom  ?  To
the  man  whose  life  is  Christly.    It  is  not  gain  to  those  who  live  to  sensual  enjoyments  and


OH.  Ll— SO.J  THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  47

worldly  interests.  No ;  by  it  they  lose  all  that  makes  tolerable  the  existence.  Bat
to  the  Ohvistly  man  it  is  "  gain  "  on  two  accounts.  1.  On  account  of  what  it  takes  away.
Physical  afflictions,  secular  anxieties,  mental  imperfections,  moral  depravities,  3i)iritual
tempiations ;  in  one  word,  all  that  pains  the  body,  deludes  the  judgment,  saddens  the
heart,  and  deadens  the  conscience.  2.  On  account  of  what  it  bestows.  Perfection  in
his  being,  character,  friendships,  worsliip,  enjoyments.  Death  is  indeed  then  "gain."
Shall  the  Christ-living  man  dreaid  it?  Shall  the  diseased  man  dread  the  hour  in  which
he  leaves  his  couch  of  suffering  and  weakness,  and  goes  forth  into  the  green  fields  of
nature  with  vigorous  limbs  and  buoyant  health?  Shall  the  exile  dread  the  hour
when  the  bark  that  bears  him  from  the  scenes  of  long  banishment  shall  touch  his
native  shores?  Shall  the  prisoner  under  the  sentence  of  death  dread  the  hour,
promised  by  the  clemency  of  his  sovereign,  when  his  fetters  shall  be  struck  off,  and
his  dungeon  door  be  opened,  and  he  shall  go  forth  to  family  and  friends  again  ?  Sooner
may  this  be  than  a  Christ-living  man  dread  death.

Conclusion.  How  often  preachers  exhort  their  hearers  to  prepare  for  death,  urging
sometimes  with  marvellous  animal  vehemence  most  utilitarian  considerations  I  Let
them  cease  this  work,  and  urge  them  to  prepare  to  live  Christ:  right  living  ensures
happy  dying.  The  ideal  life  lived  out  will  bloom  and  fructify  into  a  bless^  immor-
tality.—D.  T.

Vers.  22 — 26. — Self-love  and  social  love.  "  But  if  I  live  in  the  flesh,  this  is  the  fruit
of  my  labour:  yet  what  I  shall  choose  I  wot  not,"  etc.  Dr.  Samuel  Davidson's
rendering  of  this  passage,  which  is  as  follows,  is  evidently  an  improvement  on  our  own
version:  "  But  if  to  live  in  the  flesh  this  is  some  fruit  of  work;  and  what  I  shall
choose  I  know  not.  But  I  am  in  a  strait  betwixt  the  two,  having  the  desire  towards
departing  and  being  with  Christ,  for  it  is  very  far  better  :  but  to  abide  in  the  flesh  is
more  necest^ary  for  your  sakes.  And  of  this  I  am  confidently  persuaded,  that  I  shall
abide,  and  abide  with  you  all  for  the  advancement  and  joy  of  the  faith :  that  in  me
your  matter  for  glorifying  may  abound  in  Christ  Jesus  through  my  presence  again  with
you."  There  are  three  loves  in  all  human  souls — self-love,  which  concerns  itself  with
one's  own  interest ;  social  love,  which  concerns  itself  with  the  good  of  others ;  and
religious  love,  which  concerns  itself  with  the  claims  of  God.  Being  constitutional,  they
are  all  good  and  designed  to  answer  useful  purposes  in  the  full  and  perfect  development
of  our  nature.  They,  however,  separately  considered,  are  not  of  equal  value.  The
second,  social  love,  is  greater  than  the  first ;  the  third,  religious  love,  is  greater  than
either — it  underlies  both,  and  is  intended  to  be  the  inspiration  and  ruler  of  both.
Society  is  greater  than  the  individual,  and  God  is  infinitely  greater  than  both.  He  is
the  all.  Bishop  Butler,  if  I  recollect  rightly,  in  one  of.  his  sermons  on  human  nature,
expounds  the  nature  and  relative  importance  of  the  two  loves — the  love  of  self  and  the
love  of  society.  These  two  are  set  forth  in  the  text  as  working  in  the  mind  of  the
apostle.

I.  Here  is  SBLy-LOVB  dbsirins  exit  from  the  world.  "  Having  a  desire  to  depart,
and  to  be  with  Christ ;  which  is  far  better."  Observe  two  things.  1.  Paul's  idea  of  the
nature  of  his  death.  (1)  He  speaks  of  it  as  a  departure ;  analusai,  to  loose  anchor
(2  Tim.  iv.  6).  He  seems  to  have  regarded  his  mortal  life  as  a  vessel  intended  and
fitted  to  plough  the  ocean  and  visit  distant  shores,  fastened  and  confined  to  the  port,
and  death  as  the  unfastening  of  all  that  binds  it  down.  A  sublimely  elevating  idea
of  death  is  this.  (2)  He  speaks  of  it  as  being  with  Christ.  "  To  be  with  Christ."
This  mortal  life,  he  felt,  kept  him  to  some  extent  away  from  Christ,  and  that  death
would  conduct  him  more  immediately  into  his  presence,  and  he  expresses  the  highest
delight.  What  greater  joy  can  we  imagine  than  to  be  with  the  object  of  our  supreme
alfection?  For  this  the  heart  is  ever  craving.  Death,  then,  does  not  terminate
existence,  but  gives  it  more  freedom  and  a  wider  range  ;  does  not  take  us  away  from
the  Object  we  love  most,  but  conducts  us  more  consciously  into  his  presence  and
fellowship.  2.  Paul's  idea  of  the  advantage  of  his  death.  "  Far  better."  Is  not  the
noble  bark  better  out  on  the  boundless  sea,  with  its  sails  unfurled,  filled  by  the  propi-
tious breeze,  and  moving  under  the  smiles  of  a  sunny  azure,  than  tied  up  in  the  dusky
docks  ?  Is  it  not  better  to  gaze  into  the  eye  and  listen  to  the  living  voice  of  the  object
of  our  chief  affection  than  to  be  leagues  away  as  a  matter  of  consciousnets  ?    Hencf


48  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  [oh.  L 1—80

Paul  (desired  death ;  his  8eir-loTe  yearned  for  it.    So  far  as  he  himself  was  concerned  it

would  be  in  every  way  an  advantage.

]I.  Here  is  social  love  urging  ooNTiiraANOE  in  the  worW,  "  Nevertheless  to  abide
in  the  flesh  is  more  needful  for  you."  To  promote  the  gospel  amongst  them,  and  to
difluse  it  amongst  his  contemporaries,  was  an  object  very  dear  to  Paul's  heart.  But  hi
felt  that  if  he  were  not  to  remain  in  the  flesh,  but  to  depart  into  the  great  spirit-
realm,  his  power  in  this  direction  would  be  at  an  end.  And  this  I  take  to  be  :  1.  A
tolemn  fact.  "We  cab  only  serve  our  fellow-men  while  we  are  in  the  flesh.  There  ia
no  proof  that  one  of  all  the  millions  of  departed  saints  has  been  able,  by  personal
agency,  to  render  any  good  whatever  to  any  left  on  earth,  however  near  and  dear  to  his
heart.  All  personal  communications  seem  to  cease  at  death.  2.  A  practical  fact.
This  fact  should  influence  every  i^an  to  do  the  utmost  be  can  to  render  spiritual  service
to  his  fellow-man  during  his  life.  When  Paul  departed,  society  lost  the  influence  of
his  personal  presence,  and  the  personal  presence  of  a  good  man  is  always  most
beneficent.  And  more,  he  lost  his  personal  ac/ency  too — he  delivered  no  more  speeches,
he  wrote  no  more  letters,  his  voice  was  hushed,  his  pen  was  stilled  for  ever.  Earth
alone  is  the  sphere  in  which  we  can  serve  our  fellow-men.  Pious  parents  can  no  more
help  their  children  when  they  are  gone,  pious  pastors  cease  to  serve  their  congregations
when  they  have  passed  away.  Hence  any  work  we  have  to  do  must  be  done  now  and
here.  Here,  then,  were  the  two  principles,  the  love  of  self  and  the  love  of  society,
working  in  the  mind  of  the  apostle,  one  urging  him  to  depart  and  the  other  to  remain,
so  that  he  says,  "What  I  shall  choose  I  wot  not."  1  am  in  suspense.  "1  am  iu
a  strait  betwixt  two,"  that  is,  between  the  aspirations  of  the  two  loves.

III.  Here  is  SBLr-LOVE  overcome  by  social  love.  "  And  having  this  confidence,
I  know  that  I  shall  abide  and  continue  with  you  all  for  yonr  furtherance  and  joy  oi
faith."  "  I  know."  That  is,  it  is  my  present  feeling,  'i'he  knowledge  sprang  from
his  desire,  the  wish  was  fattier  to  the  thought.  Un  the  whole,  his  choice  was  to
remain.  In  reaching  this  decision  he  felt  assured  of  two  things.  1.  That  he  would
liave  trying  work.  "But  if  1  live  in  the  flesh,  this  is  the  fruit  of  my  labour."  " II
I  live,  my  life  will  be  one  continuous  labour,  productive  of  much  fruit,  keeping  me
back  from  my  reward,  but  useful  to  you  "  (Lewin).  2.  That  he  should  render  useful
service.  "  And  continue  with  you  ail  for  your  furtherance  and  joy  of  faith ;  that  your
rejoicing  may  be  more  abundant  in  Christ  Jesus  for  me  by  my  coming  to  you  again."
Most  lieartily  did  he  desire  such  a  joy  in  their  faith,  that  they  might  abundantlj
rejoice  in  the  continuation  of  his  presence  and  work  amongst  them.

CoNOLnsiON.  Paul's  experience  here  is  sublime  and  exemplary.  His  love  of  self  was
submerged  in  his  philanthropy,  his  love  for  his  contemporaries.  He  sought  not  his
own  things,  but  the  things  of  others.  He  said,  "  For  I  could  wish  that  I  myself  were
accursed  from  Christ  for  my  brethren,  my  kinsmen,  according  to  the  flesh.''  It
is  the  Christly  spirit,  the  spirit  of  self-sacrificing  love,  and  t£is  alone  ia  genuina
Christianity.— D.  T.

Vers.  27 — 30. — A  life  of  consistency,  unity,  and  courage.  "Only  let  your  converse*
tion  be  as  it  becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ,"  etc.  The  apostle  here  means  that,  whether
he  should  come  to  them  or  not — for  he  was  not  certain  on  the  point — they  should  be
careful  to  pursue  a  certain  course  of  conduct.  "  By  supposing,"  says  Bengel,  "  this  or
that  future  contingency  men  may  persuade  themselves  that  they  will  be  such  and  such
as  they  ought  to  be.  But  it  is  better  always  without  evasion  to  perform  present  duties
under  present  circumstances."  Their  obligation  to  live  a  Christly  life  was  independent
of  the  contingency  of  the  circumstances  of  his  life.  He  might  visit  them  or  he  might
not ;  he  might  remain  in  the  flesh  or  he  might  depart.  In  any  case  he  urges  on  theot
consistency  of  conduct,  unity  of  Ufe,  and  fearlessness  of  soul.     He  urges  on  them —

I.  Consistency  of  conduct.  "  Let  your  conversation  {politeuesthe)  be  as  it  becometh
the  gospel  of  Christ."  I  take  this  to  mean,  fulfil  your  duties  as  citizens,  worthy  of  tha
gospel  of  Christ.  This  is  a  most  comprehensive  view  of  the  duty  of  those  who  profesa
to  believe  in  the  gospel ;  it  means,  act  worthy  of  your  profession,  be  consistent.  Ton
profess  to  believe  in  a  God :  act  worthy  of  that  profession,  be  reverent,  be  devout,  Im
thankful.  You  profess  to  believe  in  Christ :  walk  worthy  of  a  true  disciple,  be  docile,
be   itudiouB,  be  loyal.    You  profess  to  believe  in  future  retribution:  r^ulate  your


cii.  1. 1—30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  49

present  conduct  in  aocordanco  with  that  faith,  subordinate  the  world  to  the  soul,  and
consecrate  the  soul  to  almighty  love.  In  ch.  iii.  20  Paul  says,  "  Our  conversation  is
in  heaven ; "  that  is,  our  citizenship  is  in  heaven.  The  genuine  disciple  of  Christ  is
now  a  citizen  of  heaven,  he  is  ruled  by  the  laws  of  heaven,  he  enjoys  the  rights  of
heaven.  This  being  so,  how  super-worldly  and  morally  stately  should  be  our  deport-
iaent  here  I  The  discrepancy  between  the  creed  of  Christian  men  and  their  daily  con-
duct is  a  terrible  sin  and  a  tremendous  curse.

II.  Unity  of  life.  "  That  whether  1  come  and  see  you,  or  else  be  absent,  I  may
hear  of  your  affairs,  that  ye  stand  fast  in  one  spirit,  with  one  mind  striving  together
for  the  faith  of  the  gospel."  Here  is :  1.  Unity  of  heart.  "  In  one  spirit,  with  one
mind  [suul]."  Unity  of  heart  consisteth  not  in  uniformity  of  opinions  or  beliefs,  but
in  identity  of  supreme  purpose  and  love.  There  is  only  one  meeting  and  mingling
place  of  souls,  and  that  is  in  the  object  of  paramount  affection.  2.  Unity  of  labour.
What  is  the  labour?  "  Striving  together  for  the  faith  of  the  gospel,"  or  more  properly,
"with  the  faith  of  the  gospel."  (1)  The  united  labour  must  be  steadfast.  "Stand
fast."  One  fixed,  irrevocable  purpose ;  no  vacillation,  no  distraction.  Let  the  union
of  heart  be  so  complete,  and  the  souls  so  welded  together,  that  the  united  purpose  shall
be  immovably  fixed.  (2)  The  united  labour  must  be  earnest.  "  Striving  together."
The  metaphor  is  drawn  from  the  games,  and  whether  the  games  were  those  of  wrestling
or  racing,  they  involved  almost  an  agony  of  earnestness.  In  Christian  work  all  labour
without  earnestness  is  morally  worthless  in  its  character,  and  useless  if  not  pernicious
in  its  results.  (3). The  united  labour  must  be  with  one  instrument.  "Striving
together  for  [with]  the  faith  of  the  gospel."  There  is  no  destroying  evil,  "putting
away  sin,"  and  promoting  true  virtue  and  holiness  only  with  the  gospel.  Philosophy,
legislation,  and  literature  have  tried  and  failed.  The  gospel  is  the  "  power  of  God."
Here  is  true  unity — unity  of  heart,  unity  of  labour,  unity  of  instrument  in  the  work.

III.  Fearlessness  of  soul.  "  In  nothing  terrified  by  your  adversaries."  "  Terrified."
"  The  original  word  is  strong — starting  or  flinching,  like  a  scared  animaL  This  fear-
lessness in  the  absence  of  all  earthly  means  of  protection  or  victory  is  a  sign  of  a  Divine
strength  made  perfect  in  weakness  (2  Cor.  xiii.  9),  not  a  complete  and  infallible  sign
(for  it  has  often  accompanied  mere  fanatic  delusion),  but  a  sign  real  as  far  as  it  goes,
having  its  right  force  in  harmony  with  others.  The  effect  which  it  had  on  the  heathen
themselves  is  shown  even  by  the  affected  contempt  with  which  the  Stoics  spoke  of  it
as  a  kind  of '  madness,'  a  morbid  habit,  a  sheer  obstinacy  "  (Dr.  Barry).  Two  remarks
are  suggested  concerning  this  Christian  fearlessness.  1.  It  bodes  good  to  its  possessor,
but  evil  to  its  adversaries.  It  is  "  an  evident  token  of  perdition  "  to  the  opponents  of
the  gospel,  but  "  salvation "  to  its  genuine  disciple.  A  man  who  has  well-founded
moral  fearlessness  of  soul  is  safe  amidst  hostile  hosts,  and  his  very  fearlessness  will
make  hostile  hosts  fear  and  tremble.  2.  It  is  well  founded  and  often  luMy  developed.
It  is  the  gift  of  God,  it  is  not  an  inherent  Stoical  self-sufiiciency.  It  is  given  as  a  pro-
vision for  the  suffering  condition  to  which  Christians  are  subject.  It  is  given  to
Christians,  not  only  "  to  believe  on  Christ,  but  also  to  suffer  for  his  sake."  "  In  the
.world  ye  shall  have  tribulation,"  etc.  How  splendidly  developed  was  this  fearlessness
of  soul  in  Paul  I  "  Having  the  same  conflict  which  ye  saw  in  me,  and  now  hear  to  be
in  me."    They  saw  his  sufferings  (Acts  xvi.  24).    "  None  of  these  things  move  me."

Conclusion.  Such  was  the  course  of  life  which  this  apostle  in  the  prospect  of  death
urged  on  the  Philippians — consistency  of  conduct,  unity  of  life,  and  fearlessness  of  soul ;
and  all  these  are  as  binding  on  us  and  as  necessary  for  our  good  as  they  were  in  the
case  of  the  Philippian  Church. — D.  T.

Vers.  1,  2. — The  Philippian  Cfiurch  (the  firstborn  Church  of  Europe)  a  type  qf  the
Catholic  Church.  I.  It  is  in  the  wobld.  Fhilippi,  a  city  of  importance  as  a  centre
of  trade  and  traffic.  A  Boman  colony  reproducing  on  a  minute  scale  the  institutions
of  the  empire  city.

II.  It  is  not  of  the  wobld,  but  in  Chbist.  In  him  its  life  is  hidden.  Three  times
in  these  two  verses  are  its  members  reminded  of  him.  The  Church  is  nothing  except
BO  far  as  it  is  the  living  body  of  Christ  and  partakes  of  his  grace  and  peace.

III.  It  is  catholic.  We  possess  a  particularly  full  account  of  the  flrst  preac^hing  of
the  gospel  at  Philippi  (Acts  xvi.).    Three  of  its  earliest  converts  are  remarkable—

philippians.  k


60  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  L««- ^  1— ^<>

Lydia,  a  Jewish  proselyte ;  a  Greek  slave ;  a  Roman  jailor.  These  may  be  taken  t«
represent  the  three  leadinp;  divisions  of  the  human  family,  all  of  wliioh  are  to  be
embraced  by  the  Catholic  Church.  Their  conversion  also  illustrates  the  truth  that  in
Christ  Jesus  there  is  no  distinction  of  male  or  female,  bond  or  free.

IV.  It  TRANSFiauRES  HUMAN  RELATIONSHIPS  INTO  DiviNE.  It  is  of  the  Church  at
Philippi  that  it  is  especially  recorded  that  the  faith  was  received,  not  merely  by
individuals,  but  by  whole  families  (Acts  xvi.  15,  33).  The  family  is  the  Divine  unit  in
God's  natural  organization  of  mankind.  May  not  this  fact  in  some  measure  account
foi-  the  singular  freedom  of  the  Philippian  Church  from  the  grosser  forms  of  error,  and
for  the  simplicity  of  its  faith  and  love  ?

v.  It  is  apostolic.  It  receives  its  teaching  from  the  mouth  of  the  apostles  and  ig
in  communion  with  them.

VI.  It  is  an  orderly  and  organized  community,  with  its  bishops  and  deacons.

VII.  It  abides.  Being  the  possessor  of  a  life  which  it  derives  from  the  spiritual
world,  it  outlasts  the  visible  and  external  order  of  things.  The  cit^  of  Philippi  has  long
since  ceased  to  be;  it  is  almost  impossible  to  trace  any  reminiscence  of  its  former
imiiortance.  The  Church  of  Philippi  lives  still  in  the  words  of  this  Epistle,  and
exercises  a  power  and  an  influence  which  can  never  cease  to  be. — V.  W.  H.

Ver.  4. — Christian  joy  not  dependent  upon  outward  circumstances.  I.  1.  The  out-
ward circumstances  of  St.  Pavd's  life,  at  the  time  of  his  writing  this  Epistle,  were
singularly  joyless.  A  prisoner  in  Rome,  awaiting  his  trial,  deprived  of  the  power  of
freely  preaching  the  gospel  when  and  where  he  would,  compelled  to  be  in  the  society
of  his  Soman  guard  night  and  day.  2.  Notwithstanding  these  untoward  conditions  he
is  inwardly  full  of  joy.  The  key-note  of  the  Epistle  is  rejoice.  3.  The  joy  which  fills
him  is  not  merely  a  selfish  joy  at  his  own  acceptance  with  God;  it  is  a  sympathetic
joy  which  rejoices  in  the  growth  of  God's  kingdom.  This  is  the  joy  of  the  angels.
This  is  the  joy  of  Josus  himself.  This  is  the  joy  which  he  promises  to  bestow  upon
his  disciples  (John  xv.  11 ;  xvii.  13).  This  is  the  joy  of  the  Lord  into  which  they
who'have  used  well  the  talents  entrusted  to  them  are  to  enter.  This  joy  is  not  mere
selfish  exultation  in  our  own  rescue  from  the  pains  of  hell,  but  a  ativtee  of  bliss  at  the
victory  which  God  has  won,  and  a  joy  at  being  permitted  to  minister  more  entirely  to
his  glory.

II.  1.  We  can  possess  this  joy  here  and  hereafter  if  we  are  filled  with  the  unselfish
desire  that  others  should  be  blessed  and  that  God  should  be  glorified  in  them.  We
deprive  ourselves  of  it  if  we  are  guilty  of  envy  at  the  spiritual  progress  which  they  are
maliing,  and  at  the  evident  tokens  of  God's  grace  working  in  them.  2.  We  can  con-
tribute to  this  joy.  By  our  own  steadfastness  in  the  faith  we  add  to  the  treasury  of  joy
which  is  the  possession  of  the  whole  Church.  We  give  joy  to  the  angels.  We  are
able  to  increase  the  joy  even  of  our  Lord,  who,  seeing  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  is
satisfied.— V.  W.  H.

Ver.  6. — The  truest  guarantee  of  perseverance.     Note—

I.  St.  Paul's  confidence  that  these  Philippians  would  persevere  unto  the  end.

II.  The  grounds  on  which  be  bests  this  confidence.  1.  That  it  is  Qod's  work.
If  we  know  that  God  is  working  in  us  we  can  trust  him  to  complete  his  work.  2.
God's  work  demands  man's  co-operation.  St.  Paul  recognizes  in  the  zeal  which  theJse
Ph'lippians  displayed  in  the  furtherance  of  the  gospel  (ver.  5)  the  best  evidence  of
their  co-operation  with  God,  and  therefore  the  best  guarantee  of  their  perseverance.

III.  What  this  zeal  is  not.  It  is  not  the  same  as  anxiety  for  the  victory  of  a
party,  of  a  particular  set  of  views,  or  of  our  own  personal  influence.  It  is  not  a  devotion
to  the  merely  external  aspects  of  religion.

IV.  What  this  zeal  is.  It  is  joy  at  the  progress  of  God's  kingdom  in  human  souls
by  whatever  methods  that  progress  may  have  been  brought  about.  It  is  readiness  to
bear  witness  for  Christ  and  to  work  for  him.

V.  This  zeal  fob  the  furtherance  op  the  gospel  ib  :  1.  Apostolic  (Acts  zL  23).
2.  It  is  angelic  (Luke  ii.  13,  14).    3.  It  is  Divine.

VI.  This  witness-bearing  is  in  itself  an  element  op  BTBENaxH,  an4  therefore  pf
perseverance  (Bom,  x.  10).


CH.  Li— 3©,]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  81

-VII.  If  you  lack  perseverance,  remember  its  secret,  which  is  that  it  is  to  be  found  in
•  OKNUiNB  oo-oPBRATioN  IN  God's  wobk  for  mankind. — ^V.  W.  H.

Ver.  7. — The  communion  of  taints.  I.  Communion  iK  sufferino.  "  In  my  bonds."
These  Philippians  had  to  endure  hardship  in  the  cause  of  the  gospel.  Every  Christian
has  to  endure  such  hardships,  either  external  or  internal.  Such  conflicts  are  necessary
links  which  unite  us  to  the  family  of  God.     "  Whom  the  Lord  loveth  he  chasteneth."

II.  Communion  IN  MiNiSTRT.  "  In  the  defence  and  confirmation  of  the  gospel."  The
little  which  we  can  do,  each  in  our  own  restricted  sphere,  for  the  furtherance  of  God's
kingdom,  partakes  of  the  character  of  the  work  of  even  a  St.  Paul,  and  brings  us  into
communion  with  him.

III.  Communion  in  sympathy.  "  I  have  you  in  my  heart."  However  humble  may
be  the  work  which  we  can  do  for  God,  or  the  suflferings  which  we  can  endure  for  him,
if  they  are  done  or  home  according  to  the  ability  which  he  has  given  us,  they  bring
us  into  sympathy  with  all  who  in  every  age  have  sought  to  do  like  work  and  to  endure
like  sufferings.

IV.  Communion  in  qbaoe.  "  Ye  all  are  partakers  of  my  grace."  As  all  the  faithful
are  blessed  with  faithful  Abraham  (Gal.  iii.  9),  even  although  their  faith  is  but  a  faint
shadow  of  his,  so  all  workers  and  sufferers  in  God's  service  share  in  the  blessing  which
has  been  bestowed  upon  apostles  and  martyrs.

V.  Communion  in  charity.  St.  Paul  speaks  as  if  the  fact  that  "  all "  were  partakers
of  his  grace  depended  upon  his  being  able  to  speak  thus  of  them  "all."  The  want  of
unity  among  Christians  deprives  them  of  the  full  benefits  of  the  communion  of  saints
(Matt,  rviii.  20;  Acts  ii.  1;  iy.  32).— V.  W.  H.

Vers.  9 — 11. — The  life  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man.  I.  The  element  which  is
PECULIAR  TC  IT  AND  WHICH  BETOKENS  ITS  PRESENCE — LovB.  "  We  know  that  We  have
passed  from  death  unto  life  because  we  love  the  brethren"  (1  John  iii.  14),  "Love  is
the  lulfilling  Of  the  Law."

II.  Its  manifestation.  If  this  love  is  the  genuine  fruit  of  God's  Spirit  within  ui,
it  will  lead  us  to  the  knowledge  of  him  and  to  the  discernment  of  that  which  is  pleasing
in  his  sight.  Being  of  God,  it  reveals  God,  so  that  new  experiences  of  him  are  being
constantly  vouchsafed  to  the  soul  that  possesses  it.  Being  thus  taught  of  God ,  the  soul
turns  naturally  to  the  things  that  are  excellent,  as  the  bee  turns  naturally  to  the  honey-
be;iring  flowers.  Thus  in  the  difficult  task  of  deciding  which  to  choose  of  two  apparent
but- opposing  duties,  the  soul  indwelt  by  God  is  guided  by  a  Divine  instinct.

III.  Its  bbsult.  The  preservation  of  the  whole  man  from  the  power  of  evil,  so  that
both  in  his  inner  being  and  in  his  external  conduct  he  is  blameless  and  brings  forth
the  fruit  which  is  natural  to  a  condition  of  righteousness.

IV.  The  source  op  its  power — Christ.  The  righteousness  thus  worked  in  us  is
not  the  righteousness  of  self-improvement,  otot  self-discipline,  or  of  adherence  to  a  law,
but  the  righteousness  which  is  imparted  to  us  by  the  indwelling  Christ.

V.  Its  ultimate  aim — the  glory  of  God.    (Ver.  11.) — V.  W.  H.

Vers.  12 14. — The  benefits  conferred  upon  men  hy  the  ttead/ast  confession  of  our

faith.  I.  On  the  unconverted.  To  such  it  is  an  evidence  of  the  truth.  No  witness
is  more  effective  than  the  consistent  faithfulness  of  a  professing  Christian.  Such
witnesses /or  Christ  by  bravely  resisting  all  inducements  to  abandon  him,  and  of  Christ
by  manifesting  his  strength  in  human  weakness.  Thus  it  witnesses  to  him.  It  is  by
such  witness  that  Christ  is  now  to  be  manifested  to  the  heathen.  The  Church  is  the
Epiphany  star.  We  cannot  now  appeal  to  the  evidence  of  miracles,^but  we  can  show
the  moral  miracle  of  a  sinner  saved.  So  long  as  the  Church  possesses  the  Spirit  of
Christ,  so  long  can  we  speak  the  invitation  of  Philip,  "  Come  and  see.'|

II.  On  our  fbllow-Chbistians.  It  encourages  them  to  join  us  in  our  confession
and  thus  strengthens  their  grasp  of  the  power  of  Christ.

III.  The  importance  op  openly  acknowledoino  oub  allboianob  to  Chbiw.  Bv
such  the  world  will  be  convinced  that  he  is  a  living  power  and  not  merely  a  name
upon  onr  lips.  By  such  they  who  are  young  in  faith  will  be  emboldened  to  deolan
tberoaejv?*  njore  positively  on  his  side,  and  will  tlms  t^v^  n»ore  of  bin*.— V.  W.  4.


62  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [ch.  1. 1— 30

Vers.  15 — 18. — The  spirit  of  faction.  L  What  it  is.  Like  nearly  all  human  errors,
it  has  its  origla  in  a  good  trait  in  our  nature  which  has  become  corrupted  by  tha
introduction  of  evil  motives.  It  springs  from  the  desire  men  have  to  act  in  common.
The  Christian  developmeat  of  this  desire  is  the  communion  of  saints.  The  ideal  ol
redeemed  mankind  is  that  it  is  the  body  of  Christ,  which  is  not  a  fortuitous  concoursa
of  atoms,  but  a  living  organism,  each  part  ntcessary  to  the  whole.  Faction  corrupts
this  grand  idea  and  breaks  up  men  into  fragments,  each  of  which  is  indwelt,  not  by
the  Spirit  of  Christ,  but  by  the  spirit  of  envy.

II.  What  it  mat  become.  A  corrupter  of  religion ;  using  the  subject-matter  of  tha
gospel,  not  as  a  means  for  building  up  souls  into  Christ,  but  of  magnifying  self.

IIL  How  IT  MAY  BE  DEALT  WITH.  St.  Paul  Is  ever  hopeful  of  human  nature.  He
sees  even  in  its  degradation  elements  of  better  things.  Just  as  men's  well-meant
actions  never  do  all  the  good  they  anticipate,  so  their  evil  deeds  do  not  do  all  the
harm  they  appear  calculated  to  do.  The  mixture  of  human  motives  and  the  insufSciency
of  human  powers  have  their  blessings  as  well  as  their  curse.

IV.  How  TO  BE  KKBE  FROM  THIS  SPIRIT  OP  FACTION.  St.  Paul  evidently  was  free
from  it.  He  longs  (ver.  20)  not  that  Christ  should  magnify  him,  or  that  he  should
magnify  Christ,  but  that  Christ  should  he  magnified  in  him ;  i.e,  that  Christ  should
use  him  as  he  wills,  exalting  him  or  humiliating  him,  making  him  serriceahle  or  dis-
carding him,  just  as  it  may  prove  most  to  his  glory. — V.  W.  H.

Ver.  21. — The  gain  of  death.  I.  Two  moods  in  which  people  feel  that  to  die  is
GAIN.  1.  The  mrong  mood,  hut  the  more  usual  one.  When  it  is  an  expression  ol
weariness  and  a  desire  to  escape  from  suffering,  responsibility,  labour,  temptation.  This
desire  is  a  selfish  one,  and  may  mean  no  more  than  that  he  who  expresses  it  is  living
for  himself.  2.  The  right  mood.  When  "  to  live  is  Christ."  This  is  the  mood  in
which  St.  Paul  speaks.  Christ  had  so  taken  possession  of  him  that  he  was  no  longer
living  a  separated  life,  but  Christ's  life  was  being  lived  in  him.  This  is  a  hard  life,  but
a  joyous  one.  They  who  experience  it  find  that  it  includes  his  cross,  his  yoke,  hia
peace,  his  joy.

IL  How  CAN  IT  BE  GAIN  TO  DIE,  IP  TO  LIVE  IS  Ohbist  ?  To  die  cauiot  be  mora
than  Christ  1  But  it  can  be  more  of  Christ.  To  the  Christian  death  is  a  closer  union
with  Christ,  and  is  to  find  a  higher  life  in  him.  To  Jesus  to  die  was  gain,  and  in  tha
Christian,  in  whom  Christ  lives,  the  experience  of  Jesus  is  reproduced.  He  finds  in
death,  not  more  of  Christ  crucified,  but  more  of  Christ  risen,  which  is  the  exaltation  of
Christ  crucified.  Note  how  the  "  Nunc  Dimittis  "  hreathes  this  same  spirit.  Spoken
by  one  who  had  seen  the  salvation  of  God,  and  to  whom,  therefore,  to  live  was  Christ,
he  is  ready  to  depart,  knowing  that  he  will  thereby  see  more  of  Christ.  Only  when  we
can  say,  "  To  live  is  Christ,"  can  we  say,  "  To  die  is  gain."  Only  when  Christ  is  in  our
arms  and  in  our  hearts  can  we  say,  "  Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in
peace."— V.  W.  H.

Vers.  22 — 24. — Fruit  and  gain.  St.  Paul  is  balancing  the  comparative  advantages
of  death  and  life.  He  is  doubtful  which  to  choose.  To  die  is  gain ;  to  live  is  to  be
fruitful.  When  he  has  put  the  question  in  this  form  his  doubts  vanish.  Oainior
himself  is  not  to  be  considered  in  comparison  with/rm'«  for  his  Master  and  fur  mankind.

L  The  end  of  created  nature  is  the  production  of  fruit.  It  is  through  fruit
that  the  life  of  nature  is  prolonged,  for  the  fruit  is  also  the  seed.  The  purpose  of  grace
is  that  it  should  be  fruitful.  The  Lord  desired  that  his  disciples  should  glorify  God
in  bringing  forth  muchXruit.  It  was  in  seeing  his  seed  that  he  was  to  prolong  his
days.  When  the  harvest  of  the  world  is  ripe  it  will  be  reaped.  When  the  number
of  the  elect  is  complete  the  end  will  come.

IX.  Fruit  can  only  be  produced  by  the  surrender  of  life.  The  corn  of  wheat
must  die  if  it  would  bring  forth  fruit.  The  vine  must  be  purged.  The  exuberant
natural  growth  of  the  plant  must  be  checked  if  it  is  to  be  fruitful.  The  tree  which
bears  leaves  only  is  not  merely  useless,  it  is  doomed  to  destruction,  since  it  has  no
power  of  reproducing  the  life  which  has  been  bestowed  upon  it.

III.  Our  prayer  should  be,  not  that  we  may  sain  salvation  for  otirselveg,  but  that  wa
may  bring  forth  fruit  fur  our  Master's  service. — V.  W.  H.


oa.  Ll— ».]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANa  6S


Vers.  27 — 30. — Exhortation  to  unity:  (1)  motives /or  it.  I,  Love  for  those  who
HAVE  LABOURED  FOB  US  IN  THE  OOSPEL.  Many  Can  feel  this  love  who  are  not  yet  capable
of  rising  to  a  sense  of  love  towards  God.  This  lower  affection  may  lead  to  the  higher
love  of  which  it  is  a  reflection.

IL  The  discomfiture  of  those  who  abb  hostile  to  the  oospeIi,  This  need  not
be  opposed  to  love.  The  gospel  is  set  for  the  fall  of  many  as  well  as  for  their  rising
again.  It  is  good  for  the  wicked  to  be  brought  low,  for  only  in  thus  falling  is  there
any  hope  of  their  being  finally  saved.

III.    A    FEELING    OF   PBIDE    THAT  WE   ABB    CONNECTED    WITH    THE    GBEAT    ONES   OP

THE  Chukch.  The  communion  of  suifering  is  ever  part  of  the  communion  of  saints.
St.  Paul  is  not  here  appealing  to  the  highest  motives,  but  to  motives  which  are
common  to  our  human  nature,  and  which  may  properly  be  used  on  the  side  of  faith.
Everything  which  is  truly  human  is  from  Gk>d  and  is  to  be  enlisted  in  his  service. —
V.  W.H.

Ver.  1. — An  ancient  letter.  We  not  only  miss  the  drift  of  many  parts  of  the  Bible,
but  we  also  lose  much  of  the  interest  they  might  excite  in  ns,  when  we  fail  to  observe
the  circumstances  under  which  they  were  written.  In  the  Epistle  to  the  Philippians,
for  example,  we  have  a  letter  addressed  by  a  remarkable  man  under  very  touching
conditions  to  a  community  of  people  in  whom  he  felt  deep  interest.  The  primary,
historical  purpose  of  the  writing  is  determined  by  these  facts.

I.  The  wbiteb.  St.  Paul.  Though  Timothy  is  also  mentioned  in  the  salutation,  he
could  have, had  little  or  nothing  to  do  with  the  contents,  because  the  apostle  speaks
throughout  personally  and  individually.  His  authority  not  being  questioned  at  Philipi,i,
St.  Paul  has  no  need  to  assert  his  apostleship,  and  in  genuine  humility  he  writes  of
himself  equally  with  his  young  companion,  Timothy,  as  a  servant  of  Jesus  Christ.  1.
The  greatest  Christian  humbles  himself  as  a  bondservant  before  Christ.  2.  The  most
independent  mind  in  the  Church  when  true  to  the  gospel  bows  in  oliedience  to  the
mind  of  Christ.  3.  It  is  the  function  of  Christian  ministers  not  to  seek  their  own
advantages  and  not  to  be  men-pleasers,  but  to  serve  Christ.

II.  The  people  addressed.  1.  The  letter  is  sent  to  the  whole  Church  at  Philippi —
"  all  the  saints,"  as  well  as  the  officers.  The  Bible  is  for  all  Christians.  St.  Paul  knew
nothing  of  esoteric  doctrines.  2.  Differences  of  official  position  are  recognized — saints,
bishops,  deacons.  Order,  discipline,  instruction,  and  administration  required  such
organization  from  the  first,  and  require  them  in  some  form  now.  3.  Christians  are
called  saints,  because  (1)  they  are  consecrated  men,  and  (2)  inward  holiness  is  begun
in  them.  Unless  a  man  is  better  in  character  for  being  a  Christian  his  profession  is  a
mockery.  4.  Christians  are  "  in  Christ."  Personal  relation  to  Christ,  the  ingrafting
of  the  olive  branch,  is  the  primary  requisite  of  the  Christian  life.

III.  The  cibcumstanoes  or  the  wbiteb  and  eeceiveks  of  the  letter.  1.  The
writer  is  a  prisoner  awaiting  trial  on  a  capital  charge.  The  martyr's  lofty  self-sacrifice
and  solemn  joy  characterize  the  Epistle.  2.  The  people  addressed  are  feeble,  poor,  and
persecuted.  Yet  their  beautiful  character  immortalizes  them.  There  is  no  Church  that
we  could  point  to  with  more  satisfaction  as  the  model  of  primitive  Christianity.  Thus
an  obscure  and  humble  community  of  Christians  may  be  an  example  to  the  great
Churches.

IV.  The  chabaotbb  of  the  letteb.  1.  It  is  uncontroversial.  St.  Paul  was  often
forced  into  controversy.  But  his  choicest  thoughts  come  out  in  calmer  moments.  2.
It  is  personal.  Nowhere  else  does  the  apostle  reveal  so  fully  his  own  private  convic-
tions and  spiritual  experiences.  It  is  difficult  to  do  this  humbly,  truly,  and  whole-
somely. But  when  well  done  it  is  of  rare  interest.  Hence  the  value  of  the  private
letters  of  great  and  good  men.  8.  It  is  unusually  full  of  tender  feeling.  St.  Paul  was
no  mere  intellectual  teacher,  and  no  hard-souled  man  of  energy.  His  greatest  ideas
were  saturated  with  emotion.  In  this  Epistle  he  reveals  the  tenderness,  sympathy,  and
joy  of  the  deepest  Cliristian  experience.  4.  It  is  a  grand  witness  to  the  power  of  the
gospel  (1)  in  the  transformation  of  the  fiery  persecutor  Saul  into  this  tender-hearted
Apostle  Paul ;  (2)  in  infusing  all-absorbing  devotion  to  Christ ;  (3)  in  kindling  brotherly
love  between  Christians ;  and  (4)  in  sustaining  the  soul  under  the  heaviest  troubles
with  «  resignation  that  faith  raises  to  joyous  confidence. — W.  F.  A,


M  THS  BPISTLt:  "TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oa.  1.1—30.

Ver.  6. — Begun,  continued,  and  ended  in  God,  This  phrase  describes  the  first
essential  condition  of  the  CbristiHn  life.

I.  Chbistians  have  a  good  work  going  on  within  them.  1.  Christianity  is  first
of  all  inteTTial.  What  is  in  us  is  the  matter  of  chief  importance.  2.  A  work  is  going
on  in  the  heart  of  the  Christian,  creating,  developing,  training,  pruning,  purging,  build-
ing up.  3.  This  work  is  good.  II  is  good  for  the  soul  to  be  brought  from  death  to
life,  and  for  others  that  sympathy  may  be  shown  them  and  active  good  done  as  waa
the  case  with  the  Pliilippians  in  their  relations  to  St.  Paul.

II.  This  work  is  as  yet  only  in  the  beginning.  A  perfect  Christian  is  the  result
of  years  of  training.  The  new  birth  produces  a  babe  in  Christ.  Much  spiritual  nourish-
ment and  ediication  are  required  to  develop  the  full-grown  man.

III.  The  work  is  beqtjm  by  God.  1.  It  begins  in  a  new  creation.  God  only  can
create.  So  great  a  change  as  is  required  in  turning  from  a  life  of  selfish  sin  to  a  life  of
self-sacrificing  holiness  can  only  be  effected  by  a  Divine  influence.  That  influence  is
put  forth  so  that  the  greatest  sinner  may  become  the  greatest  saint.  2.  Though  the
work  is  conditioned  by  onr  faith,  still  that  is  "  not  of  ourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God."

IV.  The  tact  that  God  has  beguk  the  good  work  is  a  ground  for  thinking
that  he  will  complete  it.  1.  The  character  of  Ood  implies  this.  He  is  not  fickle
that  he  should  change,  nor  weak  that  he  should  faU.  2.  The  nature  of  the  work
implies  this.  The  first  step  is  the  hardest.  Every  stage  in  the  Christian  progress  is  a
prophecy  of  future  stages.  The  force  of  habit  which  was  before  set  against  the  good
work  becomes  increasingly  engaged  in  supporting  it.

•V.  The  object  of  completing  the  good  wokk  is  that  it  may  be  ready  fob  the
DAY  of  Christ.  1.  That  day  is  a  day  of  trial.  In  the  first  age  it  came  with  the
destruction  of  Jerusalem  and  consequent  troubles.  We  need  to  be  strengthened  in
the  time  of  calm  that  we  may  stand  firm  in  the  storm.  2.  Glorious  victory  follows
the  trouble  of  the  day  of  Christ.     Christians  should  he  ready  to  share  in  that  triumph.

VI.  The  good  work  will  only  be  begdn,  continued,  and  ended  in  God  when  wk
co-opeeatk.  That  is  not  stated  here.  But  it  is  stated  elsewhere  {e.g.  oh.  ii.  12).  St.
Paol  is  "  persuaded"  of  success  with  the  work  in  the  Philippians  partly  on  account  of
what  he  knows  of  their  disposition  and  behaviour.  We  must  exercise  faith  and
obedience  in  the  strength  of  God  and  for  the  reception  of  God's  work  in  us. — W.  F.  A-

Vers.  9,  10. — The  things  that  excel.  St.  Paul  prays  that  his  readers  may  have  that
finer  spiritual  perception  (aisthesis)  which  is  produced  by  an  increase  of  love  in  order
that  they  may  discern  the  greater  worth  of  those  good  things  which  differ  from  other
good  things  in  being  more  excellent.  The  high  endowment  would  not  be  necessary  for
the  discrimination  of  the  coarser  contrasts  of  good  and  evil,  light  and  darkness,  etc.  It  is
plain,  therefore,  that  different  shades  of  goodness,  gi-adations  of  worthiness,  successive
ranks  of  spiritual  merit,  are  what  the  apostle  desires  us  to  be  able  to  appreciate.

L  Good  things  stand  in  different  banks  of  excellency.  In  nature  somethings
•re  better  than  others,  being  more  beautiful,  or  more  delicately  organized,  or  capable
of  serving  higher  ends.  When  God  created  the  world  he  saw  that  everything  was
good ;  yet  the  dog  is  superior  to  the  worm,  and  man  to  the  dog.  In  spiritual  things
differences  exist  even  among  things  wholly  good  in  themselves.  1.  In  the  being
of  God.  If  we  may  dare  to  compare  mysteries  so  high  and  sacred  as  the  attributes  of
God,  we  may  see  how  they  range  themselves  in  rank  and  order — all  glorious,  yet
mounting  one  above  another  to  the  supernal  height  of  glory.  To  the  Mohammedan,
God  is  ohiefiy  known  as  Almighty ;  the  Alexandrian  Jew  thought  most  of  his  wisdom  ;
the  prophets  of  the  Old  Testament  upheld  his  awful  righteousness ;  Christians  see  him
chiefly  as  One  whose  name  is  Love.  Now,  omnipotence  is  good,  and  supreme  wisdom
i«  better,  and  the  moral  excellence  of  righteousness  is  better  still ;  but  love  la  best  of
all.  2.  In  the  blessings  of  the  gospel.  Christ  healed  sick  bodies,  and  some  poor  folk
were  content  with  that  blessing ;  but  he  also  healed  sick  souls,  and  this  was  a  higher
blessing.  The  gospel  delivers  ua  from  the  doom  of  guilt  j  but  it  also  saves  the  soul
from  its  own  internal  corruption,  which  is  a  greater  good.  It  offers  peace  and  comfort;
but  it  also  inspires  patience  in  suffering  and  faithfulness  in  t<»il,  and  these  are  better
things.  3.  In  our  own  religious  aims.  To  be  saved  is  good  ;  to  glorify  Qioi  is  better.
It  is  well  to  seek  the  purest  blessings  for  ourselve*}  it  i»  better  to  deny  ourselves  in


im.1.1— S(X3  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPlAi^S.  S5

love  to  God  and  man,  etc.  4.  In  prayer.  Good  earthly  gifts  may  be  sought ;  apiritual
graces  are  more  desirable.  But  the  highest  prayer  will  be  for  recoaciliation  with  th«
will  of  God.  6.  In  the  Bible.  It  is  foolish  to  read  the  Bible  straight  through  indis-
criminatingly.  All  of  it  is  not  of  equal  value.  We  should  discover  and  use  most  the
best  parts.  6.  In  literatttre,  society,  omd  innocent  human  affairs.  7.  In  the  use  of  our
time,  money,  etc.  We  may  be  doing  no  harm ;  but  are  vre  making  the  best  possible
use  of  these  things  ?
II.  The  supekigk  excellence  op  the  bbttee  thinbb  can  only  bb  discerned  vt

THAT  FINER  SPIRITUAL  SENSE  WHICH  COMES  WITH  AN  INCREASE  OF  LOVE.      It  is  HOt  that

they  are  artificially  hidden.  Christianity  knows  of  no  esoteric  doctrines  jealously
guarded  from  the  uninitiated.     It  is  that  we  have  not  the  faculty  to  discern  them.

1.  Though  we  may  see  at  once  the  general  characteristic  differences,  we  need  spiritual
insight  for  the  application  of  them  to  particular  cases.  2.  Though  we  may  know  the
difference  of  value  intellectually,  we  cannot  at  first  realize  it  in  feeling  and  life.
If  while  a  man  knows  that  Beethoven's  sonatas  are  infinitely  superior  to  street  songs,
he  still  prefers  the  latter,  to  him,  practically,  these  are  the  better.  He  must  have
higher  musical  gifts  or  training  to  appreciate  the  good  music.  In  like  manner  we  need  ,
spiritual  training  for  the  discerning  of  the  best  spiritual  things.  This  training  is  not
intellectual.  It  is  the  growth  of  love.  For  love  is  the  eye  of  the  soul.  Love  of  God
will  help  us  to  understand  him.  Love  of  Christ  will  explain  to  us  the  true  worth  of
the  gospel.  Love  of  men  will  help  us  to  appreciate  the  best  pursuits  in  life.  Love
of  heavenly  things  will  enable  us  to  seek  the  best  of  them. — W.  E.  A.

Vers.  12 — 14. — Christianity  promoted  by  being  persecuted.  It  might  naturally  have
been  thought  that  the  arrest  of  the  missionary  journeys  of  St.  Paul,  and  the  shock  of
his  imprisonment,  would  have  seriously  checked  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  The  apostle
is  anxious  that  his  readers  should  understand  that  these  apparently  untoward  events
have  had  the  very  opposite  effect,  and  this  in  two  ways.

I.  The  work  of  St.  Paul  was  rendered  more  effective  by  the  very  perse-
cutions HE  suffered.  1.  The  area  of  his  influence  was  extended.  He  had  long
wished  to  preach  the  gospel  in  Rome  ^e.g.  Rom.  i.  8 — 15).  Persecution  sent  him  there.
The  particular  circumstances  of  his  residence  in  Rome  further  gave  him  an  opportunity
of  reaching  classes  of  people  who  would  have  been  almost  inaccessible  to  him  if  he  had
gone  there  as  a  free  visitor.  Living  among  Praetorian  soldiers,  if  not  in  the  Praetorian
camp  itself,  St.  Paul  was  able  to  preach  Christ  to  the  cream  of  the  Roman  army.  The
priioner  became  a  missionary  to  his  guard,  and  was  successful  in  winning  converts
among  those  stern  soldiers.  2.  The  force  of  his  influence  was  intensified.  He  always
preached  Christ  by  his  life,  but  never  more  eloquently  than  when  in  bonds  for  the
sake  of  bis  great  Master.  The  sight  of  the  brave  old  man  awaiting  trial  on  a  capital
charge,  not  only  possessing  his  soul  in  patience,  but  rejoicing  in  tribulation,  and
earnestly  preaching  the  gospel  beneath  the  very  shadow  of  Nero's  palace,  was  enough
to  strike  the  attention  of  the  most  thoughtless.

II.  Other  Christians  were  inspired  with  greater  confidence  and  energy
BY  THE  bight  OF  THE  PERSECUTED  APOSTLE.  They  Were  made  confident  through  his
bonds.  1.  The  example  of  St.  Paul  inspired  them.  Courage  rouses  courage.  Noble
self-devotion  calls  forth  responsive  echoes  in  the  hearts  of  others.  We  feel  ashamed  of
standing  idle  while  our  brother  is  toiling  in  the  midst  of  danger  and   suffering.

2.  The  success  of  St.  Paul  encouraged  them,  Half-heartedness  in  missionary  efforts
comes  of  unbelief  in  the  real  utility  of  them.  When  we  see  the  fruit  fulness  of
these  efforts  we  are  urged  to  extend  them.  3.  The  independent  action  of  St.  Paul
excited  the  jealousy  of  some.  In  Rome,  which  was  a  stronghold  of  Judaic  Christianity,
the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  preached  his  more  liberal  gospel.  This  greatly
disturbed  some  of  the  prevailing  school.  But,  unlike  their  brothers  in  Corinth,  they
did  not  directly  oppose  the  work  of  St.  Paul.  They  rather  proclaimed  their  own
version  of  the  gospel  more  zealously.  In  so  doing  they,  being  true  followers  of  Christ
as  well  as  the  apostle  they  suspected,  preached  Christ,  Thus  sectarian  rivalry  may  be
overruled  for  the  extension  of  the  gospel. — W.  F.  A.

V«.  18. — Christ  jfreaohed  in  sectarian  jealousy.    It  is  scarcely  possible  to  conceiT«


66  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [ch.  1. 1— 30.


of  a  more  magnificent  breadth  of  charity,  a  more  heroic  self-ahnegation,  or  a  mora
aident  devotion  to  Christ  than  St.  Paul  here  manifests.  His  preaching  at  Rome  appears
to  have  excited  opposition  in  the  Judaizing  section  of  the  Church  therei  In  jealousy
of  the  influence  gained  by  the  great  apostle,  this  party  was  roused  to  more  earnest
missionary  enterprise  on  their  own  account.  Their  motive  was  miserably  narrow  and
ungenerous.  But  they  little  understood  the  spirit  of  the  man  whom  they  thought  to
annoy.  The  last  thing  that  mean  and  selfish  men  can  comprehend  is  the  larger  heart
of  a  better  nature.  St.  Paul  completely  triumphed  over  this  miserable  attempt  at
raising  up  afflictions  for  him  in  his  bonds.  Instead  of  being  irritated  at  the  injury  done
to  himself,  ha  utterly  forgot  that  injury  in  his  joy  that  a  fresh  impetus  was  given  to  the
preaching  of  Christ.     What  a  noble  example  for  all  Christians !

L  The  preaching  or  Christ  is  the  most  important  work  of  the  Church.  There
were  truths  dear  to  the  heart  of  St.  Paul  which  the  Judaizing  party  denied,  and  it  was  part
of  the  life-work  of  the  apostle  to  vindicate  these  truths.  But  he  clearly  saw  that  they
were  subsidiary  to  the  great,  common  Christian  gospeL  Therefore  he  would  rather  see
the  gospel  preached  by  men  who  were  at  the  same  time  resisting  those  truths,  than
that  the  secondary  truths  should  triumph  but  missionary  work  be  less  zealously
promoted.  We  are  all  in  danger  of  losing  theological  perspective.  We  are  inclined  to
magnify  our  own  special  views  to  the  neglect  of  the  truth  that  is  common  to  all
Christendom.  To  make  Christ  known — not  to  preach  this  or  that  doctrine  about  Christ,
but  to  reveal  Christ  himself  in  his  beautiful  life,  death,  and  resurrection — this  is  to
preach  the  gospel,  and  all  else  is  of  minor  importance.

II.  Christ  mat  be  preached  in  a  great  variety  of  ways.  The  more  illiberal
Christians  set  forth  the  gospel  in  a  very  different  way  from  St.  Paul's  method.  Yet  he
had  insight  to  see  that  the  essential  truth  was  proclaimed  by  them.  1.  Because  men
do  not  pronounce  our  "  shibboleth,"  let  us  not  refuse  to  recognize  that  they  preach  our
Christ,  the  one  Christ.  2.  Moreover,  note  that,  as  a  rule,  the  grounds  on  which
Christians  agree  are  far  more  important  than  those  on  which  they  differ.  3.  Observe
also  that,  though  the  spirit  and  motive  of  the  preacher  are  important,  the  truth  of  the
gospel  is  of  more  importance ;  so  that,  though  this  be  proclaimed  with  an  unworthy
motive  (as  here  in  very  spite  to  St.  Paul),  yet,  being  proclaimed,  it  may  reach  the
hearts  of  men  and  do  its  own  work.

III.  Divisions  among  Christians  may  lead  to  the  more  zealous  PREACEnia
OF  Christ.  We  naturally  deplore  these  divisions.  They  are  very  injurious  to
Christian  charity.  They  generate  sectarian  bitterness  of  spirit  and  narrowness  of
thought.  They  lead  to  much  waste  of  effort  in  controversy  and  to  a  scandal  in  the
eyes  of  the  world.  On  the  other  hand,  they  undoubtedly  excite  greater  zeal  in
propagating  the  gospel.  The  sects  provoke  one  another  to  good  works.  The  motive
may  not  be  the  highest ;  still,  the  result  is  that  the  gospel  is  preached  more  energetically
and  with  more  variety,  so  as  to  reach  different  classes  of  mind.  And  often  the  emula-
tion is  not  unworthy.  Each  party  is  honestly  desirous  not  to  be  found  wanting,  and
is  stimulated  by  the  example  of  the  rest.  Competition,  which  greatly  encourages
efficiency  in  study  and  in  business,  is  not  without  its  influence  in  religion.  Competi-
tive Christianity  may  be,  indeed,  a  low  form  of  religion,  but  it  is  much  better  than
lifeless  Christianity.

IV.  The  true  servant  of  Christ  will  value  the  preaching  of  Christ  mobs
THAN  THE  EXTENSION  OF  HIS  OWN  VIEWS  AND  INFLUENCE.  It  is  exceedingly  difficult
really  to  rejoice  at  efforts  which  weaken  our  own  particular  cause  while  they  promota
the  great  cause  of  Christ.  But  this  is  because  we  think  more  of  ourselves  than  of
Christ.  Greater  devotion  to  Christ  will  issue  in  larger  charity  to  rivals  and  enemies.
When  we  can  say,  "  To  me  to  live  is  Christ,"  we  shall  be  able  to  experience  the  grand
feeling  of  St.  Paul  in  rising  above  the  provocation  of  jealous  opposition  to  himself  with
the  joy  of  witnessing  a  more  earnest  preaching  of  Christ. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  21. — "  lb  me  to  live  i§  Christ."  Here  is  the  secret  of  the  wonderful  life  of  St.
Paul  and  the  ideal  of  the  true  Christian  life  everywhere.  In  so  far  as  we  approach
this  ideal  we  are  Christian.  The  whole  scope  and  aim  and  energy  of  Christianity  are
included  in  the  conception  of  "  living  Christ."

L  Christ  oivks  the  pattern  fob  tee  Christian  life.    Christianity  it  Christ-


tH.  1. 1— 30.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  61

likeness.  Only  they  who  have  the  Spirit  of  Christ  are  his.  The  one  call  of  Christ  ii
"  Follow  me."  St.  Paul  carries  this  truth  out  very  fully  in  his  descriptions  of  the
assimilation  of  the  Christian  to  Christ  through  every  stage — birth  (in  the  new  birth),
humiliation,  self-denial  and  service  in  life,  death  (to  sin  and  the  old  life),  resurrection
(to  the  newer  spiritual  life),  and  ascension  (the  setting  our  affections  on  heavenly  things).
We  must  beware  of  mere  servile  imitation  in  following  the  footsteps  of  our  Lord.  W«
are  to  seek  to  have  the  mind  that  was  in  him.  If  our  circumstances  are  different  from
those  of  the  first  disciples,  we  have  to  inquire,  not  simply  what  was  done  in  Gblilee  in
the  first  century,  but  what  would  Christ  do  in  England  in  the  nineteenth  century?

II.  Cbbist  inspires  thb  pitrfosb  of  thb  Ghbistian  life.  The  Christian  is  the
servant  of  Christ.  His  object  in  life  should  not  be  to  seek  his  own  welfare,  but  to  do
Christ's  work.  It  may  be  that  he  will  suffer  personal  loss.  That  will  not  stand  in  his
way  if  his  spirit  is  right.  For  if  Christ  has  died  for  us  the  least  we  can  do  is  to  live
for  him ;  and  even  though  hardships  ensue,  we  have  to  remember  that  we  have  only  to
be  like  Simon,  bearing  the  cross,  whilst  Christ  was  nailed  to  it.  So  long,  therefore,  as
our  object  is  simply  to  secure  the  salvation  of  our  own  souls,  to  be  sure  of  peace  here
and  of  heaven  hereafter,  we  have  not  learnt  the  very  alphabet  of  the  Christian  life.
That  life  consists  in  denying  ourselves  and  living  for  Christ.

IIL  Chbist  inspires  the  power  necessary  fob  the  Christian  life.  To  live  as
Christ  lived !  To  deny  ourselves  and  serve  Christ  I  These  are  hard  things,  impossible
simply  as  duties  to  be  performed  in  our  own  strength.  But  the  gospel  of  the  cross  it
"  the  power  of  God."  Morally,  the  influence  of  the  love  of  Christ  e«nstraining  us  is  great.
Spiritually,  the  power  of  the  indwelling  Christ  is  the  real  secret  of  ^e  Christian
life.— W.F.A.

Vers.  23,  24. — A  strait.  St.  Paul  is  in  a  strait  between  his  personal  desire  to  depart
and  be  with  Christ,  and  his  unselfish  willingness  to  remain  on  earth  for  the  good  of  the
Church.

I.  The  personal  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ.  This  is  no  mere  senti-
mental yearning  for  death,  such  as  very  young  people  sometimes  dream  about.  St.
Paul  is  an  old  man,  and  old  men  commonly  cling  to  life.  He  is  in  bonds,  howevei  j  he
has  fought  a  good  fight ;  he  feels  the  weariness  of  a  life  of  extraordinary  hardship  and
toil ;  soberly,  earnestly,  reverently,  he  longs  to  be  with  Christ.  1.  St.  Paul  had  a  grand
faith  in  thefutwre  life.  He  was  not  simply  resigned,  he  longed  for  the  great  change.
His  was  not  Hamlet's  wish —

"  To  die, — to  sleep, —
No  more ;  and,  by  a  sleep,  to  say  we  end
The  heart-ache,  and  the  thousand  natural  shocki
That  flesh  is  heir  to."

Many  have  devoutly  wished  for  this  consummation,  longing  only  to  be  at  peace,
"  where  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling  and  the  weary  are  at  rest."  St.  Paul's  great
desire  was  positive — life  with  Christ.  2.  The  essential  Christian  blessedness  is  to  he  with
Christ.  We  know  exceedingly  little  about  the  future  life.  When  we  pass  from  rheto-
rical images  to  distinct  facts,  the  chief,  almost  the  only,  thing  we  know  it  that
Christians  will  be  with  Christ  (John  xiv.  3).

••  My  knowledge  of  tliat  life  is  small, —
The  eye  of  faith  is  dim ;
But  'tis  enough  that  Christ  knows  all.
And  I  shall  be  with  him."

Note :  (1.)  Only  they  who  have  followed  Christ  on  earth  can  dwell  with  Christ  in  heaven.
(2)  Only  they  who  have  loved  Christ  on  earth  can  rejoice  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ
in  heaven.  It  is  far  better  to  depart,  just  because,  and  only  because,  Christ  ii  far
dearer  than  all  earthly  things ;  for  where  our  treasure  is,  there  will  our  heart  he  also.

II.  The  unselfish  willingness  to  remain  on  earth  to  serve  the  Chubob.  St.
Paul  was  resigned  to  life.  His  conception  of  Christianity  was  unselfish  service.  Men
sometimes  ask — Why  are  not  Christians  taken  straight  to  heaven  out  of  the  troubles  and
temptations  of  this  world  ?  One  reason  for  remaining  here  is  their  own  discipline.
Another  ia  the  work  ther  have  to  do.    As  Christ  came  into  the  world  to  bless  maidciad.


58


TEE  EPlStLE  fO  THE  PillLlPtlANS.         ten.  n.  1— SOt


Chiistians  are  retained  in  the  world  that  they  may  be  the  salt  of  the  earth.  Bat  they
should  remember  that  they  are  pilgrims  and  strangers;  in  the  world,  but  not  of  it;
serving  the  world,  but  looking  for  their  greatest  joy  above  it.  Let  every  man  ask  him*
self — Is  it  for  the  good  of  my  fellow-mea  that  t  should  be  continued  in  Jife  ?  How
many  useful  lives  are  out  down  I  How  many  cumberers  of  the  ground  are  spared  by
the  long-suffering  mercy  of  God,  in  the  hope  that  they  may  yet  bear  fruit,  though  at  th«
eleventh  hour ! — W,  F.  A.

Ver.  29. — Suffering  in  "behalf  of  Christ.  St.  Paul  feels  peculiar  sympathy  for  th»
Philippians  on  account  of  the  fact  that  they  are  like  himself  in  suffering  persecution  on
account  of  Christ.  Common  sufferings  promote  common  sympathies.  Only  they  who
have  suffered  themselves  can  uniierstand  the  sufferings  of  others.  Tlius  it  seems  to  bo
part  of  the  mission  of  pain  to  enlarge  and  deepen  onr  sympathies.

I.  Christians  may  be  called  to  sdffeb  in  behalf  op  Chkist.  Let  a  man  count
the  cost.  To  be  a  Christian  is  not  only  to  believe  on  Christ.  It  may  involve  loss,
pain,  death.  1.  We  may  suffer  through  our  connection  with  Christ.  Thus  was  it  with
the  persecuted.  Now,  we  may  have  to  give  up  lucrative  but  un-Christlike  occnpations,
and  to  meet  with  ridicule  or  opposition  in  our  attempt  to  serve  Christ  faithfully.  2.
We  may  suffer /«r  the  cause  of  Ghrist.  We  may  serve  him  by  our  suffering.  Faithful
endurance  is  itself  a  grand  witness  to  Christ.  The  martyr  preaches  Christ  as  truly  as
the  missionary.  Even  the  patient  endurance  of  pain  because  it  is  Christ's  will  that  we
should  bear  it  does  honour  to  Christ.  Many  a  helpless  sufferer,  who  thinks  his  life  a
useless  burden  to  others,  teaches  such  high  lessons  by  the  spirit  of  faith  and  love
with  which  he  endures,  that  he  serves  Christ  more  effectually  in  his  sick-chamber  than
others  by  the  most  vigorous  activity  in  wide  fields  of  enterprise.

II.  It  is  a  real  blessing  to  be  permitted  to  suffer  in  behalf  of  Christ.  St.
Paul  regards  the  fact  with  joy.  1.  It  is  proof  of  fidelity.  Not  being  "  affrighted  by
the  adversaries,"  the  persecuted  have  their  faith  confirmed  in  their  trials.  2.  It  is  a
171  cans  of  serving  Christ.  It  is  an  honour  and  a  joy  to  serve  Christ  in  any  way,  and
most  of  all  where  the  service  is  most  effective.  3.  It  is  a  proof  of  peculiar  distinction.
The  best  soldiers  are  selected  for  the  hardest  service.  The  martyrs  are  the  flower  of
the  Christian  army.  It  will  lead  to  the  greatest  reward,  (1)  because  the  most  arduous
task  will  justly  receive  the  richest  recompense ;  and  (2)  because  the  peace  and  joy  of
heaven  will  be  inteni-ified  by  contrast  with  the  pain  and  war  of  earth.  Only  the  toiler
can  know  the  true  sweetness  of  rest,  and  only  the  sufferer  the  deep  blessedness  of
heaveu.— W.  F.  A.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IL


Ver.  1. — If  there  be  therefore,  any  oonBo-
lation  in  Christ.  Maik  the  fervour  of  the
apostle.  "Opa  irws  Kvnap&s^  trais  (rtpo$pS)S,  ira>s
/*€T£j  ffu/xTraBclas  troWTis  (Chrysostom).  He
appeals  to  the  Christian  experience  of  the
Philippians ;  if  these  experiences  are  real,
as  they  are;  facts  verified  in  the  believer's
consciousness ;  not  talk,  not  mere  forms  of
speech, — then  fulfil  ye  my  joy.  Consolation  ;
perhaps  "  exhortation  "  is  the  more  suitable
rendering  in  this  place :  if  the  presence  of
Christ,  if  communion  with  Christ,  hath
power  to  stir  the  heart,  to  stimulate  the
emotions,  to  oonstraiu  the  will.  If  any
comfort  of  love;  comfort  springing  out  of
love.  Love  is  the  subjective  result  of  the
presence  of  Christ  as  an  objective  reality,
and  with  love  comes  comfort  (comp.  1  Cor.
xiv.  8  aud  1  Thess.  ii.  11).    If  any  fellow-


ship of  the  Spirit.  If  the  indwelling  of  the
Holy  Ghost  be  true,  a  felt  reality  in  the
Christian  life.  Kot,  as  some  understand,
"If  there  be  any  fellowship  of  spirit  among
themselves."  If  any  bowels  and  meroies.
Bowels  (see  note  on  ch.  i.  8),  the  seat  of  the
feelings  of  compassion ;  mercies,  those  feel-
ings thcinselves.  The  pronoun  "  any  "  ac-
cording to  the  reading  of  all-  the  Mst
manuscripts,  is  masculine  singular;  the  word
"  bowels,"  being  neuter  plural:  ilTi^aTrT^yxva.
If  St.  Paul  really  w.-^ote  thus,  we  must  sup-
pose that  the  warmth  of  his  feelings  suddenly
led  him  to  substitute  irtrkdyxva  for  soma
other  word  originally  in  histhoughts.  "Under
any  circumstances,"  says  Bishop  Lightfoot,
"  the  reading  elf  rts  is  a  valuable  testimony
to  the  scrupulous  fidelity  of  the  early  tran-
scribers, who  copied  the  text  ris  they  found
it,  even  when  it  contained  readings  so  rnani*
festly  difficult,"


CH.  11.1— 30.]         TllEi  EPtSTLfi  tO  'I'tlE  tHlLltPlAlJa.


m


Ver.  2. — Fulfil  ye  my  joy.  St.  Paul  haa
eJready  (ch.  i.  4)  sjjoken  of  liis  joy  derived
fiom  the  life  and  conduct  of  the  Philippiaii
Christians ;  now  he  asks  them  to  complete
his  joy  by  living  in  unity.  There  were  dis-
agreements among  them  (ch.  iv.  2).  That  ye
be  like-minded,  haying  the  same  luve,  being
of  one  accord,  of  one  mind.  The  apostle'8
earnestness  leads  him  to  dwell  on  the  idea
of  unity,  clothing  the  one  thought  again  and
again  in  different  words.  Baffal,  says  Chry-
Bostom,  iroffiKts  rh  airb  \4yei  iirA  SioBsaews
TroA.Ai)s.  "  Having  the  same  love : "  loving
and  beloved ;  i/ioimj  koJ  (piKetv  koI  <t>i\eiireai
(Chrysostom).  "Being  of  one  accord  ((nJ/i-
<j/ux<")"  Bishop  Ellieott  fenders  more  lite-
rally, "With  accordant  souls  minding  the
one  thing."

Ver.  3.— Let  nothing  be  done  through  strife
or  vain-glory.  Not  "strife,"  but  "faction,"  as
E.V.  The  word  is  the  same  as  that  rendered
"contention"  in  oh.  i.  10,  where  see  note.
Party  spirit  is  one  of  the  greatest  dangers
in  running  the  Christian  race.  Love  is  the
characteristic  Christian  grace ;  party  spirit
and  vain-glory  too  otten  lead  professing
Christiana  to  break  the  law  of  love.  But  in
lowliness  of  mind  let  each  esteem  other
better  than  themselves.  In  your  lowliness ;  the
article  seems  to  have  a  possessive  sense,  the
lowliness  characteristic  of  Christians,  which
you  as  Christians  possess.  TaTreimfpoffivri  is
an  exclusively  New  Testament  word:  the
grace  was  new,  and  the  word  was  new.  The
ndjective  Tcaruv6s  in  classical  Greek  is  used
as  a  term  of  reproach — abject,  mean.  The  life
of  Christ  ("  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart ")
and  the  teaching  of  Christ  ("  Blessed  are  the
poor  in  spirit")  have  raised  lowliness  to  a  new
position,  as  one  of  the  chief  features  in  the
true  Christian  character.  Here  St.  Paul  bids
UB,  as  a  discipline  of  humility,  to  look  at  our
own  faults  and  at  the  good  points  in  the
character  of  others  (comp.  Eom.  xii.  10).

Yer.  4. — Look  not  every  man  on  his  own
things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things  of
others.  Translate,  "  looking,"  as  B.V.,  not
making  one's  own  interest  the  one  only
object  of  life,  but  regarding  also  the  interests,
feelings,  wishes,  of  others.  Each  man  must
in  a  measure  look  at  his  own  things, — the
(cat  implies  that ;  but  he  must  consider  others
if  he  is  a  Christian  indeed.

Ver.  5. — Let  this  mind  be  in  yon,  which
was  also  in  Christ  Jesus ;  literally,  accord-
ing to  the  reading  of  the  best  manuscripts,
mind  this  in  you  which  was  also  (minded)  in
Christ  jesui.  Many  manuscripts  take  the
words  "every  man"  (?KoffToi)  of  ver.  4  with
ver.  5 :  "  AH  of  you  mind  this."  The  words,
"in  Christ  Jesus,"  show  that  the  correspond-
ing words,  "  in  you,"  cannot  mean  "  among
you,"  but  in  yourselves,  in  your  heart.  The
upostle  refers  ui  to  the  supreme  example  of


unselfishness  and  humility,  the  Lord  Jesus
Christ.  He  bids  us  mind  (eomp.  Eom.  viii.
5)  the  things  which  the  Lord  Jesus  minded,
to  love  what  he  loved,  to  hate  what  he
hated ;  the  thoughts,  desires,  motives,  of  the
Christian  should  be  the  thoughts,  desires,
motives,  which  filled  the  sacred  heart  of
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  We  must  strive  to
imitate  him,  to  reproduce  his  image,  not
only  in  the  outward,  but  even  in  the  inner
life.  Especially  here  we  are  bidden  to  follow
his  unselfishness  and  humility.

Ver.  6. — Who,  being  in  the  form  of  God.
The  word  rendered  "being  "  (JiTripx"")  means,
as  E.V.  in  margin,  being  originally.  It  looks
back  to  the  time  before  the  Incarnation,  when
the  Word,  the  Adyoj  Surapicos,  was  with  God
(comp.  John  viii.  68;  ivii.  5,-24).  What
does  the  word  /loptp-li,  form,  mean  here  ?  It
occurs  twice  in  this  passage — ver.  6,  "  form
of  God ; "  and  ver.  7,  "  form  of  a  servant ; "  it
is  contrasted  with  cx^f^^^  fashion,  in  ver.  8.
In  the  Aristotelian  philosophy  (vide  '  De
Anima,'  ii.  1,  2)  itopcpii  is  used  almost  in  the
sense  of  eTSosor  rh  tI  ^v  eiym,  as  that  which
makes  a  thing  to  be  what  it  is,  the  sum  of
its  essential  attributes:  it  is  the  form,  as
the  expression  of  those  essential  attributes,
the  permanent,  constant  form ;  not  the  fleet-
ing, outward  (rxv/J-a,  or  fashion.  St.  Paul
seems  to  make  a  somewhat  similar  distinc-
tion between  the  two  words.  Thus  in  Bom.
viii.  29;  Gal.  iv.  19  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  18 ;  ch.  iii.
10,  liop^'f;  (or  its  derivatives)  is  used  of  the
deep  inner  change  of  heart,  the  change
which  is  described  in  Holy  Scripture  as  a
new  creation;  while  ffxvi'^''  is  used  of  the
changeful  fashion  of  the  world  and  agree-
ment with  it  (1  Cor.  vii.  31 ;  Bom.  xii.  2).
Then,  when  St.  Paul  tells  us  that  Christ
Jesus,  being  first  in  the  form  of  God,  took
the  form  of  a  servant,  the  meaning  must  be
that  he  possessed  originally  the  essential
attributes  of  Deity,  and  assumed  in  addition
the  essential  attributes  of  humanity.  He
was  perfect  God;  he  became  perfect  Man
(comp.  Col.  i.  15 ;  Heb.  i.  3 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4).
For  a  fuller  discussion  of  the  meanings  of
fioptpii  and  irxw"!  see  Bishop  Lightfoot's
detached  note  ('  Philippians,'  p.  127),  and
Archbishop  Trench, '  Synonyms  of  the  New
Testament,'  sect.  Ixx.  Thought  it  not  robbery
to  be  equal  with  God ;  E.V.  "counted  it  not
a  prize  [margin, '  a  thing  to  be  grasped ']  to
be  on  an  equality  with  God."  These  two
renderings  represent  two  conflicting  inter-
pretations of  this  difficult  passage.  Do  the
words  mean  that  Christ  asserted  his  essential
Gri )dhead  ("  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal
with  God,"  as  A.V.),  or  that  he  did  not  cling
to  the  glory  of  the  Divine  majesty  ("  counted
it  not  a  prize,"  as  E.V.)?  Both  statements
are  true  in  fact  The  grammatical  form  of
the  word  i.pirayii6$,  which  properly  impUei


60


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.


[cH.  n.  1—30.


en  action  or  process,  favours  the  first  view,
which  seems  to  be  adopted  by  most  of  the
ancient  versions  and  by  most  of  the  Latin
Fathers.  On  the  other  hand,  the  form  of
the  word  does  not  exclude  the  passive  inter-
pretation ;  many  words  of  the  same  termi-
nation have  a  passive  meaning,  and  ap-iray/iSs
itself  is  used  in  the  sense  of  &pirayiia  by
Eusebius,  Cjril  of  Alexandria,  and  a  writer
in  the  '  Catena  Possini '  on  Mark  x.  42  (the
three  passages  are  quoted  by  Bishop  Light-
foot,  in  loeo).  The  Greek  Fathers  (ns  Chry-
snslom,  'O  rod  @eov  vths  oix  ^(po$iiSr]  Kora-
firjuai  airh  toJ  i|idijuaTor,  etc.)  generally  adopt
this  interpretation.  And  the  context  seema
to  require  it.  The  aorist  fiyfitraro  points  to
an  act,  the  act  of  abnegation ;  not  to  a  state,
the  continued  assertion.  The  conjunction
"  but "  (o\Aa)  implies  that  the  two  sentences
are  opposed  to  one  another.  He  did  not
grnsp,  but,  on  the  contrary,  he  emptied  him-
Belf.  Tlie  first  interpretation  involves  the
tacit  insertion  of  "  nevertheless ;"  he  asserted
his  equality,  but  nevertheless,  etc.  And  the
whole  stress  is  laid  on  the  Lord's  humility
•nd  unselfishness.  It  is  trae  that  this  secund
interpretation  does  not  so  distinctly  assert
the  divinity  of  our  Lord,  already  sufBciently
asserted  in  the  first  clause,  "  being  in  the
form  of  God."  But  it  implies  it.  Not  to
grasp  at  equality  with  God  would  not  be  an
instance  of  humility,  but  merely  the  ahaence
of  mad  impiety,  in  one  who  was  not  himself
Divine.  On  the  whole,  then,  we  prefer  the
second  interpretation.  Though  he  was  from
the  beginning  in  the  form  of  Grod,  he  did
not  regard  eqnality  with  God  as  a  thing  to
be  grasped,  a  prize  to  be  tenaciously  retained.
Not  so  good  is  the  view  of  Meyer  and  others ;
"  Jesus  Christ,  when  he  found  himself  in  the
heavenly  mode  of  existence  of  Divine  glory,
did  not  permit  himself  the  thought  of  using
his  equality  with  God  for  the  purpose  of
seizing  possessions  and  honour  for  himself
on  earth."  The  E.V.  rendering  of  I  he  last
words  of  the  clause, "  to  be  on  an  equality,"  is
nearer  to  the  Greek  and  better  than  the
A. v.,  "  to  be  equal  with  God."  Christ  was
equal  with  God  (John  T.  18;  x.  30).  He  did
not  cling  to  the  outward  manifestation  of
that  equality.  The  adverbial  form  Xaa  im-
plies the  state  or  mode  of  equality  rather
than  the  equality  itself.

Ver.  7. — But  made  himself  of  no  repu-
tation ;  rather,  as  B.V.,  but  emptied  himself}
not,  indeed,  of  the  Godliead,  which  could  not
be,  but  of  its  manifestation,  its  glory.  This
he  did  once  for  all,  as  the  aorist  implies,  at
the  Incarnation.  The  word  "  emptied  "  in-
volves a  previous  fulness,  "a  precedent
plenitude "  (Pearson  on  the  Creed,  iii.  25).
The  Divine  majesty  of  which  he  emptied
himself  was  bis  own,  his  own  rightful  pre-
ro^tiva;  and  his  humilifttion  was  his  own


voluntary  act — he  emptied  himself.  "H«
used  his  equality  with  God  as  an  oppor-
tunity, not  for  self-exaltation,  but  for  self-
abasement"  (Alford).  "ManebatpZenus,  Joh.
i.  14,  et  tamen  perinde  se  gessit  ac  si  inanit
esset"  (Bengel).  And  took  upon  him  the
form  of  a  servant;  rather,  as  B.y.,  taking
the  form.  The  two  clauses  refer  to  the  same
act  of  self-humiliation  regarded  from  its  two
sides.  He  emptied  himself  of  his  glory,
taking  at  the  same  time  the  form  (iJi.op<jiiiv,aa
in  ver.  6,  the  essential  attributes)  of  a  servant,
literally,  of  a  slave.  Observe,  he  was  origin-
ally (virdpxo'v)  in  the  form  of  God;  he  took
{Ka$ii/)  the  form  of  a  slave.  The  Godhead
was  his  by  right,  the  manhood  by  his  own
voluntary  act :  both  are  equally  real ;  he  is
perfect  God  and  perfect  Man.  Isaiah  pro-
phesied of  Christ  (Isa.  xlix.  and  Iii. ;  comp.
Acts  iii.  13,  in  the  Greek  or  E.V.)  as  the
Servant  of  Jehovah;  he  came  to  do  the
Father's  will,  submitting  his  own  will  in  all
things:  "Not  as  I  wUl,  but  as  thou  wilt"
(comp.  Matt.  xx.  27,  28 ;  Mark  x.  44,  45).
And  was  made  in  the  likeness  of  men ;  trans-
late, becoming,  or,  as  E.  V.,  being  made  (aorist
participle).  This  clause  is  another  de-
scription of  the  one  act  of  the  Incarnation :
he  was  God,  he  became  man.  Form  (^lioptpif)
asserts  the  reality  of  our  Lord's  human
nature.  Likeness  (iiioimtia)  refers  only  to
external  appearance :  this  word,  of  course,
does  not  imply  that  our  Lord  was  not  truly
man,  but,  as  Chrysostom  says  ('  Horn.,'  viii.
247),  he  was  more  than  man ;  "  We  are
soul  and  body,  but  he  is  God  and  soul  and
body."  Tfte  likeness  of  men;  because  Christ
is  the  Eepresentative  of  humanity :  he  took
upon  him,  not  a  human  person,  but  human
nature.  He  is  one  person  in  two  natures.
As  Bishop  Lightfoot  says,  "Christ,  as  the
second  Adam,  represents,  not  the  individual
man,  but  the  human  race."

Ver.  8. — And  being  foxmd  in  fashion  as  a
man.  He  humbled  himself  in  the  Incar-
nation; but  this  was  not  all.  The  apostle  has
hitherto  spoken  of  our  Lord's  Godhead
which  he  had  from  the  beginning,  and  of
his  assumption  of  our  human  nature.  He
now  speaks  of  him  as  he  appeared  in  the
sight  of  men.  The  aorist  participle,  "  being
found  (^eipeBels)"  refers  to  the  time  of  his
earthly  life  when  he  appeared  as  a  man
among  men.  Fashion  (<rxi)M")>  as  opposed
to  form  (fiop^if),  implies  the  outward  and
transitory.  In  outward  appearance  he  was
as  a  man ;  he  was  more,  for  he  was  God.
He  humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient
unto  death ;  translate,  as  E.V.,  becoming
obedient.  The  participle  implies  that  the
supreme  act  of  Self-humiliation  consisted  in
the  Lord's  voluntary  submission  to  death.
The  obedience  of  his  perfect  life  extended
even  unto  death.  •'  He  taketh  away  (literally,


oh.il  1—30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILTPPIAN8.


61


•beareth,'  cilpfi]  the  sin  of  the  world ; "  "  The
wages  of  sin  is  death ; "  therefore  he  suffered
denth  fnr  the  sin  which,  himself  sinless,  he
vouchsafed  to  bear.  Here  we  may  remark
in  passing  that  this  conneotiou  of  death  with
sin  must  have  made  death  all  the  more
awful  to  our  sinless  Lord.  Eveu  the  death
of  the  cross.  No  ordinary  death,  but  of  all
forms  of  death  the  most  torturing,  the  most
full  of  shame — a  death  reserved  by  the
Bomans  for  slaves,  a  death  accursed  in  the
eyes  of  the  Jews  (Deut.  xxi.  23).

Ver.  9.— Wherefore  God  also  hath  highly
exalted  him.  The  exaltation  is  tlie  reward
of  the  humiliation !  "  He  that  humbleth  him-
self shall  be  exalted."  Better,  as  E.V.,
liiglily  exalted.  The  aorist  (iwepitfioxrev)  refers
to  the  historical  facts  of  the  Resurrection  auil
Ascension.  And  given  him  a  Name  which  is
above  every  name ;  read  and  translate,  as
B.V.,  and  gave  unto  him  the  Name.  The
two  aorist  verba,  "highly  exalted"  and
"  freely  gave  "  (4xapl<raTo),  refer  to  the  time
of  our  Lord's  resurrection  and  ascension.  He
voluntarily  assumed  a  subordinate  position ;
God  the  Fatlier  exalted  him.  We  must  read,
with  the  best  manuscripts,  the  Name.  This
seems  to  mean,  not  the  name  Jesus,  which
was  given  him  at  his  circumcision,  in  ac-
cordance with  the  angel's  message ;  but  the
name  Lord  or  Jehovah  (corn p.  ver.  11),  which
was  indeed  his  before  his  incarnation,  but
was  given  (comp.  Matt,  xxviii.  18,  "All
power  is  given  unto  me  in  heaven  and  in
earth  ")  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  incarnate  Son,
God  and  Man  in  one  Person.  Or  more  pro-
bably, perhaps,  the  word  "  Name  "  is  used
hero,  as  so  often  in  the  Hebrew  Scriptures,
for  the  majesty,  glory,  dignity,  of  the  God-
head. Compare  the  oft-repeated  words  of
the  psalmist,  "Praise  the  Name  of  the  Lord."
So  Gesenius,  in  his  Hebrew  lexicon  on  the
word  Di^,  explains  the  Name  of  the  Lord  as
(6)  Jehovah  as  being  called  on  and  praised
by  men ;  and  (c)  the  Deity  as  being  present
with  mortals  (comp.  Bph.  i.  21 ;  Heb.  i.  4).

Ver.  10.— That  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every
knee  should  how ;  translate,  in  the  name,  not
at  (comp.  Isa.  xlv.  23,  quoted  in  Bom.  xiv,
10,  11).  The  words  may  mean,  either  that
all  prayer  must  be  offered  to  God  in  the
name  of  Jesus,  through  his  mediation;  or
that  all  creation  must  offer  prayer  to  him.
Both  alternatives  are  true,  and  perhaps
both  are  covered  by  the  words;  but  tlie
second  seems  to  be  principally  intended
(comp.  Pb.  Ixiil.  4,  "I  will  lift  np  my
hands  in  thy  Name."  Oomp.  also  (in  the
Greek)  Ps.  xliii.  9 ;  oiv.  3 ;  1  Kings  viii.  44;
also  the  common  Septuagint  phrase,  'Ewiiea-
Keia9ai  iy  iyi/iari  Kvp(ov).  Observe,  the  words
are,  not "  the  name  Jesus,"  but  » the  name  of
Jesus;"  the  name,  that  is,  which  God  freely
gave  to  him  (ver.  9).    It  is  the  name  which


is  above  every  name,  that  is,  the  majesty,
the  glory  of  Jesus,  which  is  to  be  the  object
of  Christian  worship.  The  end  of  the  whole
passage  being  the  exaltation  of  Jesns,  it
seems  more  natural  to  understand  this  verse
of  worship  paid  to  Jesus  than  of  worship
oifered  through  him  to  God  the  Father,
Observe  also  that  the  words  (Isa.  xlv.  23)
on  which  this  passage  is  formed  are  the
words  of  Jehovah:  "Unto  me  every  knee
shall  bow,  every  tongue  shall  swear."  They
could  not  be  used  without  impiety  of  any
but  God.  Of  things  in  heaven,  and  things
in  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth.  Per-
haps the  angels,  the  living,  and  the  dead ;
or,  more  probably  (comp.  Eev.  v.  13  and
Eph.  i.  21,  22),  all  creation,  animate  and
inanimate,  is  represented  as  uniting  in  the
universal  adoration.

Yer.  11. — And  that  erery  tongne  should
confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord.  Every
tongue ;  all  creatures  endowed  with  the  gift
of  speech.  The  word  rendered  "  confess  "  is
commonly  associated  with  the  idea  of  thanks-
giving, as  in  Matt.  xi.  25,  and  generally  in
tiie  Septuagint.  Every  tongue  shall  confess
with  tliankful  adoration  that  he  who  took
upon  him  the  form  of  a  slave,  is  Lord  of  all.
To  the  glory  of  Ood  the  Father  (comp.  1  Cor.
XV.  28,  "That  God  may  be  all  in  all").
The  glory  of  God  the  Father,  from  whom,
as  the  original  Source,  the  whole  scheme  of
salvation  proceeds,  is  the  supreme  and  ulti-
mate object  of  the  Saviour's  incarnation.

Ver.  12. — ^Wherefore,  my  beloved,  as  ye
have  always  obeyed,  not  as  in  my  presence
only,  but  now  much  more  in  my  ahsenoe.
St.  Paul  passes  to  exhortation  grounded  on
the  Lord's  perfect  example.  "Ye  obeyed"
(^uTrriKoiiraTf)  answers  to  the  yevi/ievos  tiirl)
Koos  of  ver.  8,  and  t^v  eavray  juTTiptav
corresponds  with  the  Saviour's  exaltation
described  in  vers.  9 — 11.  He  encourages
them  by  acknowledging  their  past  obedience;
he  urges  them  to  work,  not  for  the  sake  of
approving  themselves  to  theirearthly  teacher,
but  to  think  of  their  unseen  Lord,  and  to
realize  his  presence  all  the  more  in  8L
Paul's  absence.  Work  out  your  own  sal-
vation. Complete  it;  God  has  begun  the
work;  carry  it  out  unto  the  end.  Comp.
the  same  word  in  Eph.  vi.  13,  "having  done
all."  Christ's  work  of  atonement  is  finished:
work  from  the  cross:  carry  out  the  great
work  of  sanctification  by  tiie  help  of  the
Holy  Spirit.  Tour  own :  it  ii  each  man's
own  work;  no  human  friend,  no  pastor,  not
even  an  apostle,  can  work  it  for  him.  'With
fear  and  trembling  (comp.  2  Cor.  vii.  15  and
Eph.  vi.  5).  "  Servi  esse  debetis  exemplo
Christi"  (Bengel).  Have  an  eager,  trem-
bling anxiety  to  obey  God  in  all  things,  con-
•ideriug  the  tremendous  saorifloe  of  Christ
the  unspeakable  depth  and  tenderness  of


«t


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANa  [cH.n.  1— 3«


his   lore,  the   immenm  importance  of  a

present  salvation  from  sin,  the  momentous
preciousiiess  of  a  future  salvation  from  death.

Ver.  13. — For  it  is  God  which  worketh  in
you.  "  PrsBsens  Tobis,"  says  Bengel,  "  etiam
absents  me."  Worltefh  (ivepyavjl  not  the
same  word  as  "work  out"  (^KarfpyiC^a-ei)  in
ver.  12;  acts  powerfully,  with  eneigy.  lit
you;  not  merely  among  you,  but  in  the
heart  of  each  individual  believer.  Both  to
will  and  to  do ;  translate,  with  E.  V.,  to  work ;
the  same  word  as  before,  ii/epyelir.  "Nos
ergo  volumus.  Bed  Deus  in  nobis  operatur  et
velle :  nos  ergo  operamur,  sed  Deus  in  nobis
operatur  et  operari  "  (Augustine,  quoted  by
Meyer).  The  grace  of  God  is  alleged  as  a
motive  for  earnest  Christian  work.  Tlie
doctrines  of  grace  and  free-will  are  not  con-
tradictory: they  may  seem  so  to  our  limited
understanding ;  but  in  truth  they  complete
and  supplement  one  another.  St.  Paul  does
not  attempt-  to  solve  the  problem  in  theory ;
he  bids  us  solve  it  in  the  life  of  faith  (comp.
1  Cor.  is.  24,  "  So  run  that  ye  may  obtain ; "
and  Rom.  ix.  16,  "It  is  not  of  him  that
willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God
that  showeth  mercy  ").  Of  his  good  pleasure
(fiiSoKias).  As  the  glory  of  God  is  the  ulti-
mate end  (ver.  11),  so  the  good  will  of  God
is  the  first  cause  of  our  salvation:  "God
will  have  all  men  to  be  saved"  (1  Tim,  iL  1).

Ver.  14. — ^To  all  things  without  murmur-
ings  and  disputings.  Obedience  must  be
willing  and  cheerful.  The  word  rendered
"muimuring8"(7o77u(r/i(Js)isthatconstantly
used  in  the  Septuagint  of  the  murmurings  of
the  Israelites  during  their  wanderings.  Aio-
Koyitrixoi  may  mean,  as  here  rendered,  "  dis-
putings,"  or  more  probably,  in  accordance
with  the  New  Testament  use  of  the  word,
questionings, doubtings.  Submission toGod's
will  must  be  inward  as  well  as  outward.

Ver.  15. — That  ye  may  be  blameless  and
harmless ;  read,  with  the  best  manuscripts,
that  ye  may  become ;  an  exhortation  to  con-
tinued progress.  "  Harmless ; "  rather,  pure,
simple ;  literally,  unmixed.  The  sons  of  God,
without  rebuke,  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked
and  perversa  nation ;  rather,  children,  with-
out the  article.  "  The  slave  may  murmur,"
says  Chrysostom,  "but  what  smi  will  murmur,
who,  while  working  for  his  father,  works  also
for  himself  ?  "  Substitute  "  blameless  "  for
"without  rebuke,"  and  "generation"  for
"  nation."  There  is  a  close  resemblance
Sere,  especially  in  the  Greek,  and  an  evident
/eference  to  Deut.  xxxii.  5.  The  Phillp-
pians  are  exhorted  to  exhibit  in  their  lives
a  contrast  to  the  behaviour  of  the  rebellious
Israelites.  Among  whom  ye  shine  as  lights
in  the  world ;  not  "  shine,"  but,  as  R.V.,  ar»
seen  or  appear.  LiglUe ;  literally,  luminariei.
The  word  is  used  in  Gen.  i.  14, 16  of  the
f«a  Hid  inoon.    Comp.  Ecclus.  xUi).  7  a|i4


Wisd.  xiii.  %  "where  ^atrrTipn  fciparoB  is
exactly  equivalent  to  ^mrrripts  if  Koaii^
here,  the  Koir/uii  of  this  place  being  the
material  world,  the  firmament;  not  the
ethical  world,  which' has  been  already  ex-
pressed by  the  crooked  and  perverse  nation  "
(Trench, '  Synonyms  of  the  New  Testament').
Ver.  16.— Holding  forth  the  word  of  life.
Holding  out  to  others.  Meyer  translates
"  possessing,"  and  others,  as  Bengel,  "  hold-
ing fast."  This  clause  should  be  taken  with
the  first  clause  of  v«.  15,  "That  ye  may  be
blameless,"  etc.,  the  words,  "among  whom,"
etc.,  being  parenthetical.  That  I  may  rejoice
in  the  day  of  Christ ;  literally,  for  matter  of
boasting  to  me  against  the  day  of  Christ.  He
boasts  or  glories  in  their  salvation.  '-  The
day  of  Christ,"  says  Bishop  Lightfoot,  "  is  a
phrase  peculiar  to  this  Epistle,  more  com-
monly it  is  '  the  day  of  the  Lord.' "  That  I
have  not  run  in  vain,  neither  laboured  in
yain ;  translate,  did  not.  The  verbs  are
aorist.  He  looks  back  upon  his  finished
course  (comp.  Gal.  ii.  2).

Ver.  17. — ^Yea,  and  if  I  be  offered  upon
the  sacrifloe  and  service  of  your  faith.  He
again  compares  the  advantages  of  life  and
death,  as  in  ch.  i.  20 — 25.  In  the  last  verse
he  was  speaking  of  the  possibility  of  looking
back  from  the  day  of  Christ  upon  a  life  of
prolonged  labour.  Here  he  supposes  the
other  alternative.  The  form  of  the  sentence,
the  particles  used  (el  xat),  and  the  indicative
verb,  all  imply  that  the  apostle  looked  for-
ward to  a  martyr's  death  as  the  probable
end  of  his  life  of  warfare  :  Yea,  if  I  am  even
offered,  as  seems  likely,  and  as  I  expect.
Offered ;  the  word  means  "  poured  out "  as  a
libation  or  drink  offering.  St.  Paul  regaiiis
his  blood  shed  in  martyrdom  as  a  libation
poured  forth  in  willing  sacrifice.  See  2  Tim.
iv.  6,  'Eyii  y&p  fjSri  ffireVSojuai,  "I  am  already
being  poured  forth :  the  libation  is  commenc-
ing, the  time  of  my  departure  is  at  hand."
Compare  also  the  similar  words  of  Ignatius,
'  Rom.'  2,  and  the  words  of  the  dying  Seneca
(Tacitus, '  Annals,*  xv.  64).  Some  think  that
the  apostle,  writing,  as  he  does,  to  converted
heathen,  draws  his  metaphor  from  heathen
sacrifices:  in  those  sacrifices  the  libation
was  a  much  more  important  element  than
the  drink  offering  in  the  Mosaic  rites ;  and
it  was  poured  upon  the  sacrifice,  whereas
the  drink  offering  seems  to  have  been  poured
around  the  altar,  not  upon  it.  On  the  other
hand,  the  preposition  iirt  is  constantly  used
of  the  Jewish  drink  offering  and  does  not
necessarily  mean  upon,  but  only  "  in  addition
to,"  or  "  at ; "  the  drink  offering  being  an
accompaniment  to  the  sacrifice-  Service
{\itTovpyia).  This  important  word  denotes
in  classical  Greek  (1)  certain  costly  publio
offices  at  Athens,  dischnrged  by  the  richer
citizepa  in  fotatiuui  (2)  ajiy  «wvi«e  at  fm^


m.  II.  1—30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHTLIPPIANS.


63


tion.  In  the  Greek  Scriptures  it  is  used  of
priestly  ministrations  (Heb.  viii.  6 ;  ix.  21 ;
comp.  also  Kom.  xv.  16).  In  eoclesiaetical
Greek  it  stands  for  tlie  order  of  the  Holy
Communion,  the  ancient  liturgies;  it  is
sometimes  used  loosely  for  any  set  form  of
public  prayer.  The  analogy  of  Rom  xii.  1,
where  St.  Paul  exhorts  Christians  to  present
their  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  suggests  that
here  the  Philippiiins  are  regarded  as  priests
(comp.  1  Pet.  ii.  5),  oifering  the  sacrifice  of
their  faith,  their  hearts,  themselves,  in  the
ministrations  of  the  spiritual  priesthood ;  St.
Paul's  blood  being  represented  as  the  ac-
companying drink  offering.  Others,  com-
paring Eom.  XV.  16,  where  also  sacrificial
words  are  used,  regard  St.  Paul  himself  as
the  ministering  priest,  and  understand  the
metaphor  of  a  priest  slain  at  the  altar,  his
blood  being  shed  while  he  is  offering  the
sacrifice  of  their  faith.  I  joy,  and  rejoioe
with  you  all.  Meyer,  Bengel,  and  others
prefer  "  congratulate  "  as  the  rendering  of
vuyxalpai,  "  I  rejoice  with  you."

Ver.  18. — ^Por  the  same  cause  also  do  ye  joy,
and  rejoice  with  me ;  or,  as  B.V.,  in  the  same
manner.  Their  joy  is  to  be  like  his,  to  mingle
with  his  joy.  The  second  clause  may  be
rendered, as  in  ver.  1 7,  "and  congratulate  me."

Ver.  19.— But  I  trust  in  the  Lord  Jesus  to
send  Timotheus  shortly  unto  yon ;  reud  and
translate,  with  R.V.,  /  hope  in  the  Lord  Jesus.
He  had  urged  them,  in  ver.  12,  not  to  depend
too  much  on  human  teachers;  but  "much
"jiore  in  my  absence  work  out  your  own  sal-
vation;" still  he  will  give  them  what  help  he
can — he  will  send  Timotheus.  In  the  Lord
Jesvs  (comp.  eh.  i.  8,  14;  ii.  24).  Bishop
Lightfoot  has  a  beautiful  note  here:  "  The
Christian  is  a  part  of  Christ,  a  member  of
his  body.  His  every  thought  and  word  and
deed  proceed  from  Christ,  as  the  centre  of
volition.  Thus  he  loves  in  the  Lord,  he
hopes  in  the  Lord,  he  boasts  in  the  Lord,
he  labours  in  the  Lord.  He  has  one  guiding
principle  in  acting  and  forbearing  to  act,
'only  in  the  Lord'  (1  Cor.  vu.  39)."  That
I  also  may  be  of  good  comfort,  when  I  know
your  state.  Timothy  is  both  to  assist  the
Philippians  by  his  presence  and  counsel,
and  to  comfort  St.  Paul  by  bringing  back
tidings  of  their  Christian  life.

Ver.  20. — For  I  have  no  man  Uke-minded ;
literally,  of  equal  siml  (comp.  Deut.  xiii.  6,
"Thy  friend,  which  is  as  thine  own  soul ").
"Timotheus,"  says  Bengel,  "is  a  second
Paul :  where  he  is,  there  you  should  think
that  I  myself  am  present."  Others,  not  so
well,  explain  the  words,  "I  have  no  one  like
Timothy."  The  expression  must,  of  course,
be  limited  to  those  present  at  the  moment,
and  available  for  the  mission :  it  cannot  in-
clude St.  Luke.  Who  will  naturally  oaro
toj  your  state  (So-tu);  iwcft  o»  iviU  care.


Naturally  (yvn<riu! :  comp.  1  Tim  i.  2,  where
St.  Paul  calls  Timothy  "mine  own  son  in  the
faith,"  ^i/^crioi'  TeKm>);  with  a  true,  genuine
affection.  Timothy's  love  for  St.  Paul  as
hia  spiritual  father  will  inspire  him  with  a
genuine  love  for  those  who  were  so  dear  to
St.  Paul.  Gare  is  a  strong  word,  nipiiu/itvei,
will  be  anxious  (comp.  Matt.  vi.  31).

Ver.  21. — For  all  seek  their  own,  not  the
things  which  are  Jesus  Christ's.  All  of  them,
he  says  (ol  irivTes);  Timothy  is  the  one  ex-
ception. He  calls  those  about  him  brethren
in  ch.  iv.  21 ;  but,  it  seems,  they  were  not
like  St.  Paul,  not  willing  to  spend  and  to  be
spent  for  the  salvation  of  souls.  It  was  a
great  sacrifice  in  one  who  so  yearned  for
Christian  sympathy  to  submit  to  the  absence
of  the  one  true  loving  friend.  St.  Paul's
spiritual  isolation  increases  our  wonder  and
admiration  for  tlie  strain  of  holy  joy  which
runs  through  this  Epistle.

Ver.  22. — But  ye  know  the  proof  of  him.
Ye  recognize  from  your  former  experience
(Acts  xvi.)  his  approved  character.  That,  as
a  son  with,  the  father,  he  hath  served  with
me  in  the  gospel ;  translate,  with  R.V.,  that,
as  a  child  serveth  a  father,  so  he  served  with
me  in  fttrtherance  of  the  gospel.  Served  {iSoi-
XfutTEf) ;  as  a  slave.  He  was  both  a  son  and
servant  to  St.  Paul,  and  also  a  fellow-worker
with  St.  Paul,  both  being  slaves  of  God.

Ver.  28. — Him  therefore  I  hope  to  send
presently,  so  soon  as  I  shall  see  how  it  will
go  with  me.  Presently ;  rather,  forthutith,  as
B.V.  Dr.  Parrar  translates,  "As  soon  as  I
get  a  glimpse."  The  oldest  raauusoripts
here  read  lupiSa  (remarkable  for  the  aspirate)
instead  of  aviSa.

Ver.  24.— But  I  trust  in  the  lord  that  I
also  myself  shaU  come  shortly.  Notice  the
variations  of  tone  respecting  his  prospects
of  release.  "I  know"  (oh.  i.  25),  "I  hope"
(Philem.  22,  in  the  Greek),  "I  trust"  here.
The  apostle  was  subject,  like  all  of  us,  to
changing  currents  of  thought,  to  the  ebb
and  flow  of  spirits ;  but  his  trust  was  always
in  the  Lord.  "  Behold,"  says  Ohrysostom,
"how  he  makes  all  things  depend  upon
God."  His  hope,  in  all  probability,  was
fulfilled  (see  Titus  iii.  12).

Ver.  25. — ^Tet  I  supposed  it  necessary  to
send  to  yon  Epaphroditns ;  translate,  but  I
count  it  necessary.  'Hyri(riij.riv  here  and  €ire/»i^a
in  ver.  28  are  epistolary  aorists;  they  point,
that  is,  to  the  time  of  reading  the  letter,
not  to  that  of  writing  it ;  and  are  therefore
to  be  rendered  by  the  English  present.
Epaphroditus  is  mentioned  only  in  this
Epistle.  Epaphras  is  the  contracted  form,
but  the  name  is  a  common  one,  and  there  is
no  evidence  of  his  identity  with  the  Epaphras
of  Colossians  and  Philemon.  He  seems  to
have  been  the  bearer  of  this  Epistle.  St.
P*ul  felt  thftt  to  Qovue  hiij»self,  ojt  even  ^


6i


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [ch.  tl  1— SQ


■end  Timothy,  might  possibly  not  be  in  hii
power;  he  thought  it  necessary,  a  matter  of
duty,  to  send  Epaphroditus  at  once.  My
brother,  and  companion  in  labour,  and  fellow-
soldier.  Mark  how  the  epithets  rise  one
above  another;  they  imply  fellowship  in
religion,  in  work,  in  endurance.  But  your
messenger,  and  he  that  ministered  to  my
■wants.  "Your"  refers  to  both  clauses;
"your  messenger,  and  (your)  minister  to
my  need."  Epaphroditus  had  brought  to
St.  Paul  the  contributions  of  the  Philippians
(oh.  iv.  18).  Some  think  that  the  word
rendered  "messenger"  {liirSaToXos,  literally
"apostle")  means  that  Epaphroditus  was
the  apostle,  that  is,  the  bishop  of  the  Phi-
lippian  Church.  H  may  be  so  (comp.  oh.  iv.
8,  and  note) ;  but  there  is  no  proof  of  the
establishment  of  any  diocesan  bishops,  ex-
cept St.  James  at  Jerusalem,  at  so  early  a
period.  The  word  oitiJo-toXos,  both  here  and
in  2  Cor.  viii.  23  (ftirrfo-ToXoi  dKKKriirtuv),  is
probably  used  in  its  first  meaning  in  the
sense  of  messenger,  or  delegate.  The  Greek
word  for  minister,  XeiToi;p7(!s,  seems  to  imply,
like  \uTovpyla  in  ver.  SO,  that  St.  Paul  re-
garded the  alms  of  the  Philippians  as  an
offuring  to  God,  ministered  by  Epaphroditus.
(But  see  Bom.  ziii.  6,  also  2  Kings  iv.  43;
Ti.  15,  etc.  in  tlie  Greek.)

Yer.  26.— for  he  longed  after  you  all.
The  verb  is  strengthened  by  the  preposi-
tion: "was  eagerly  longing."  Perhaps  it
should  be  rendered,  "  is  longing ; "  like  "  I
count  it  necessary,"  in  ver.  25.  And  was
fall  of  heaviness,  because  that  ye  had  heard
that  he  had  been  sick.  "  Full  of  heaviness  "
(^aSnuouav)  is  the  word  used  of  our  blessed
Lord  in  his  agony  (Matt.  xxvi.  37).  Some
derive  it  from  KSt/^hoj,  away  from  home;
others,  more  probably,  from  SStjv,  in  the
sense  of  loathing,  weariness,  satiety'.  The
word  implies  heart-sickness,  restless,  un-
satisfied weririnesB,  prodnced  by  some  over-
whelming distress.

Ver.  27. — For  indeed  he  was  sick  nigh
unto  death :  but  God  had  mercy  on  him ;
and  not  on  him  only,  but  on  me  also,  lest  I
should  have  sorrow  upon  sorrow.  St.  Paul
recognizes  the  thankfulness  of  Epaphroditus
for  the  recovery  of  his  health:  he  shares
that  thankfulness  himself.  Mark  his  human
sympathies;  he  had  a  "desire  to  depart,"
but  he  rejoices  in  the  recovery  of  his  friend.
Bt.  Paul  does  not  seem  to  have  healed  Epa-
phroditus. The  puwer  of  working  miracles,
like  that  of  foreseeing  the  future  (comp.  ch.


{.  25,  and  note),  was  not,  it  seems,  oontinnonr,
both  were  exercised  only  in  accordance  with
the  revealed  will  of  God  and  on  occasions  ol
especial  moment.

Ver.  28. — I  sent  him  therefore  the  more
carefully,  that,  when  ye  see  him  again,  ye
may  rejoice,  and  that  I  may  be  tiie  less
sorrowful;  rather,  /  tend  him  (epistolary
Borist,  as  ver.  25),  I  send  him  with  the  ktter.
Perhaps  "  again "  is  better  taken  with  the
following  clause;  "that  when  ye  see  him,
ye  may  again  rejoice."  Note  St.  Paul's
ready  sympathy  with  the  Philippians :  their
restored  joy  will  involve  a  diminution  of  his
sorrow.  Mark  also  the  implied  admission  that
sorrows  must  still  remain,  though  spiritual
joy  briglitens  and  relieves  tliem.  " Sorrow-
ful, yet  always  rejoicing"  (2  Cor.  vi.  10).

Ver.  29. — Beoeive  Mm.  therefore  in  the
Lord  with  all  gladness;  and  hold  such  in
reputation:  In  the  Lord  (see  note  on  ver.  19;
comp.  Kom.  xvi.  2).  With  joy  on  every
account.  Notice  the  constant  repetition  of
the  word  "joy,"  characteristic  of  tliis  Epistle.

Ver.  30. — Because  for  the  work  of  Christ
he  was  nigh  unto  death.  The  readings  vary
between  "Christ"  and  "the  Lord."  One
ancient  manuscript  reads  simply,  "  for  the
work's  sake."  The  work  in  this  case  con-
sisted in  ministering  to  the  wants  of  St.
Paul.  Translate  the  following  words,  with
B.V.,  he  came  nigh  unto  death.  Hot  regard-
ing bis  life ;  ratlier,  as  B.V.,  hazarding  hit
life,  which  translation  represents  the  best-
supported  reading,  irapapo\eviriiifvos:  the
verb  literally  means  "  to  lay  down  a  stake,
to  gamble."  Hence  the  word  Parabolani,
the  name  given  to  certain  brotherhoods  in
the  ancient  Church  who  undertook  the
hazardous  work  of  tending  the  sick  and
burying  the  dead  in  times  of  pestilence.
The  A.V.  represents  the  reading  vapaPou-
Kevcinevos,  cousulting  amiss.  To  supply
your  lack  of  service  toward  me ;  rather,  as
B.V.,  that  which  wai  laeking  in  your  urtiea.
Tlie  Philippians  are  not  blamed.  Epaphro-
ditus did  that  which  their  absence  prevented
them  from  doing.  His  illness  was  caused
by  over-exertion  in  attending  to  the  apostle'i
wants,  or,  it  may  be,  by  the  hardships  of  the
journey.  "tpLuv  must  be  taken  closely  with
vvrepii/ia,  the  lack  of  your  presence.  Bt.
Paul,  with  exquisite  delicacy,  represents  the
absence  of  the  Philippians  as  something
lacking  to  his  complete  satisfaction,  some-
thing which  he  missed,  and  which  Epaphro-
ditus supplied.


H0MILETIC8.

Vers.  1 — 4. — Exhortation  to  unity.  I.  St.  Paul's  kabkebt  debibk  fob  thk  omrr
or  THB  Philifpian  CamtOH.  \.  He  desires  that  unity  because  he  hves  them.  His
happiness  is  bound  up  with  their  spiritual  welfare.   "  Fulfil  ye  my  joy,"  he  gays ;  he


OH.  n.  1—30.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  86

had  leaned  to  look  upon  the  things  of  others ;  his  deepest  joy  depended,  not  on  his
own  personal  ooml'orts,  but  on  the  spiritual  progress  of  those  whom  he  loved.  The
remembrance  of  the  Philippians  (oh.  i.  3,  4),  the  thought  of  their  Christian  love,
brought  joy  to  his  heart.  He  asks  them  now  to  fulfil  his  joy,  to  increase,  to  Complete
it ;  and  that  not  by  gifts  (sifts  they  had  sent  agaia  and  a;;aiil),  but  by  living  together
in  holy  love,  by  keeping  "  the  unity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace."  2.  He  desires
that  unity  because  Christ  desires  it.  He  lonjied  for  the  Philippians  "in  the  bowels  of
Jesus  Christ."  His  life  was  Christ,  "Christ  liveth  in  me,"  he  said;  therefore  he
loved  with  the  love  of  Christ,  and  Christ  prayed  for  the  unity  of  the  Church.  That
unity  (the  Lord  Jesus  said)  should  be  the  mark  and  badge  of  his  disciples  (John
xiii.  35) ;  it  should  be  the  means  of  leading  the  world  to  believe  in  his  mission,  in  his
gospel  (John  xvii.  21,  23).  3.  Be  shows  the  earnestness  of  his  desire  hy  dwelling  on  the
thought  of  unity.  He  repeats  his  exhortation  again  and  again.  "Mind  the  same
things,"  he  says ;  have  the  same  motives,  the  same  desires,  the  same  circle  of  thoughts.
Have  the  same  love;  set  yoiu:  love  on  the  same  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  regard  for  his  sake
with  a  common  love  all  who  are  called  by  his  Name.  Let  your  souls  be  knit  together
in  a  similarity  of  affections,  wishes,  feelings.  Let  the  central  thought,  the  aim  of  your
lives,  be  one ;  the  one  thing  needful,  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ.

II.  The  motives  whioh  should  urqb  Christians  to  follow  aftbb  unity.  These
are  to  be  found  in  the  inner  experiences  of  the  Christian  life.  1.  The  indwelling
presence  of  Ghrist.  That  presence  stimulates,  quickens,  encourages.  It  is  the  life  ot
the  Christian  soul ;  and  that  life  is  diffused  through  all  the  members  of  the  one  body,
through  all  the  branches  of  the  one  Vine.  Their  spiritual  life  is  one ;  unity  aids  its
development;  discord  checks  its  growth.  2,  The  felt  comfort  of  Christian  love.  Love
is  the  bond  of  unity ;  the  mutual  love  of  Christians  binds  together  the  Christian  Church.
The  truest  joy  springs  out  of  love.  Love  comforts,  blesses  with  a  holy  joy,  the  heart
that  entertains  its  sacred  influences.  The  experience  of  the  blessedness  of  Christian
love  should  draw  Christians  nearer  to  one  another  in  ever  closer  union.  3.  The  gift  of
the  Spirit.  The  one  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  in  whose  gifts  and  graces  all  in  varying
degrees  participate  (1  Cor.  xii.  4 — 12),  knits  together  all  the  members  of  Christ  into
one  communion  and  fellowship.  The  presence  of  that  one  Si)irit  in  each  individual
Christian  constitutes  the  inner  unity  of  the  Church.  That  inner  unity  should  find  its
natural  expression  in  outward  agreement.  4,  The  tender  feelings  of  the  Christian  heart.
The  life  of  Christ  in  the  soul,  the  presence  of  the  blessed  Spirit,  lead  the  disciple  to
imitate  his  Lord,  to  learn  of  him  tenderness  and  compassion.  St.  Paul  asks  the
Philippians  to  show  their  love,  their  compassion  for  him  by  living  in  unity.  If  these
spiritual  truths  are  real  facts  to  you,  he  says,  verified  in  your  own  experience,  fulfil  ye
my  joy ;  be  one  in  spirit  and  in  heart.

III.  Unitt  implies  humility.  It  is  pride,  self-conceit,  that  leads  to  strife  and
debate ;  avoid  party  spirit,  avoid  vain-glory,  1,  Party  spirit  iipiBeia)  is  one  of  the
works  of  the  flesh.  (Gal.  v.  20.)  Party  spirit  arrays  men  in  factions  against  one  another  |
they  think  more  of  their  party  than  ot  Christ,  more  of  party  triumphs  than  of  the
progress  of  the  gospel.  This  evil  tendency  soon  found  a  place  in  theCliuroh.  Christian?
began  early  to  say,  "  I  am  of  Paul,  and  I  of  Cephas."  "  Is  Christ  divided  ?  "  St.  Paul
asks  in  indignant  sorrow ;  there  is  one  body  in  Christ.  2.  Humility  is  essential  for  the
preservation  of  unity.  Vain-glory  must  be  wholly  excluded  from  the  motives  and
thoughts  of  the  true  Christian,  Human  ambitions  are  empty  and  vain ;  the  one  true
ambition  is  to  please  God.  We  are  ambitious  {ftKorinaifuea),  says  St.  Paul  (2  Cor.  v.  9),
to  be  well-pleasing  unto  him.  It  is  vain-glory  that  distracts  the  Church  and  rends
the  body  of  Christ.  So  far  as  it  intrudes  itself  into  the  motives,  it  destroys  the  truth
and  inner  beauty  of  the  religious  life.  Humility  is  a  Christian  grace^  a  product  of
Christianity.  The  example  of  Christ  has  shed  a  halo  round  a  word  which  to  the
heathen  spoke  of  meanness  and  cowardice.  Holy  Scripture  has  taken  it  and  filled  it
with  a  new  and  blessed  meaning;  it  suggests  to  the  Christian  the  deepest  piety,  the
inmost  reality  of  personal  religion.  Humility  lies  at  the  very  basis  of  the  Christian
character.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,".is  the  first  of  the  beatitudes.  There  is  no
true  holiness  that  is  not  grounded  on  humility ;  for  "  God  gireth  grace  to  the  humble."
Therefore  "  let  each  esteem  other  better  than  themselves."  The  highest  saints  feel  and
own  themselves  to  be  the  chief  of  sinners.     The  nearer  they  draw  to  the  Son  of

FHILIPriAIlS,  »


86  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  n.  1— SOt

righteousness,  the  more  clearly  they  see  their  owq  guilt  and  unworthiness.  "  He  that
a^eth  himself  shall  he  exalted."  Hence  the  value  of  St.  Paul's  rule  to  esteem  others
better  tlian  ourselves.  We  are  tempted  to  magnify  our  own  virtues  and  the  faults  of
others.  True  wisdom  reverses  this.  We  are  to  consider  others,  not  for  self-exaltation,
but  for  self-abasement.  We  are  to  look  on  our  own  faults  to  correct  them,  on  the  good
points  in  others  to  imitate  them.  3.  True  humility  implies  unselfishness.  The
Christian  must  not  put  himself  first ;  he  must  not  regard  his  own  wishes,  his  own
interest,  as  the  one  thing  to  be  thought  of.  He  must  consider  the  feelings  of  others,
their  desires,  their  wants.  Only  true  humility  will  enable  him  to  do  this.  But  it  is  a
hard  lesson ;  there  is  need  of  more  than  words ;  there  is  need  of  a  strength  not  our  own  ;
there  is  need  of  the  stimulating  influence  of  a  great  example.

Lessons.  1.  Learn  to  search  your  heart  for  the  realities  of  Christian  experience ;
you  will  find  them  there,  if  you  are  indeed  living  in  fellowship  with  Christ.  2.  Pray
for  grace  to  feel  real  joy  in  the  religious  progress  of  others.  3.  Endeavour  to  keep  the
nnity  of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace.  4.  Be  on  your  guard  against  party  spirit  and
vain-glory.  Strive  to  be  first  in  humility  and  self-abasement ;  it  is  the  secret  of  Christian
joy  and  Christian  growth.

Vers.  5 — IL — The  example  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  1.  Thb  imitation  of  thk  Lord
Jesus  Christ  is  the  one  rule  of  Christian  practice.  1.  In  the  outward  life.  He
pleased  not  himself;  he  sought  not  the  high  places  of  the  world;  he  did  not  choose  a
life  of  ease,  comfort,  pleasure.  He  lived  for  others;  he  went  about  doing  good;  he
cared  for  the  temporal  needs  of  the  sick  and  poor.  He  cared  for  the  souls  of  all.  2.
In  the  inner  life  of  thought  and  feeling.  The  Christian  must  mind  the  things  which
the  Lord  Jesus  minded ;  his  thoughts,  wishes,  motives  should  be  the  thoughts,  wishes,
motives  which  filled  the  sacred  heart  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Holy  Scripture  bids  us
purify  ourselves  even  as  he  is  pure.  The  standard  is  very  high,  above  us,  out  of  our
reach.  But  it  is  the  end  to  which  the  high  calling  of  the  Christian  points;  it  should
be  the  object  of  all  the  longings  of  our  hearts,  to  know  Christ,  to  love  Christ,  to  bo
made  like  unto  Christ — like  him  in  the  outward  life  of  obedience,  like  him  in  the  Ifaner
life  of  holy  thought.

IL  The  example  draws  out  in  its  details.  Christ  looked  not  upon  his  own
things — ^his  Divine  glory,  his  equality  with  God  the  Father.  He  looked  upon  the
things  of  others — our  helplessness,  our  danger,  our  need  of  a  Saviour.  1.  What  he  was.
He  was  God ;  the  Word  was  God  in  the  beginning,  "  God  only  begotten  "  (the  reading
of  the  most  ancient  manuscripts  in  John  i.  18),  begotten  of  his  Father  before  the
world  was.  When  "God  only  was,  and  there  was  none  but  God  ;  before  the  ages  were,
the  Word  was  God.  "  Before  Abraham  was,  I  am,"  the  Saviour  said,  in  John  viii.  58,
where  he  vindicates  his  right  to  the  incommunicable  Name,  Jehovah.  He  was  God,
then,  by  nature,  by  inalienable  right,  one  with  the  Father,  being  "  the  Brightness  of  his
glory,  and  the  express  Image  of  his  person ; "  possessed  of  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  ;
ill  the  splendour,  the  glory,  the  omnipotence,  all  the  essential  attributes,  of  Deity.
Thus  he  was  in  the  form  of  God,  on  an  equality  with  God.  But  he  did  not  count  this
Inconceivable  glory  a  thing  to  be  grasped,  to  be  clung  to.  He  looked  on  the  things  of
others,  blessed  be  his  holy  Name  I  2,  What  he  lecame.  He  emptied  himself  of  that
effulgence  which  flesh  could  not  behold  and  live.  He  took  the  form  of  a  servant,  the
likeness  of  humanity.  In  outward  fashion  he  became  as  one  of  us,  though  he  ceased
aot  to  be  God.  His  whole  humiliation,  from  the  Incarnation  to  the  cross,  was  his
9wn  voluntary  act :  "  I  lay  down  my  life  of  myself."  That  stupendous  act  of  self-
lacrifice  wholly  transcends  the  reach  of  human  thought.  The  difference  between  the
greatest  king  and  the  meanest  slave  is  absolutely  nothing  compared  with  the  abyss
that  separates  humanity  from  Deity.  That  abyss  beyond  measure  is  the  measure  of
the  love  of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge.  3.  Still  he  looked  not  on  'zs  ovm  things  ;
ie  chose  the  lowest  place  upon  earth.  He  despised  not  the  carpenter's  shop  at  Nazareth ;
tie  shed  a  new  dignity  on  honest  labour  by  his  own  example ;  he  gave  a  new  glory  to
tiumility  which  had  no  glory  hitherto ;  he  was  content  to  obey  :  "  Not  my  will,  but
thine,  be  done."  He  humbled  himself  and  became  obedient.  His  obedience  extended
through  every  detail  of  his  most  holy  life;  he  sought  not  his  own  glory;  it  culminated
In  his  death :  it  could  reach  no  further ;  he  became  obedient  unto  death.    And  that


OH.  n.  1—30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  «7

death  was  the  death  of  the  cross — the  cruel,  lingering,  shameful  death  reserved  for
slaves  and  the  worst  of  criminals.  Life  has  many  strange  contrasts — wealth  and  ahjeot
poverty,  joy  and  utter  misery.  There  never  was  contrast  like  this — omnipotence  and
seeming  helplessness,  the  glory-thrme  on  high  and  the  awful  cross.  He  loved  us  so
very  dearly.     That  astonishing  love  is  set  before  us  as  our  example.

III.  His  exaltation  consequent  upon  his  humiliation.  1.  Christ  humUed
himself,  wheri-fore  Qod  highly  exalted  him.  Wherefore ;  it  is  a  great  word,  it  expresses
•  law  of  God's  kingdom.  Exaltation  follows  on  self-abasement,  glory  on  humility.
It  was  so  with  Christ  our  Lord.  God  exalted  him,  the  incarnate  Son,  Jesus,  perfect
God,  but  also  (blessed  be  his  holy  Name!)  perfect  Man,  high  above  all  heavens.  He
became  obedient  unto  death  ;  wherefore  God  gave  unto  him  the  name  which  is  above
every  name.  Unto  Jesus,  God  and  Man,  all  power  is  given  in  heaven  and  in  earth,  all
the  unutterable  glory,  all  the  majesty  of  the  Godhead.  2.  Therefore  aU  prevailing
prayer  is  made  in  his  Name.  "  If  ye  shall  ask  anything  in  my  Name,  I  will  do  it."
All  prayer  is  offered  through  his  mediation.  We  plead  before  the  throne  of  grace  his
perfect  obedience,  his  precious  death,  his  atoning  blood,  the  blood  that  cleanseth  from
all  sin.  "  Through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  "  is  the  prevailing  close  of  every  Christian
prayer.  3.  He  himself  is  the  object  of  Christian  worship.  All  creation  in  heaven  and
earth  and  under  the  earth  hows  the  knee  to  him  in  adoration.  All  tongues  must
confess  with  thanksgiving  that  he  is  Lord.  Worship  offered  to  him  redounds  to  the
glory  of  God  the  Father,  for  it  is  God  who  exalted  him.

IV.  The  disciple  k  as  his  Master,  the  servant  as  his  Lord.  The  life  of
Christ,  in  a  sense,  repeats  itself  in  each  one  of  his  elect.  They  share  his  humiliation,
his  cross;  they  shall  share  his  glory,  his  throne  (Rev.  iii.  21).  1..  I  am  crucified  with
Christ.  We  must  imitate  him  in  his  humiliation,  emptying  ourselves  of  pride  and
self-indulgence.  We  must  deny  ourselves,  mortifying  the  old  man,  crucifying  the
flesh  with  the  affections  and  lusts,  dying  through  the  power  of  the  most  holy  cross
to  the  world  and  to  the  flesh.  2.  So  shall  we  rise  with  him — now,  unto  newness  of  life ;
hereafter,  to  behold  him  in  his  glory,  to  sit  with  him  in  his  throne.  "  He  that  shall
humble  himself  shall  be  exalted."  Self-abasement  must  come  first,  then  the  glory  ;
first  the  cross,  then  the  crown.

Lessons.  1.  Learn  never  to  let  a  day  pass  without  meditation  on  the  great  Example.
Contemplate  with  wondering  thankfulness  the  great  mystery  of  the  Incarnation.
Strive  with  all  the  energy  of  your  spirit  to  fix  your  thoughts  in  awe,  in  penitence,  in
adoring  love,  upon  the  cross  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Intense  meditation  on  that
tremendous  sacrifice  is  the  greatest  help  towards  a  holy  life.  2.  Pray  for  grace  to
imitate  him  in  his  humility,  in  his  unselfish  love.

Vers.  12, 13. —  What  should  he  tTie  result  of  Christ's  example  f  I.  Obedience.  1.  Christ
hecwme  obedient  even  unto  death.  The  Philippians  have  hitherto  been  obedient ;  they
were  obedient  when  the  apostle  called  them  to  faith  and  repentance;  let  them  be
obedient  now.  2.  That  obedience  is  due  to  Ood  who  seeth  the  heart.  We  must  not  depend
too  much  on  human  teachers,  whether  present  or  absent ;  we  must  look  to  the  unseen
Saviour  who  is  ever  present,  and  work  out,  each  one  for  himself,  our  own  salvation.

II.  Earnest  effort  to  save  cue  souls.  1.  Because  our  salvation  was  the  end  of
Chrisfs  humiliation.  He  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.  The  greatness  of  his
self-sacrifice  shows  the  momentous  importance  of  the  object  for  which  he  humbled
himself.  The  cross  of  Christ  throws  a  bright  light  on  the  tremendous  alternative — ^life
or  death,  salvation  or  damnation.  2.  Because  if  salvation  is  lost,  all  is  lost.  The  word
aonrifla  means  simply  safety — safety  from  anything  that  may  harm  us,  from  danger,
sickness,  death.  In  Holy  Scripture  it  means  the  safety  of  the  soul,  (1)  from  sin,
which  is  the  sickness  of  the  soul ;  (2)  from  death,  the  death  of  the  soul,  which  is
eternal  death.  It  is  a  precious  word,  for  it  points  to  unspeakable  blessedness ;  an
awful  word,  for  it  suggests  a  fearful  alternative.  It  reminds  us  of  that  condemnation,
that  horror  of  eternal  despair,  which  must  be  the  portirai  of  the  lost.  That  greai
danger  threatens  us ;  we  need  to  be  saved  from  it,  and  therefore  from  sin.  3.  Becatu*
our  salvation  must  be  torought  out  by  owsdves :  no  other  man  can  do  it  for  us.  The
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  our  Saviour ;  he  is  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the  Beginning  and  the
End.    "  By  grace  ye  are  saved, ...  and  that  not  of  yourselves ;  it  is  the  gift  of  OoA.*


68  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oa.  n.  1— 80.

Our  Bftlvation  1«  the  work  of  God.  But  there  are  two  sides  to  the  same  great  truth.
It  is  his  work,  and  yet  it  is  ours.  Both  views  of  the  one  truth  are  presented  to  us  ia
Holy  Scripture.  Both  are  true ;  they  meet  somewhere  above  our  heads.  Now  we
Isnow  in  part ;  our  standpoint  is  not  high  enough  to  command  a  connected  view  of  all
Giod's  dealings  with  men.  But  we  can  see  far  enough  to  guide  us  on  our  way  to
heaven ;  we  know  enough  for  the  needs  of  the  Christian  life.  We  know  that  Christ  is
our  only  Saviour ;  he  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners;  he  died  for  all.  But  Holy
Scripture  bids  us  to  carry  out  the  work  of  salvation  in  our  own  souls,  to  complete  it,
working  from  the  cross,  in  the  faith  of  Christ.  There  is  need  of  persevering  energy.
Others  may  guide,  comfort,  exhort ;  hut  each  man  must  work  out  his  own  salvation
for  himself  in  the  depths  of  his  spirit, — ^it  cannot  be  done  by  deputy.  We  must  work,
for  God  bids  us ;  we  must  work,  for  we  have  an  irresistible  consciousness  of  power  to
choose  the  good  and  to  avoid  the  evil.  But  we  must  trust  wholly  in  Christ.  He  is
the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith.     It  is  he  that  saves  us,  not  we  ourselves.

III.  A  TBBMBLIN&  ANXIETY  TO  PLEASE  GoD.  1.  If  lUt  are  in  tamest,  there  must
tmnetimes  he  fear  and  trembling  in  our  religious  life.  The  work  is  so  very  momentous ;
it  is  no  matter  for  indifference  or  lukewarmness.  We  must  pass  the  time  of  our
sojourning  here  in  fear,  for  we  were  "  redeemed  .  .  .  with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ."
The  greatness  of  the  ransom  shows  the  greatness  of  the  danger.  We  must  pray  for
grace  to  serve  God  acceptably,  with  reverence  and  godly  fear ;  for  true  religion  involves
a  deep,  awful  reverence  for  the  majesty  of  God.  Reverence  is  an  essential  element  in
true  holiness.  "  Hallowed  be  thy  Name  "  is  the  first  petition  in  the  prayer  which  the
Lord  himself  hath  taught  us ;  and  with  reverence  must  be  mingled  holy  fear — the  fear
of  undue  familiarity  intruding  itself  into  our  solemn  worship ;  the  fear  of  displeasing
God  who  will  judae  us,  who  gave  his  blessed  Son  to  die  for  us,  by  unfaithfulness  in  our
daily  lives.  2.  The  ground  loth  for  fear  amd  for  encouragement.  God  worketh  in  us.
It  is  a  ground  for  lear ;  for  if  it  is  God  that  worketh  in  us,  then  to  take  part  with  the
flesh  is  to  strive  against  the  Most  High,  to  resist  the  Holy  Ghost — a  most  awful  danger.
And  it  is  a  ground  for  encouragement ;  for  if  it  is  God  that  hath  begun  the  good  work
within  us,  we  may  be  confident  that  he  will  carry  it  on.  His  strength,  if  only  we
persevere,  will  be  made  perfect  in  our  weakness.  Man  can  do  nothing  without  God,
and  God  wiU  do  nothing  without  man.  He  bids  us  work  out  our  own  salvation,
lecause  he  worketh  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  do.  Holy  desires  and  just  works  alike
proceed  from  him.  Yet,  though  he  willeth  that  all  men  should  be  saved,  all  are  nut
saved  ;  for  they  will  not  come  unto  him  that  they  might  have  life.  The  problem  is
insoluble  in  theory ;  it  is  solved  in  the  religious  life.  If  we  live  in  the  faith  of  the
Sun  of  God,  the  very  sense  of  entire  dependence  upon  him  will  urge  us  to  work  out  to
the  end  the  salvation  which  he  hath  wrought  for  us  by  his  precious  blood-shedding,
which  he  is  working  within  us  by  the  yift  of  his  Holy  Spirit.

Lessons:  1.  You  work  hard  in  your  outward  calling ;  work  hard  in  your  religious
life.  2.  The  alternatives  at  issue  are  of  stupendous  moment;  work  with  fear  and
trembling.  3.  But  remember,  Christ  died  for  you,  God  worketh  in  you.  Work  from
the  cross ;  trust  in  God,  not  in  your  own  efibrts,  however  earnest.

Vers.   14 — 18. — The    salvation   of  the   PhUippians  the  apostle's  joy.    I.  Theib

OBEDIBNCB    MUST    BB    THE    BEADT    OBBDrBNOE   OF    LOVE.      ChrlSt    died   for   them,    God

worketh  within  them.  They  have  the  great  gift  of  reconciliation  with  God  through
the  precious  blood  of  Christ ;  they  have  the  indwelling  presence  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.
Therefore :  1.  It  is  their  duty  to  he  cheerful,  to  render  to  Ood  a  loving  service.  A
Christian  who  knows  that  the  Son  of  God  loved  him  and  gave  himself  for  him,  has  no
right  to  be  gloomy  and  melancholy.  There  must  be  no  murmurings.  The  Christian
life  is  a  pilgrimage,  like  the  journey  of  the  Israelites  from  the  house  of  bondage  to  the
promised  land,  but  we  must  not  resemble  the  Israelites  in  their  constant  murmurings
•gainst  God.  Do  all  things,  each  duty  as  it  oOmes,  without  murmuring.  Have  "a
steadfast  faith  in  God  as  your  Father,  "who  maketh  all  things  work  together  for
good  to  them  that  love  him ; "  and  in  the  trustful  spirit  of  a  loving  faith  learn  to  say,
"  Thy  will  be  done."  Neither  should  there  be  doubtiugs  in  the  Christian  life.  The
intellect,  as  well  as  the  will,  must  submit  itself.  Our  knowledge  is  imperfect,  our
mental  reach  is  limited ;  we  can  see  only  a  very  little  way  into  the  mysteries  of  the


OH.  n.  1—30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  69

Divine  government ;  we  know  in  part.  We  must  be  content  with  that  partial  know-
ledge ;  we  must  not  venture  to  question  the  love,  the  goodness,  the  wisdom  of  God,
When  harassing  doubts  arise,  we  must  go,  like  Asaph  the  psalmist,  into  the  house  of
God ;  then  we  shall  understand  as  much  as  we  need  to  know  of  God's  dealings  with
mankind.  These  things  are  hidden  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  but  they  are  revealed  tmto
babesi  2.  Cheerful  obedience  leads  to  growth  in  holiness.  If  they  obey  God-  in  all  -
things  gladly  and  lovingly,  they  will  become  blameless ;  others  will  find  no  ground  of
censure  in  them ;  their  own  inner  lives  will '  be  pure  and  sincere,  without  mixture  of
evil  or  selfish  motive.  Simplicity  of  character  is  essential,  for  God  seeth  the  heart.
Thus  they  will  be  children  of  God  indeed,  like  those  little  children  of  whom  is  the
kingdom  of  heaven ;  a  contrast  to  the  crooked  and  perverse  generation  among  whom
they  live.  3.  They  must  set  a  good  example.  They  are  lights  in  the  world — others
watch  them ;  they  attract  by  their  lives  the  attention  of  the  surrounding  Gentiles ;
they  must  hold  out  to  others  the  Word  of  life.  They  must  exhibit  its  influence  in
their  lives,  in  their  conversation.  They  must  preach  by  word  and  by  example,  for
Christianity  is  essentially  a  missionary  religion.

II.  Such  conduct  will  fill  thb  apostle  with  jot.  1.  It  vrill  prove  that  his
labour  was  not  in  vain.  He  glories,  not  in  his  own  successes  or  popularity,  but  in  the
faith,  the  love,  the  obedience  of  his  converts.  Such  glorying  does  not  fade  away ;  it
endures  unto  the  day  of  Christ.  Then,  when  the  apostle  presents  the  Philippian
Christians  to  the  r.<ord,  what  holy  glorying  will  be  his  as  he  looks  upon  the  fruit  of
his  labours  1  2.  Se  is  ready  for  such  an  end  to  lay  down  his  life,  and  that  with  Joy.
He  will  rejoice  to  shed  his  blood  as  a  drink  offering  to  accompany  the  sacrifice  offered
by  his  converts.  That  sacrifice  is  their  faith ;  faith  is  trustfulness,  entire  dependence
upon  Ood,  self-surrender.  The  sacrifice  of  faith  is  the  sacrifice  of  self;  the  spiritual
sacrifice  which  the  children  of  God,  as  a  royal  priesthood,  are  bound  to  offer.  "We
offer  and  present  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  ourselves,  our  souls  and  bodies,  to  be  a  reasonable,
holy,  and  lively  sacrifice  unto  thee."  Thus,  and  thus  only,  can  we  work  out  our  own
salvation.  Such  devotion  in  the  Pliilippians  will  fill  St.  I'aul  with  holy  joy,  though
it  cost  him  his  life-blood.  He  rejoices  himself  at  the  prospect,  he  bids  them  rejoice
with  him.

Lessons.  Learn :  1.  To  be  cheerful  always,  never  to  murmur.  2.  To  be  simple,
sincere,  truthful,  single-minded.  8.  To  seta  good  example  to  others.  4.  1o  rejoice  in
the  salvation  of  souls.

Vers.  19 — 24. — Timothy.  I.  Martyrdom  may  come  soon ;  if  it  comes,  the  apostle
will  welcome  it  with  joy ;  if  he  lives,  he  will  send  Timothy.  1.  Be  hopes  to  send
Timothy  almost  immediately ;  he  trusts  himself  to  come  shortly.  Observe,  he  hopes  in
the  Lord,  and  he  trusts  in  the  Ijord.  "  Behold  how  he  refers  all  things  t»  the  Lord,"
says  St.  Chrysostom.  He  submits  his  hopes  and  desires,  even  where  the  spiritual
welfare  of  his  converts  seems  to  be  concerned,  wholly  to  the  higher  will  of  God.  His
life  was  Christ.  "Christ  liveth  in  me,"  he  said.  Therefore  his  desires  were  the  desires
of  Christ,  whose  abiding  presence  filled  his  heart.  He  hopes  in  the  Lord,  in  conscious
communion  with  the  Lord;  his  hopes  are  guided  and  quickened  by  the  indwelling
Saviour.  "  Only  in  the  Lord  "  is  the  rule  of  the  highest  Christian  life.  2.  He  hopes  to
send  Timothy,  not  for  their  sahes  only,  hut  for  his  oton  also.  His  own  happiness  is
bound  up  in  the  spiritual  welfare  of  his  converts ;  like  St.  John,  he  had  no  greater  joy
than  to  hear  that  his  children  were  walking  in  the  truth.  Mark  the  depth  of  nil
Christiaii  affection;  bow  fully  he  had  learned  the  lessons  of  his  own  sweet  psalm  of
love  in  1  Cor.  xiii.  I

II.  The  chabacteb  or  Timothy.  He  had  his  faults;  he  was  timid,  nervous^
shrinking  from  opposition.  But :  1.  He  was  a  man  of  Ood,  a  man  of  unfeigned  faith
and  deep  Christian  love.  Of  all  St.  Paul's  companions  none  was  so  dear  to  him  as
Timothy,  **mine  own  son,"  as  he  calls  him.  2.  Se  is  like-minded  with  St.  Paul.
St.  Paul  can  trust  him  wholly ;  he  will  act  as  the  apostle  himself  would  have  acted ;
the  Philippians  should  regard  his  presence  as  equivalent  to  the  apostle's  presence ;  he
is  a  second  Paul.  He  will  seek  no  selfish  ends ;  he  will  have  a  true,  genuine  anxiety
for  their  welfare.  He  will  be  really  anxiuus  to  do  all  he  possibly  can  to  help  the
Philippians  in  their  religious  life.     And  that  anxiety  will  be  real  and  sincere,  not  in


70  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  n.  1—30.

words  only,  not  merely  ofBcial,  but  deep-seated  in  the  heart,  genuine.  Timothy  was  a
true  Christian ;  the  Philippians  knew  him ;  he  had  already  worked  among  them ;  he
had  beeu  proved,  he  had  laboured  with  St.  Paul,  and  that  for  the  gospel's  sake.  Others
have  selfish  aims — they  seek  their  own  interests;  he  will  seek  the  things  that  are
Jenus  Christ's,  the  interests  (so  to  speak)  of  Christ,  that  is,  the  salvation  of  souls.  It
is  the  character  of  a  true  Christian  minister,

III.  St.  Paul's  lonbliness.  Timothy  is  the  only  true  friend  at  hand ;  Luke  and
others  are  absent;  those  present  with  him,  except  Timothy,  are  half-hearted;  all  of
them,  he  says,  seek  their  own.  St.  Paul's  whole  nature  craved  for  sympathy;  his  one
earthly  comfort  and  support  was  the  sympathy,  the  love  of  Christian  friends.  Once
he  bitterly  felt  being  left  at  Athens  alone  (1  Thess.  iii.  1).  Now  his  anxiety  to  hear
the  state  of  the  Philippians,  his  love  for  them,  makes  him  willing  to  part  with  Timothy,
and  to  be  left  alone  in  his  Roman  captivity.  We  may  well  wonder  at  the  intensity  of
his  love,  the  completeness  of  his  self-sacriflce.

Lessons.  1.  The  great  aim  of  the  Christian  lif»  should  be  to  live  wholly  in  the
Lord,  in  his  presence,  in  the  constant  effort  to  please  him  in  all  things.  2.  Communion
of  Christians  with  Christians  is  one  of  the  greatest  helps,  as  it  is  one  of  the  greatest
comforts,  in  the  religious  life.  3.  Pray  to  be  genuine,  absolutely  truthful  and  real ;  to
be,  not  to  seem.  4.  A  true  saint  of  God  can  endure  isolation.  "  Who  hath  the  Father
and  the  Son,  may  be  left,  but  not  alone."

Vers.  25 — 30. — Epa^phroditm.  I.  His  ifAMB  means  "lovely."  It  was  not
uncommon;  it  was  assumed  by  the  dictator  Sulla;  it  was  the  name  of  a  freedman  of
Nero,  the  master  of  the  philosopher  Bpictetus.  It  is  derived  from  the  name  of  the
goddess  'AippoSlT-ii,  like  the  corresponding  Latin  word  veniistus  from  Yenus.  But
the  character  of  this  Epaphroditus  was  evidently :  1.  "  Lovely  "  in  the  Christian  sense.
He  stems  to  have  been,  like  Jonathan,  lovely  and  pleasant  in  his  life.  Like  Daniel,  he
was  a  "  man  of  loves,"  full  of  love  both  towards  St.  Paul  and  towards  his  friends  at
Philippi.  He  was  a  man  of  very  tender  feelings,  almost  too  tender,  we  might  think.
But :  2.  He  was  as  Irave  as  he  was  tender.  St.  Paul  calls  him^his  brother  and  companion
in  labour  and  fellow-soldier.  He  was  not  only  a  brother  in  love,  a  fellow-Christian,
but  he  shared  the  apostle's  labours;  he  threw  himself,  heart  and  soul,  into  the  work  of
spreading  the  gospel  at  Borne ;  he  worked  hard,  probably  in  an  unhealthy  season.  He
was  also  the  messenger  of  the  Philippians ;  he  readily  undertook  the  long  journey,  with
all  its  perils  and  hardships,  to  minister  to  the  apostle's  wants.  Doubtless  he  regarded
those  ministrations  (as  St.  Paul  himself  regarded  them;  see  note  on  ver.  25)  as  an
offering  offered  gladly  unto  God.  He  knew  that  in  ministering  to  the  apostle  he  was
ministering  unto  God.  To  relieve  the  necessities  of  the  saints,  to  help  them  by  alms,
by  sympathy,  is  a  sacrifice  well-pleasing  to  God.  He  was  a  brother  in  danger,  too,  a
fellow-soldier.  He  hazarded  his  life;  he  shared  the  apostle's  dangers;  he  willingly
exposed  himself  to  risk  for  the  work's  sake ;  his  dangerous  illness  was  in  some  way
caused  by  his  unselfish  exertions.  Yet  he  was  very  tender-hearted.  He  longed  after
the  Philippians ;  he  could  not  bear  the  thought  of  their  sorrow  and  anxiety  on  account
of  his  sickness  and  danger.  He  is  an  example  of  that  union  of  seemingly  opposite
virtues  which  is  sometimes  conspicuous  in  Christ's  saints,  as  it  was  in  Christ  himself.

II.  How  PBEOious  18  THE  LIFE  OF  HOLT  MEN  I  Eiiaphroditus  was  evidently  one
of  the  bishops  (see  note  on  ch.  L  1),  possibly  the  presiding  bishop  of  the  Philippian
Church.  His  life  was  valuable.  "  God  had  mercy  on  him."  Perhaps  his  longer  life
was  necessary  for  himself,  to  peifeot  his  repentance ;  for  the  Philippians,  to  carry  on
the  good  work  which  he  had  begun ;  for  St.  Paul,  lest  he  should  have  sorrow  upon
sorrow.  "  God  had  mercy  on  him."  Sometimes  in  mercy  God  spares  the  life  of  his
servants ;  sometimes  in  mercy  he  takes  them  to  himself.  We  are  in  his  hands,  and  ha
is  the  Most  Merciful.  He  knows  better  than  we  what  is  for  our  real  good.  We  may
pray  for  health  and  longer  life  for  our  friends,  for  ourselves,  if  the  prayer  is  offered  in
submission  to  the  higher  will  of  God.

III.  Sdoh  men  SHOULD  BE  HELD  IN  BEVERENOB,  St.  Paul  bids  the  PhiUppians  to
receive  Epaphroditus  with  every  joy — joy  on  every  account,  for  his  sake  and  for  thers.
They  were  to  honour  him ;  for  to  hononr  good  men  is  to  honour  God,  the  source  of
all  goodness ;  and  reverence  for  goodness  elevates  and  refines  the  character.


OH.  n.  1—30.1     .    THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  71


Lessons.  1.  Learn  from  the  example  of  Epaphroditus  that  to  minister  to  God'a
saints  is  a  high  privilege;  he  risked  his  life  to  supply  the  needs  of  St.  Paul.  2.  His
love  for  the  apostle  did  not  weaken  his  love  for  the  Philippian  Christians.  We  must
loTe  all  God's  people,  not  only  his  highest  saints.  3.  We  may  pray  that  our  sick
friends  may  recover  their  bodily  health,  if  it  be  God's  gracious  wUl.

HOMILIES  BY  VAEIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  1,  2. — Christian  Uke-mindedness.  It  seems  strange  that  the  apostle,  knowing
the  difficulty  of  getting  a  thousand  minds  to  agree  in  the  reception  of  intellectual
truth,  should  yet  counsel  them  to  seek  a  unity  of  opinion.  There  is  nothing  strange
in  the  fact  when  we  consider  how  much  the  intellect  of  man  is  influenced  by  his  moral
nature.

I.  Th»  katueb  and  conditions  of  this  LIKE-MINDEDNES8.  "That  ye  he  like-'
minded,  having  the  same  love,  with  accordant  souls  minding  the  one  thing."  1.  It
mtat  include  a  certain  intellectual  agreement  as  to  matters  of  doctrine.  It  is' not
possible  to  understand  wiiat  may  have  been  the  diversity  of  opinion  on  points  of
doctrine  which  made  this  counsel  necessary.  The  Philippians  are  not  censured  for
heresy ;  but  the  apostle  knows  that  the  "  men  of  the  concision  "  are  not  far  oflf,  and
the  warning  to  keep  to  "  the  sound  doctrine "  is  neither  premature  nor  unnecessary.
2.  It  includes  an  agreement  as  to  methods  and  aims.  There  were  symptoms  of  jealousy,
leading  to  quarrel,  manifest  in  the  conduct  of  two  ladies  of  this  Church  (ch.  iv.  2),  and
it  is  difficult  to  say  how  far  these  women,  holding  an  influential  place  in  the  little
community,  may  have  disturbed  its  unity.  3.  It  implies  an  agreement  working  along
the  lines  of  a  common  love.  Love  is  a  bond — "  the  bond  of  perfectness  " — just  aa  hatred
separates  man  from  man.  It  produces  that  harmony  of  feeling  and  interests  that  leads  to
unity  of  service.

II.  The  tbue  OBonNDS  of  this  i>ise-hindednes3.  "If  there  be  any  consolation
in  Christ,  if  any  comfort  of  love,  if  any  fellowship  of  the  Spirit,  if  any  bowels  and
mercies."  The  apostle  grounds  his  appeal  to  the  Philippians  upon  their  undoubted
possession  of  certain  spiritual  experiences.  1.  "  Consolation  in  Christ."  What  stores
of  consolation  are  in  Christ  1  "  I  will  not  leave  you  comfortless."  2.  "  Comfort  of
love."  Love  has  comfort  in  it,  especially  when  it  has  a  sure  resting-place.  3.  "  Fellow-
ship of  the  Spirit."  This  fellowship  involves  "  the  fellowship  of  the  Father  and  the
Son,"  and  carries  with  it  all  the  experiences  and  fruits  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22,  23).
It  involves  unity  as  one  of  its  essential  ideas.  4.  "  Bowels  and  mercies.  A  tender  and
compassionate  spirit  is  helpful  to  unity.

III.  The  minister's  jot  promoted  bt  the  liee-mindgdness  or  his  flock.
"  Fulfil  ye  my  joy."  As  nothing  so  depresses  the  mind  of  a  minister  as  intellectual  or
social  dissensions  among  the  members  of  his  flock,  so  his  joy  is  fulfilled  alike  in  their
unity  of  thought  and  in  the  harmony  of  their  feeling  and  affection. — ^T.  C.

Vers.  3,  4. — The  qualitie*  of  Christiom  Uke-mindedness.  L  Warning  against
FACTION  AND  VAiN-QLORY.  "Let  nothing  be  done  through  faction  or  vain-glory."
True  unity  of  spirit  is  inconsistent  alike  with  the  exaltation  of  party  and  the  exaltation
of  self.  Faction  carries  men  beyond  the  bounds  of  discretion,  and  rends  the  unity  of
the  brotherhood.  "  The  beginning  of  strife  is  as  the  leLting  out  of  water  "  (Prov.  xvil.
14).  It  should  be  "  an  honour  for  a  man  to  cease  from  "  it  (Prov.  xx.  3).  Vain-glory,
personal  vanity,  carries  men  into  many  follies  and  sins.  "  For  men  to  search  their
own  glory  is  not  glory  "  (Prov.  xxv.  29).  ''  There  is  more  hope  of  a  fool  than  of  "  such
a  one  (Prov.  xxvi.  12).  We  ought,  therefore,  to  pray,  "  Bemove  far  from  me  vanity
and  lies."

II.  The  estimate  of  a  humble-minded  man.  "  In  humbleness  of  mind  let  each
esteem  other  better  than  themselves."  This  implies :  1.  That  we  have  modest  thoughts
of  ourtelves.  (Prov.  xxvi.  12.)  2.  That  we  have  a  just  idea  of  others'  excellences.
(1  Pet.  ii.  17.)  3.  Tluit  in  honour  we  are  to  prefer  one  another.  (Rom.  xii.  10.)  The
reasons  for  this  command  are :  (1)  If  we  excel  others  in  some  things,  they  may  excel
us  in  others  (Bom.  xii.  4).    (2)  We  know  not  but  others  are  more  dear  to  Gud  than


72  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  n.  1—30.

ourselves,  though  they  seem  inferior  to  ourselves.  (3)  It  is  a  good  way  of  preserving
peace,  as  pride  causes  division  among  men  (Prov.  xiii.  10)  and  separation  from  God
(1  Pet.  V.  5).

III.  An  unselfish  interest  in  the  welpabe  of  others.  "Not  regarding  your
own  interests,  but  also  the  interests  of  others."  There  is  nothing  here  said  inconsistent
with  the  most  careful  and  conscientious  discharge  of  the  duty  we  owe  to  ourselves.
Tlie  injunction  of  the  apostle  is  profoundly  Chiist-like.  It  implies :  1.  That  we  are  to
desire  one  another'a  good.  (1  Tim.  ii.  1.)  2.  That  we  are  to  rejoice  in  one  another's
prosperity.  (Rom.  xii.  15.)  3.  That  we  are  to  pity  one  another's  misery.  (Rom.  xii.  15.)
4.  That  we  are  to  help  one  another  in  owr  necessities.  (I  John  iii.  17, 18.)  It  reiterates
the  command  of  Christ :  "Love  one  another."  No  other  command  can  be  performed
without  this  one  (Bom.  xiii.  10) ;  we  caimot  love  God  without  it  (1  John  iii.  17) ;
and  this  is  true  religion  (Jas.  i.  27). — T.  0.

Vers.  5 — 8. — Jehus  Christ  the  supreme  Example  of  humble-mindedness.  "  Let  this
mind  be  in  you,  which  was  also  in  Jesus  Christ."  The  exhortation  to  mutual  ooncord
is  strengthened  by  a  reference  to  the  example  of  Christ's  humiliation  on  earth.

I.  Consider  his  essential  peb-bxisting  glory.  "  Who,  subsisting  in  the  form  of
Gloil,  counted  it  not  a  prize  to  be  on  an  equality  with  God."  1.  This  language  evidently
describes  Christ  be/ore  his  incarnation,  in  his  Divine  glory  ;  for  the  pregnant  expression,
"  existing  in  the  foim  of  God,"  can  be  understood  only  of  Divine  existence  with  the
manifestatiun  of  Divine  glory.  It  is  similar  to  the  expression,  "  Who,  being  the
Brightness  of  his  glory,  and  the  express  Image  of  his  person  "  (Heb.  i.  3).  As  to  be  in
the  form  of  a  servant  implies  that  he  was  a  servant,  so  to  be  in  the  form  of  God  implies
that  he  was  God.  The  emphatic  tliought  is  that  he  was  in  the  form  of  God  before  he
was  in  the  form  of  a  servant.  2.  This  language  exhibits  likewise  his  own  consciousness
of  the  relations  which  subsisted  between  him  and  his  Father.  "Who  counted  it  not
a  prize  to  be  on  an  equality  with  God."  The  expression,  "  being  in  the  form  of  God,"
is  the  objective  exposition  of  his  Divine  dignity ;  the  second  expression  is  the  subjec-
tive delineation  of  the  same  thing.    It  asserts  his  conscious  equality  with  God.

II.  CoNsiDBB  HIS  humiliation.  "  But  emptied  himself,  taking  the  form  of  a
servant,  being  made  in  the  likeness  of  men ;  and  being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he
humbled  himself,  becoming  obedient  even  unto  death,  yea,  the  death  of  the  cross."
There  is  a  double  humiliation  here  involved,  first  objectively,  then  subjectively,  described .
1.  The  first  is  involved  in  his  becoming  man.  (1)  "He  emptied  himself."  Of  what?
He  did  not  cease  to  be  what  he  was,  but  he  emptied  himself  in  becoming  another;  he
became  man  while  he  was  God  ;  a  servant  while  he  was  Lord  of  all.  (2)  "  He  took
upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant."  This  marks  his  spontaneous  self-abasement.
"  0  Israel,  thou  hast  made  me  to  serve  with  thy  sins."  It  is  more  than  an  assertion
that  he  assumed  human  nature,  for  it  is  that  nature  in  a  low  condition.  What  conde-
scension 1  "  He  who  is  Master  of  all  becomes  the  slave  of  all  1 "  (3)  "  Being  made  in
the  likeness  of  men."  He  was  really  the  "  Word  become  flesh  "  (John  i.  14),  made  "  in
the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh"  (Rom.  viii.  3),  that  he  might  be  qualified  for  his  sin-
bearing  and  curse-bearing  career.  The  language  of  the  text  explodes  all  Ducelic  notions
of  a  mere  phantom-body.  (4)  "  Behig  Ibund  in  fashion  as  a  man."  As  the  apostle
formerly  contrasted  what  he  was  from  the  beginning  with  what  he  became  at  his
incarnation,  so  here  he  contrasts  what  he  is  in  himself  with  his  external  appearance
before  men.  In  discourse,  in  conduct,  in  action,  in  suffering,  he  was  found  in  fashion
as  a  man.  2.  The  second  humiliation  is  involved  in  his  ohedience  to  death.  "He
humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross."  Thii
marks  his  subjective  disposition  in  the  sphere  in  which  he  placed  himself  as  a  servant,
with  all  the  obligations  of  his  position  (Matt.  xx.  28).  There  was  the  form  of  a  servant
and  the  obedience  of  a  servant.  (I)  His  abasement  took  the  form  of  obedience.
(a)  It  was  not  an  obedience  necessitated  by  obligations  natural  to  himself,  but  was
undertaken  solely  for  others  in  virtue  of  the  covenant  in  which  he  acted  as  God's
Servant  (Isa.  xiii.  1).  (b)  It  was  a  voluntary  obedience.  The  idea  of  inevitable
Buffering,  in  a  world  altogether  out  of  joint,  is  out  of  the  question,  for  no  one  could
take  his  life  from  him,  nor  inflict  suffering  of  any  sort  without  his  will  (John  i.  18).
His  vicarious  obedience  was  perfectly  free.     (2)  His  abasement  involved  death.     "  He


OH.  It  1—80.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  73

became  obedient  unto  death,"  It  was  an  obedieace  from  his  birth  to  his  death,  for  it
was  unto  death.  His  obedience  was  in  his  death  as  well  as  in  his  life,  and  he  was
equally  vicarious  in  both.  (3)  His  abasement  involved  a  shameful  death,  "even
the  death  of  the  cross."  It  was  a  death  reserved  for  malefactors  and  slaves.  There
was  pain  and  shame  and  curse.  Yet  "  he  endured  the  cross,  duspising  the  shame "
(Heb.  xii.  2).  Mark,  then,  at  once,  the  transcendent  love  and  the  transcendent
humility  of  Jesus  Christ  1  What  an  example  to  set  before  the  Christian!  af  I'hilippi  1
"  Let  the  same  mind  be  in  you  which  was  also  io  Christ  Jesus." — T.  0.

Vers.  9 — 11. — Ghrisfs  reward.  There  is  a  relation  between  work  and  reward
signified  in  our  Lord's  own  announcement :  "  He  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be
enaited  "  (Luke  xiv.  11).

I.  Chbist's  exaltation.  "  Wherefore  also  God  highly  exalted  him."  This  exal-
tation is  associated  with  his  resurrection,  his  ascension,  and  his  sitting  at  God's  right
hand.  It  was  the  reward  of  his  obedience  unto  death,  as  the  Suiety-Head  of  his  people.
It  was  a  part  of  his  exaltation  that  God  "  gave  unto  him  the  Name  which  is  above
every  name  " — not  Jesus,  nor  the  Son  of  God — but  rank  and  dignity,  majesty  and
authority.

II.  The  pcbposk  of  the  exaltation.  "That  in  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee
should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven,  ami  things  in  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth  ;  and
that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the
Father."  Thus  is  declared  the  honour  paid  to  Jesus.  1.  Worship.  He  is  the  Object
of  adoration  to  all  intelligences  in  heaven,  in  earth,  and  under  tlie  earth.  Christianity
is  the  worship  of  Jesus  Christ.  2.  Open,  confession  of  his  lordship.  "  The  knee  is  but
a  dumb  acknowledgment,  but  a  vocal  confession — that  doth  utter  our  mind  plainly."
The  lordship  thus  acknowledged  by  every  tongue  has  a  vast  import,  both  for  the  Church

-and for  the  world.  Jesus  Christ  "died  and  revived,  that  he  might  become  Lord  both
of  the  living  and  of  the  dead"  (Rom.  xiv.  9).  Thus  the  whole  obedience  of  C/hristian
life  is  grasped  by  that  lordship,  which  at  the  same  time  controls  all  the  events  of
human  life  for  the  good  of  the  Church.

III.  The  end  of  his  exaltation.  "  To  the  glory  oi  God  ilie  Father,"  wfaoec  Soo
he  it ;  their  honour  and  glory  being  inseparable. — T.  C.

Vers.  12, 13. — Christian  lalvatUm  a  working  out  what  God  works  in.  The  apostle,
after  commending  the  Philippians  for  their  obedience  to  God  in  his  absence,  counsels
them  to  continue  in  that  course,  working  out  their  salvation  for  themselves.  "  Work
out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,"

I.  CoNSiDBB  THE  MATTEK  TO  BE  WORKED  OUT.  "  Your  own  salvation."  1.  Salva-
tion ii  an  essentially  individual  thing  between  each  man  and  his  Ood.  It  is  the  supreme
cuncemment  of  every  man.  Green  shows  it  was  the  glory  of  Puritanism  that  "  religion
in  its  deepest  and  innermost  sense  had  to  do,  not  with  Churc;hes,  but  with  the  individual
soul.  It  is  as  a  single  soul  that  each  Christian  claims  his  part  in  the  mystery  of
redemption."  2.  Though  salvation  is  Ood's  work,  it  is  yet  consistent  with  Scripture  and
fact  that  it  should  be  man's  work  likewise.  The  salvation  to  be  worked  out  is  supposed
to  be  already  possessed  in  its  principle  or  germ ;  for  the  apostle  addresses  this  counsel,
not  to  unconverted  sinners,  but  to  "  saints  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  breadth  of  the  word
"  salvation  "  is  to  be  carefully  estimated.  Sometimes  it  is  used  in  Scripture,  as  we  have
already  seen,  as  equivalent  to  justification  or  pardon;  sometimes  as  equivalent  to
sinctification ;  sometimes  as  equivalent  to  the  final  deliverance  at  death  or  judgment.
1'hus  it  may  be  regarded  as  either  past,  present,  or  future.  It  is  in  the  second  sense
that  the  apostle  uses  the  expression,  for  he  has  special  regard  here  to  the  development
of  the  Christian  life  in  believers.

II,  The  process  of  working  out  this  salvation.  "  Work  out  your  own  salva-
tion." 1.  Z%is  implies  that  Christian  life  is  not  a  mystic  and  indolent  quietism  which
moves  neither  hand  nor  foot,  but  a  state  of  conscious  activity  and  struggle.  There  are
theories  of  sanctification  in  our  day  which  teach  the  doctrine  of  the  soul's  passivity,  as
if  it  lay  in  the  arms  of  Jesus  without  effort  or  almost  conscious  thought.  Such  an
idea  would  need  a  recasting  of  the  whole  phraseology  of  Scripture  to  justify  it.
Christtan  life  is  always  represented  In  Scripture  as  a  life  of  watching,  of  struggle,  of


74  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.         [oh.  n.  1— Sa

combat.  "  So  run  that  ye  may  obtain  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  24) ;  "  So  fight  I,  not  as  on<i  that
beateth  the  air  "  (1  Cor.  ix.  26) ;  "  Striving  according  to  his  working  which  worketh
in  me  mightily  "  (Col.  i.  29) ;  "  I  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling
of  God  in  Christ,  Jesus  "  (oh.  iii.  14) ;  "  Give  all  diligence  to  make  your  calling  ana
election  sure "  (2  Pet.  i.  10).  2.  It  implies  that  Ood  has  cHready  worked  in  what
we  are  to  work  out.  If  we  work  out  anything  else,  it  will  be  of  nature  or  the  deviL
If,  therefore,  we  have  faith,  hope,  or  love,  let  us  work  it  out.  If  we  have  been  begotten
again  with  the  incorruptible  seed  of  the  Word,  work  out  its  imperishable  principles  in
all  the  lovely  consistencies  of  a  holy  life.  3.  It  implies  a  constant  andfaith/ul
use  of  all  the  means  appointed  hy  God  for  this  end.  (Matt.  vi.  33 ;  Acts  xiii,  43 ;
Eom.  xii.  12.)

III.  The  beason  ob  ENCotmAOEMBNT  FOB  ENEBaT  IN  THIS  woBK.  "  For  it  is  God
that  worketh  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure."  1,  Consider
hew  the  encouragement  operates.  The  believer  strives  because  he  is  assured  of  Divine
co-operation  in  the  work.  There  is  a  spirit  of  dependence  in  human  life  which  tends
to  produce  weakness  and  sterility ;  but  dependence  on  God  is  the  true  spring  of  all  effort,
strength,  and  heroism.  Divine  grace  has  no  tendency  to  supersede  human  effort,  but
rather  to  stimulate  it  to  greater  results.  The  fact  that  an  army  is  led  by  a  matchless
general  does  not  make  soldiers  less,  but  more,  resolute  in  carrying  out  his  commands,
Wellington  regarded  the  presence  of  Napoleon  Bonaparte  at  the  head  of  his  army  as
equal  to  a  hundred  thousand  additional  bayonets.  Let  the  Christian,  then,  work  out  his
salvation  ;  for  he  has  God  working  in  him  every  result  involved  in  it.  2.  Consider  the
sphere  of  OocFs  working.  "  It  is  God  that  worketh  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  do  of
his  good  pleasure."  The  Divine  operation  touches  the  first  impulse  of  the  will  as  well
as  the  final  achievement  that  flows  from  it.  Augustine  says,  "  Therefore  we  will,  but
God  works  in  us  also  to  will ;  therefore  we  work,  but  God  works  in  us  also  to  work."
How  natural,  then,  that  believers  should  attritfute  everything  good  in  them  to  Divine,
grace !  3.  Consider  the  end  and  direction  of  this  working.  "  Of  his  good  pleasure."
God  delights  in  this  work,  even  in  the  perfection  of  his  saints.  It  is  his  good  pleasure
that  they  should  be  holy,  pure,  loving.  4.  Consider  the  mystery  of  the  double  working
here  implied.  The  apostle  does  not  attempt  to  explain  the  blending  of  the  two  activities
in  one  glorious  work,  so  as  to  indicate  where  the  one  ends  and  the  other  begins.  In
other  words,  he  does  not  attempt  to  reconcile  the  doctrine  of  man's  freedom  with  the
doctrine  of  God's  sovereignty.  This  is  a  deep  mystery,  which  faith  can  accept,  but  the
philosophies  of  earth  have  tried  in  vain  to  unravel.

IV.  The  spirit  in  which  believers  abb  to  woek  out  their  salvation.  "  With
fear  and  trembling."  With  an  inward  distrust  of  our  own  power  and  an  anxious
solicitude  for  the  constant  action  of  Divine  power.  There  is  a  fear  and  a  trembling
that  have  a  true  place  in  the  Christian  life,  in  consideration  of  our  sins  and  our
weaknesses,  yet  that  lead  us  to  cling  all  the  closer  to  the  Ark  of  our  strength.  Fear
has  its  place  even  by  the  side  of  faith,  pointing  its  finger  to  possible  dangers.  "  Thou
standest  by  faith :  therefore  be  thou  not  high-minded,  but  fear."  But  the  fear  is  not
that  which  is  hostile  to  full  assurance,  but  to  carnality  and  recklessness ;  while  the
trembling  is  not  that  of  the  slave,  but  of  the  child  of  God,  tremblingly  alive  to  all  his
responsibilities  and  to  the  fear  of  vexing  God's  Holy  Spirit,

V.  Conbidbrations  why  we  should  be  oarefdl  io  do  this  work,  1.  Ood
commands  it.  (Acts  xvii.  30.)  2.  He  shows  us  how  to  do  ii,  (Micah  vi.  8.)  3.  Es
works  with  us  and  in  us  to  do  it.  4.  It  is  the  most  pleasant  work,  (Prov.  iii.  17.)
5.  It  is  most  honourable.  (Prov.  xii.  26.)  6.  It  is  most  profitable.  (1  Tim.  iv.  8.)
7.  It  is  work  not  to  be  begun  only,  but  finished.  (John  xvii,  4.)  8,  All  other  works
are  sin  till  this  is  begun.  (Isa.  Ixvi,  3.)  9.  Unless  it  be  done,  we  are  undone  for  ever,
(Luke  xui.  3.)— T.  C,

Vers.  14—16. — The  importance  of  a  contented  and  peaceful  haMt  of  wnI.    "Do  all

things  without  murmurings  and  disputings."

I.  The  character  and  influence  of  an  UNMURMURiNa  and  peaceful  spirit,  1.
Murmuring  is  here  meant  against  Ood.  It  may  arise  (1)  from  our  experience  of  a
disagreeable  lot  or  from  dark  providences;  or  (2)  from  an  unthankful  spirit.  "Shall  we
receive  good  at  the  hand  of  God,  and  shall  we  not  receive  evil?"   (Job  ii.  10.)  We


OH.  II.  1—30.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  78

ought  to  be  "content  with  such  things  as  we  have"  (Heb.  xiii.  5),  for  "godlinesa  with
_  conteutment  is  great  gain  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  6).  We  are,  therefore,  to  do  nothing  murmur-
ingly,  because  such  an  attitude  of  mind  seems  to  imply  a  too  slender  trust  in  the
resources  of  Divine  goodness  and  wisdom.  2.  The  disputinga  here  meant  point  to  those
dissensions  which  mar  the  peace  of  the  Church.  We  ought  to  avoid  disputings,  because
(1)  we  know  not  where  they  may  end;  (2)  because  they  often  arise  from  pdde  and
ignorance  (1  Tim,  vi.  4) ;  (3)  because  they  disturb  others  as  well  as  ourselves  (Luke  xxi.
19) ;  (4)  because  they  produce  confusion  and  evil  works  (Jas.  iii.  16, 17) ;  (5)  because,
if  we  live  in  peace,  God  will  be  with  us  (2  Cor.  xiii.  11).

II.  The  object  and  aim  of  such  a  spieit.  "  That  ye  may  be  blameless  and  harm-
less, children  of  God  without  blemish,  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  generatioQ,
among  whom  ye  are  seen  as  lights  in  the  world,  holding  forth  the  Word  of  life."  They
were  to  be  examples  to  the  world  of  high  Christian  living.  1.  Their  lives  were  to  be
marked  hy  a  purity,  a  loftiness,  a  consistency,  which  would  disarm  the  censure  of  the
world.  They  were,  as  children  of  God,  to  present  no  spots  upon  which  the  eye  of  a
critical  generation  might  rest  with  a  scorn  for  goodness.  2.  Their  lives  were  to  be
marked,  not  by  a  mere  absence  of  fault,  but  by  a  conspicuous  exhibition  of  all  those  posi-
tive graces  that  are  identified  with  the  full  power  of  the  Word  of  life.  (1)  The  lives  of
Christians  ought  to  be  a  transcript  of  the  Word  of  life,  manifesting  its  beauty  to  the
world.  Thus  the  saints  are  to  be  "  living  epistles  of  Christ,  to  be  known  and  read  of
all  men."  (2)  They  are  to  shine  forth  as  luminaries  in  a  dark  and  perverse  world
(Matt.  v.  16).  Nearly  all  the  light  that  fills  the  world  is  reflected  from  a  million
objeuts  around  us,  and  does  not  ^tream  down  directly  from  the  sun.  Similarly,  Jesus
Christ  is  the  supreme  Source  of  all  light — the  Sun  of  righteousness — but  his  light  is
reflected  upon  the  world  from  the  millions  of  believers  whom  he  has  enlightened  and
blessed  by  his  Spirit.  Therefore  the  saints  ought  to  remember  the  voice  of  old,
"  Arise,  shine ;  for  thy  light  is  come,  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  is  risen  upon  thee."

in.  The  dltimate  beablng  of  such  a  spibit  upon  the  gloeyinq  of  the  apostle.
"That  I  may  have  whereof  to  glory  in  the  day  of  Christ,  that  I  did  not  run  in  vain,
neither  labovu-  iu  vain."  1.  It  is  possible  even  for  an  apostle  to  lose  his  labour.  It  may
be  in  vain  to  the  people  who  refuse  his  message,  but  not  to  himself  (Isa.  xlix.  4).  2.
The  ministry  is  a  work  of  great  toil  and  strain.  3.  The  conversion  of  touls  will
enhance  the  joys  of  heaven  to  the  faithful  minister. — T,  C.

Vers.  17, 18. —  The  apostles  readiness  to  sacrifice  his  life  for  the  Philippians.  "Yea,
and  if  I  be  offered  upon  the  sacrifice  and  service  of  your  faith,  I  joy,  and  rejoice  with
you  all.    For  the  same  cause  also  do  ye  joy,  and  rejoice  with  me."

I.  Mabk  the  apostle's  deep  affeotion  fob  the  Phiuppians  and  his  intense
intebest  in  theib  bfibitual  WELL-BEiNa.  He  considered  not  his  life  too  dear  a
sacrifice  to  be  made  on  their  behalf.

II.  Mabk  the  impobtanoe  of  the  tbuth  which  cotrLD  demand  such  a  sacbifioe.

III.  The  pbospect  of  mabttbdom  in  such  a  cause  ought  to  be  subjeot  or  jot

ALIKE  TO  THE  SUFFEBEB  AND  TO  HIS  DISCIPLES. ^T.  C.

Vers.  19 — 23. — The  mission  of  Timothy.  The  apostle  comforts  the  Philippians  with
the  intimation  that,  if  be  cannot  himself  visit  them,  he  will  send  them  Timothy,  who
was  already  well  known  to  them  all.

I.  Uis  OBJECT  IN  SENDING  TiMOTHT.  It  was  twofold,  1.  To  comfort  ki$  oum  heart.
"That  I  also  may  be  of  good  heart,  when  I  know  your  state."  The  apostle  had  a  tender
anxiety  respecting  the  best  beloved  of  all  the  Churches.  2.  To  give  them  guidanoe ;
for  Timothy  was  one  wha  would  "naturally  care  for  their  state"  with  an  almost
instinctive  devotion  to  their  interests.

II.  His  beason  fob  sending  Timothy  nr  pbefebenoe  to  ant  othbb.  1.  They  had
already  known  Timothy's  devotion  to  the  apostle  omd  to  the  gospel  of  Christ.  "  But  ya
know  the  proof  of  him,  that,  as  a  child  serveth  a  &tber,  so  he  served  with  me  in
furtherance  of  the  gospel."  When  the  apostle  was  at  Philippi,  Timothy—"  mine  own
son  in  the  faith  " — was  his  congenial  assistant,  obeying  his  counsel,  and  imitating  his
example,  in  everything  that  tended  to  the  edification  of  the  Church.  2.  There  was  no
other  hdper  with  the  apostle  at  the  time  possessed  nf  the  imne  quick  sympathy  wiih  their


76  THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  n.  1—30.

state  as  Timothy.  "  For  I  have  no  man  like-minded,  who  will  naturally  care  for  youi
state :  for  they  all  seek  their  own,  not  the  things  of  Jesus  Christ."  (1)  The  apostle
contrasts  Timothy  with  other  preachers  or  evangelists,  who  sought  their  own  advantage
rather  than  the  honour  of  Christ.  He  had  had  sad  experience  of  alienation,  half-
heartedness,  and  selfishness  in  the  very  circle  of  the  evangelistic  companionship.  A
man's  own  things  may  he  different  from  the  things  of  Christ.  The  highest  life  la
where  our  interests  are  identical  with  the  interests  of  Christ.  God  will  disappoiut  all
other  interests.  (2)  He  commends  the  anxious  concern  of  Timothy  on  their  hehalf.
(a)  It  was  a  concern  for  their  spiritual  state,  (b)  It  was,  as  the  word  imports,  an
anxious  care  on  their  behalf,  testifying  at  once  to  his  own  personal  interest  in  their
welfare  and  to  his  profound  appreciation  of  the  worth  of  immortal  souls,  (c)  It  was  a
concern  natural  to  one  inheriting  the  interests  and  the  affections  of  his  spiritual  father.
(d)  It  was  implanted  in  his  soul  by  the  Lord  himself ;  for  it  was  with  him  as  with
Titus ;  "  Thanks  be  to  God,  which  put  the  same  earnest  care  for  you  into  the  heart
of  TituB"  (2  Cor.  viii.  16).— T.  C,

Vers.  24 — 30. — Epaphroditus  the  link  hetween  the  apostle  and  Philippi.  As  It  was
still  uncertain  what  would  be  the  issue  of  his  bonds  at  Rome,  the  apostle  deemed  it
right  no  longer  to  detain  the  worthy  Philippian  minister  who  had  relieved  the  tedium
of  his  imprisonment,  but  sent  him  back  to  Pliilippi  under  circumstances  which  attest
the  tenderness  of  the  relation  which  hound  all  three  together.

I.  Consider  the  aposti,e'b  estimate  op  the  high  oharaoteb  or  Epaphroditus.
1.  In  relation  to  himself.  "  My  brother " — as  if  to  imrk  the  common  sympathy  that
bound  them  together — "my  companion  in  labour" — to  signify  the  common  woik
which  engaged  them^ — "  and  fellow-soldier  " — to  signify  the  common  perils  and  sufferings
of  their  service  in  the  gospel.  2.  In  relation  to  the  Philippians.  "Your  messenger,
and  he  that  ministertd  to  my  wants " — doing  for  them  what  they  could  not  do  for
themselves,  supplying  "  your  lack  of  service  toward  me."  He  was  the  representation
of  their  liberality,  and  was  about  to  tike  back  to  Philippi  this  beautiful  and  touching
Epistle.

II.  Th«  DANOEBons  ILLNESS  OF  EpAPHRODiTUS.  "  For  indeed  he  was  sick  nigh  unto
death."  1.  The  cause  of  this  sickness.  "  Because  for  the  work  of  Christ  he  came  nigh
unto  death,  not  regarding  his  life,  to  supply  what  was  lacking  in  your  service  toward  me."
He  had  overtaxed  his  strength  in  the  service  of  the  gospel,  either  by  his  labours  in
preaching  or  by  doing  a  thousand  little  offices  of  love  for  the  imprisoned  apostle.  2.
J-Jis  recovery.  (1)  The  apostle  might  have  used  his  jxifts  of  healing  to  restore  such  a
valuable  life  to  the  service  of  the  Church,  but  such  gifts  were  mostly  used  for  the  sake
of  unbelievers,  and  the  Lord  did  not  see  fit  to  have  them  exercised  for  the  benefit  of
ordinary  believers.  (2)  It  was  God  himself  who  was  the  Author  of  this  recovery ;  "  God
had  mercy  on  him."  It  is  a  mercy  to  be  thankful  for  that  we  should  have  our  health
restored  and  our  lives  prepared  anew  for  holy  service.  It  is  a  mercy  to  the  minister,
who  has  fresh  opportunities  of  doing  good ;  and  a  mercy  to  his  flock,  as  thsy  receive
greater  blessing  from  his  labours.  3.  The  deep  sympathy  of  the  Philippians  with  their
suffering  minister.  "  He  longed  after  you  all,  and  was  sore  troubled,  because  ye  had
heard  that  he  was  sick."  (1)  The  distress  at  Philippi  was  a  proof  of  their  love  to
Epaphroditus  and  their  interest  in  him.  (2)  His  distress  on  account  of  this  rumour
shows,  again,  a  deep  feeling  of  love  for  them.

III.  The  jot  of  the  apostle  at  his  recovery.  "  God  had  mercy  on  him ;  and
not  on  him  only,  but  on  me  also,  that  I  might  not  have  sorrow  upon  sorrow."  The
apostle  had  already  to  bear  the  hard  sorrow  of  imprisonment,  but  if  Epaphroditus  had
died  at  Rome,  his  sorrows  might  have  become  overwhelming.,  We  are  all  deeply
interested  in  the  recovery  of  the  saints,  and  especially  of  eminent  ministers,  whose  lives
contribute  to  the  enrichment  of  the  world.

IV.  HiB  reasons  for  sendino  Epaphroditus  back  to  Philippi.  "  I  have  sent  him
therefore  the  more  diligently,  that  when  ye  see  him  again  ye  may  rejoice,  and  that  I
may  be  the  less  sorrowful."  They  would  recover  their  cheerfulness  at  the  sight  of  their
beloTed  minister,  and  the  sum  of  the  apostle's  daily  cares  would  thereby  be  proportion-
tMy  lessened. — ^T.  G.


OH.  n.  1—30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHIMPPIANS,  77

Vers.  1 — 4. — Altruism.  Paul  has  been  speaking  of  the  gifts  of  faith  and  of  lufTering
which  the  Philippians  had  received,  and  now  he  proceeds  to  state  further  the  practical
ontcome  of  the  Christian  spirit.  It  is  really  an  altruism  of  a  more  thorough  character
than  that  provided  by  the  schools.  We  have  altruism  paraded  at  present  as  the  high
outcome  of  that  morality  which  is  independent  of  God.  But  there  is  no  consideration
of  the  case  of  others  so  broad  or  so  deep  as  that  which  is  secured  by  the  gospeL

I.  The  fountain-hbad  of  a  considebate  spirit  is  the  gkace  op  Jesus  Cbbmt.
(Ver.  1.)  We  are  not  asked  in  this  matter  to  go  upon  our  own  charges ;  God  does  not,
like  an  austere  man,  expect  to  reap  where  be  has  never  sown.  So  far  from  this,  he  only
looks  for  consideration  of  conduct  towards  others  from  those  who  have  received  "  comfort
in  Christ,"  "  consolation  of  love,"  "  fellowship  of  the  Spirit,"  and  "  bowels  and  mercies."
These  are  the  forerunners  of  the  true  altruism.  And  they  amount  to  this,  that  God
has  led  the  way  in  consideration.  His  gospel  means  that  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ
he  has  not  looked  on  his  own  things,  but  on  the  things  of  others.  It  is  Divine  altruism.
It  is  the  seed  of  disinterestedness  sown  in  a  kindly  soil,  and  it  is  sure  to  produce  a
harvest.

II.  Thk  unity  of  the  Philippians  was  the  jot  of  the  apostle.  (Ver.  2.)  He
made  it  a  matter  of  personal  comfort  to  secure  unity  of  mind  and  of  heart  among
his  converts.  If  we  laid  the  unity  of  believers  thus  to  heart,  how  we  would  use  all
lawful  means  to  bring  it  about !  Are  ws  not  open  to  the  charge  sometimes  of  living
too  self-containedly,  so  that  when  unity  is  bioken  we  are  not  inconvenienced  and
pained  by  it  as  a  Paul  would  have  been  ?  Christian  union  should  be  made  by  each
one  of  us  a  personal  concern :  let  us  with  Paul  say  honestly,  as  we  urge  men  to  see  eye
to  eye  and  feel  as  heart  to  heart,  that  in  so  doing  they  are  fulfilling  our  dearest  joy  1

III.  Lowliness  of  mind  must  be  the  antidote  and  death  of  strife  and  vain-
OLOBT.  (Ver.  3.)  Nothing  so  separates  souls  and  breaks  the  unity  of  spirit  as  vain-
glorious strife.  Competition,  be  it  ever  so  generous,  cannot  be  tolerated  in  the  Church
of  Gkid,  except  it  be  competition  for  the  lowe:>t  place  and  the  severest  service.  The
competition  for  the  chief  seats  in  society,  in  the  world's  market,  in  the  sphere  of  power,
is  always  prejudicial  to  the  Christian  spirit  and  the  unity  which  comes  from  Heaven ;
but  the  competition  which  contemplates  the  severest  service,  the  lowliest  ministrations,
the  most  humiliating  role,  is  wholesome,  Christ-like,  Divine.  Now,  this  lowliness  of
mind  which  esteems  others  better  than  ourselves  can  be  secured  only  by  severe  self-
scrutiny  in  the  light  of  God's  Word,  above  all,  in  the  light  of  Christ's  perfect  life.  Then
our  sins  and  shortcomings  become  appalling,  and  we  walk  softly  before  the  Lord.  On
the  other  hand,  no  such  knowledge  of  our  neighbour's  sins  and  shortcomings  is  open
to  us ;  we  judge  him  so  charitably  as  to  esteem  him  above  ourselves,  and  so  we  sit  in
the  independence  begotten  of  humility.  No  longer  do  we  complain  of  any  lot  God
gives  us;  we  accept  it  as  better  than  we  deserve;  and  in  the  panoply  of  humility  we
are  safe  from  all  assault.

IV.  We  can  thus  make  publio  servants  of  ourselves  in  the  truest  sense,
(Ver.  4.)  We  hear  a  good  deal  of  "  public  men,"  as  they  are  called.  They  profess  to
serve  the  public,  but  the  most  of  them,  while  professing  to  serve  the  public,  are  sus-
pected of  serving  themselves.  With  some  of  them  the  public  spirit  is  doubtless  genuine,
and  they  do  serve  their  sovereign  and  country  with  singleness  of  heart.  But  the
gospel  is  the  great  means  in  God's  hand  of  making  men  and  women  the  servants  of
others.  Since  Jesus  came  not  to  be  ministered  unto,  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  his
life  a  ransom  for  many,  many  have  learned  to  make  the  welfare  of  others  their  chief
care.  And  so  Christian  consideration  and  charity  break  forth  on  the  right  hand  and
on  the  left.  Men  and  women  thrust  themselves  into  work  for  others  which  can  have
no  selfish  aim  or  selfish  issue,  and  the  world  becomes  "  Paradise  restored."  We  are
not  light  in  heart  until  we  thus  are  made  public  servants  by  the  dynamic  force  of  the
Christian  spirit.  The  law  of  love  regulates  us  and  carries  us  out  of  the  narrow  circle
of  personal  interests  into  the  broader  one  of  the  common  weal.  We  sacrifice  much  to
serve  others.  "  We  stoop,"  and  think  nothing  of  the  effort,  "to  conquer"  souls  and
circumstances  in  the  interest  of  Christ.  We  have  got  unmoored,  and  are  out  to  sea,
where  we  have  room  and  are  in  no  danger  from  the  lee  shore.  It  is  the  life  of  real
liberty  which  we  secure  when  we  look  no  longer  on  oui  own  things,  but  have  an  eye
for  those  of  others.— R.  M.  K.


78  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [ch.  n.  1— 8a

Vers,  5 — 8. — The  self-sacrifice  of  Christ.  Paul  backs  np  Us  appeal  for  public  spirit
by  the  example  of  Jesus  Christ.  If  the  Philippians  will  only  entertain  a  like  mind
with  Christ,  then  all  needful  abnegation  for  the  good  of  others  will  be  forthcoming,
even  up  to  self-sacrifice  itself.     And  here  we  have  to—

I.  Consider  Chbibt'b  equality  with  God.  (Yet.  6.)  The  Rerised  Version  puts
this  verse  more  accurately  than  the  Authorized  Version  when  it  gives  it,  "Who  being
in  the  form  of  God,  counted  it  not  a  prize  to  be  on  an  equality  with  God."  Or,  as
another  still  more  emphatically  gives  it,  "  Being  in  the  form  of  God,  did  not  consider
equality  with  God  a  prize  to  be  retained ;  but  emptied  himself"  Consequently  we
must  begin  with  Christ's  equality  with  God,  if  we  would  understand  the  magnificence
of  his  descent.  As  eternal  Son  of  the  eternal  Father,  he  had  been  the  coequal  of  the
Father  from  all  eternity.  As  he  lay  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  was  "  very  God  of
very  God,"  in  the  language  of  the  Nicene  Creed.  It  was  from  the  abode  of  absolute
Being  he  began  his  pilgrimage  to  save  us.

II.  CoNSiDBE  HIS  EMPTYING  OF  HiMSBLi'.  (Yet.  7.)  The  idea  is  hazarded  by  some
that,  In  his  emptying  of  himself,  he  laid  aside  for  a  season  his  Divinity  and  became
man;  but  this  is  not  to  be  entertained  for  a  moment.  The  "form  "of  God  (fiopip^)
presupposes  "  existence  "  (a6<rta)  and  "  nature  "  (ipiiris),  but  is  not  to  be  identified  with
either.  It  is,  as  we  might  say,  the  accidental  manifestation  of  the  essential  being;.  It
might,  therefore,  be  laid  aside  without  the  essential  being  undergoing  any  change.
This  is,  then,  all  that  the  emptying  implies.  He  exchanged  "  the  form  of  God  "  for
"  the  form  of  a  servant."  Instead  of  forcing  conviction  about  his  Divine  nature  by  a
glorious  manifestation  of  it  at  all  times,  he  allowed  this  conviction  to  spring  up  quietly
and  gradually  by  veiling  his  Divinity  behind  a  servant's  form.  The  everlasting  Son,
who  shared  the  glory  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  became  the  servant  that  he  might
raise  us  to  the  dignity  of  sons.  Such  was  his  consideration  for  us  that  he  took  this
immense  step  downwards  that  we  might  be  redeemed.

III.  OoNSiDEK  Eis  ASsuMPTios  OF  HUMANITY.  (Vcr.  7.)  "  He  was  mado  in  the
likeness  of  men,''  having  taken  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant.  He  thus  "  entered
upon  a  course  of  responsible  subordination."  The  incarnation  of  Christ  was  his
becoming  all  we  are,  saving  only  sin.  "  The  body,"  it  has  been  said,  "  which  had  been
prepared  for  him  by  another  was  sustained  by  that  other's  power.  When '  his  disciples
went  to  buy  meat,'  it  was  because  their  Master  was  really  hungry ;  when  he  asked
drink  of  the  woman  of  Samaria,  it  was  because  he  was  really  thirsty ;  and  when  he
fell  asleep  in  the  midst  of  the  howling  tempest,  it  was  because  nature  was  overwearied
with  endless  labours  of  love.  We  ask  why  the  all-glorious  and  blessed  One  should
have  lived  in  such  bodily  dependence  as  this.  The  apostle  answers — ^He  had  emptied
himself.  His  almighty  power  could  easily  have  sustained  his  body.  And  though  he
ate  and  drank  and  slept,  it  might  have  been  for  the  eyes  of  those  around  him  only.
But  this  would  not  have  been  man's  real  bodily  life.  Nay,  soul  and  body  are  so
wondrously  connected  that  it  would  not  have  been  man's  life  at  all.  And  had  not  the
Son  of  God  taken  the  life  of  man,  no  son  of  man  could  have  found  the  life  of  God.
Every  Christian  knows  what  man's  nobler  life  is.  Trust  in  God's  love,  hope  in  his
eternal  mercy,  that  spirit  of  filial  love  which  submits  itself  cheerfully  and  gladly  to  a
heavenly  Father's  will,  give  him  strength  and  ability  to  serve  God  in  the  world.  And
of  this  life,  as  every  Christian  knows,  Christ  is  the  Source  and  Fountain-head.  But  he
is  something  more — ^its  Example.  It  is  the  life  which  he  himself  lived  when  it  pleased
him  to  dwell  among  us.  .  .  .  Possessed  of  infinite  strength,  he  'emptied  himself,'
leaning  always  on  another's  arm.  Possessed  of  infinite  wisdom,  he  ever  lifted  up  the
eyes  to  heaven,  and  took  counsel  with  the  Father  who  dwelt  there.  Willing  only
what  was  right  and  good,  having  no  wish  but  what  was  pure  and  true,  he  nevertheless
submitted  that  will  in  all  things;  the  will  of  another  was  his  continual  law.  '  Being
found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself,'  i.e.  demeaned  himself,  as  man  ought  to
do.   Man  ought  to  trust  in  God  and  walk  by  his  counsel.   This,  therefore,  was  his  course."

IV.  Consider  his  humiliation  even  to  the  obedience  of  death,  (Ver,  8.)  The
Incarnation  was  the  first  step  in  the  humiliation  of  God.  We  do  not  realize  as  we
ought  how  tremendous  a  descent  that  is.  If  we  as  intelligent  beings  were  to  undergo  a
metempsychosis  and  be  incarnated  in  the  lowest  creature  that  crawls,  it  would  not  be
■o  great  a  descent  for  us  as  it  was  for  Deity  to  become  incarnate.    But  Christ  undertook


OH.  n.  1—30.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  79

s  second  descent.    "The  Son  of  God  did  not  live  human  life  only;  he  died  human
death.    Oh  what  a  step  downward  was  this!     We  may  be  feeble  and  dependent,  still
we  are  alive.     And  how  great  is  the  difference  between  the  living  and  the  dead !     We
enjoy  the  society  of  a  friend;  we  sit  at  hia  table;  we  interchange  the  thoughts  of
living  men.     But  there  comes  a  day  when,  on  repairing  to  hia  dwelling,  we  are  con-
ducted to  the  darkened  room,  and  behold  his  lifeless  remains ;  the  friend  of  yesterday
is  ready  for  the  grave  to-day  I  .  .  .  What,  then,  must  the  disciples  have  felt  as  they
prepared  their  Master  for  his  burial  1     They  were  covering  up  and  putting  out  of  sight,
as  what  they  could  no  longer  bear  to  look  upon,  that  blessed  countenance  in  which
Divine  beauty  had  shone.    They  were  closing,  as  they  thought  for  ever,  those  eyes  of
tenderness  in  whose  light  they  had  rejoiced  to  live.     He  had  said, '  Ye  shall  weep  and
lament,'  and  verily  his  words  were  fulfilled.     And  when  the  transition  from  life  to
death  is  accomplished  by  the  hand  of  violence,  the  sorrow  of  bereavement  is  of  a  much
more  overwhelming  character.    We  see  on  a  friend's  dead  body  the  marks  of  rude
hands,  of  instruments  of  savage  cruelty,  and  emotion  altogether  overpowers  us.     How
true  to  nature  are  the  words  which  Shakespeare  puts  into  the  mouth  of  Mark  Antony
as  he  comes  upon  Csesar's  body, '  Pardon  me,  thou  bleeding  piece  of  earth ' !    He  sought
pardon  for  uncontrollable  emotion,  for  the  wild  bursts  of  grief.    What,  then,  must  have
been  the  emotion  of  the  disciples  as  they  gazed  on  their  dead  Master  I     His  had  been
'  the  death  of  the  cross.'    It  was  in  a  bloody  shroud  they  wrapped  him.     His  sacred
person  was  disfigured  by  marks  of  savage  violence ;  his  hands  bore  them,  his  feet,  his
wounded  side.   They  had  never  had  any  difficulty  about  his  living  human  life.   Though
they  knew  him  to  be  '  the  Son  of  the  living  God,'  habit  had  accustomed  them  to  the
Bight  of  his  eating  and  drinking  and  sleeping  as  they  did.    And  they  knew  that  he
believed  and  hoped  and  prayed  as  they  did,  for  he  taught  them  by  his  example  so  to
do.    But  from  this  dire  consummation— death,  and  such  a  death ! — they  had  always
shrunk.    And  now  they  saw  it  realized.  "  He  who  but  yesterday  taught,  and  cheered,
and  comforted,  and  blessed  them,  now  lay  before  their  eyes,  covered  with  blood  and
wounds,  and  ready  only  for  his  sepulchre.    A  second  step  in  the  Christ's  descent
indeed  1     Prom  the  throne  of  God  to  the  grave  of  man ! "    We  have  here,  then,  in  the
"double  descent  of  the  Christ,"  in  his  humiliation  to  become  man,  and  in  his  humilia-.
tion  to  be  obedient  as  far  as  to  death  (/t^Xf*  ianirov),  and  this  death  that  of  the  ctoss,
the  Bublimest  enforcement  ever  afforded  of  the  duty  of  looking,  not  upon  one's  own
things,  but  upon  the  things  of  others.     The  self-sacrifice  of  Clirist  is  the  perfection  and
ideal  of  public  spirit.    It  is  God  moving  from  the  abysmal  depths  of  his  absolute  being
to  perform  an  unparalleled  public  service  and  save  a  ruined  race.     At  the  foot  of  the
cross  we  become  the  tenants  of  a  large-hearted,  public  spirit. — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  9 — 11. — Ohritfs  exaltation.  Can  the  public  spirit  displayed  by  Jesus  Christ
be  allowed  to  terminate  in  the  tomb?  Or  will  it  receive  a  gracious  recognition  and
compensatioiL?  It  is  to  this  we  are  next  brought-by  the  apostle.  The  Father  set  his
seal  upon  tm  Son's  self-sacrifice  by  highly  exalting  him  and  conferring  on  him  a
superlative  Name.    And  here  we  learn —

I.  That  exaltation  is  propobtional  to  humiliation  in  the  final  aeeangbments
OF  God.  (Ver.  9.)  The  humiliation  of  Christ,  as  we  have  seen,  is  the  deepest  which
the  universe  admitted  of;  and  so  his  exaltation  is  the  greatest.  Just  as  water  descend-
ing from  the  highest  height  will  return  to  its  own  level ;  so  Christ,  in  condescending  to
the  cross  and  the  grave  from  the  eternal  throne,  comes  back  to  more  than  pristine
glory,  and  gets  a  Name  which  is  above  every  name.  Hence  if  we  were  wise,  we  should
gladly  abase  ourselves  in  the  assurance  that  self-abasement  is  the  plain  and  only  path
to  real  exaltation  (Luke  xiv.  11).

II.  The  Father  has  oiven  unto  Jesus  a  Name  which  ib  above  evert  name.
(Ver.  9.)  Now,  when  we  consider  what  a  "  name  "  is,  we  find  that  it  is  a  revelation  of
what  a  person  or  thing  is.  Of  course,  names  may  be  given  where  their  appellative
character  is  not  regarded ;  but  when  a  name  is  given  as  a  glory,  it  contains  a  revelation.
Thus  it  has  been  pertinently  said,  "Names  are  mysteries,  labelled.  A  thing  not
labelled  is  a  mystery  directly.  If  it  has  not  been  named,  we  look  at  it,  we  smell  it,
we  taste  it,  we  wonder  at  it ;  and  finally  ask —  What  can  it  he  1  Naming  ia  the
annihilation  of  curiosity.    Names  are  disguises  put  upon  things  to  conceal  firom  ui


80  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  [oh.  n.  1—30.

their  mystery.  Things  without  names  would  be  too  wonderful  for  us.  Only  a  few
people  continue  to  wonder  as  much  after  a  thing  is  named,  as  before."  Now,  the  Name
which  the  Father  sets  above  every  name  is  that  of  Jesus.  The  signification  of  this
name  is  Saviour  (Matt.  i.  21),  and  the  whole  course  uf  Providence  is  to  exalt  this
above  every  other  name.  Hence  the  deep  significance  of  this  passage  seems  to  be
this — ^that  salvation  is  the  greatest  glory  which  can  be  attributed  to  any  individual,
Even  the  world  is  coming  round  to  this  idea,  that  for  a  man  to  be  the  "  saviour  of  his
country  "  in  any  sense  is  the  highest  position  to  which  he  can  attain.  When  public
worth  is  recognized,  it  is  in  connection  with  some  salvation  which  the  hero  has  wrought
for  men.  The  world  is  steadily  moving  towards  this  Divine  idea,  that  the  higheit  glory
attainable  in  the  nature  of  things  is  the  glory  of  saving  in  some  way  others.

III.  At  the  Name  of  Jesus  the  universe  shall  yet  bow.  (Vers.  10, 11.)  Among
the  saviours  of  mankind  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is,  of  course,  pre-emineijt.  All  other
salvations  will  be  made  to  appear  in  their  essential  insignificance  when  compared  with
Christ's  salvation  of  his  fellows  from  sin  and  death.  Hence  tlie  long  processioti  of  the
ages  shall  yet  issue  in  the  universal  acclaim,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to
receive  power,  and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and
blessing"  (Rev.  v.  12).  This  is  only  another  way  of  putting  the  truth  that  self-
sacrifice  shall  yet  be  recognized  as  the  sublimest  manifestation  of  personality,  and  that
in  self-sacrifice  Jesus  has  been  pre-eminent.  The  homage  of  the  universe  is  yet  to  be
made  before  the  self-sacrifice  which  is  embodied  in  Jesus  Christ.

IV.  The  lordship  or  Jesus  shall  be  universally  acknowledobd.  (Ver,  11.)
Not  only  shall  the  Name  of  Jesus  be  put  in  honour  above  all  other  names,  but  his  right
to  reign  shall  be  recognized  by  all.  The  sovereignty  of  self-sacrifice  is  the  goal  of
intellectual  and  moral  progress.  Jesus,  as  embodying  the  principle  in  absolute  per-
fection, will  yet  receive  the  homage  of  the  universe.  Even  his  enemies  shall  be
constrained  to  bow  to  his  authority  and  Submit  to  his  holy  will.  The  triumph  of
self-forgetfnlness  and  consideration  for  others  is  to  be  embodied  in  the  acknowledged
sovereignty  of  the  Saviour.

V.  But  lastly,  the  olobt  of  the  Pathbb  shall  pbovk  to  b8  ths  last  end  o*  isb
whole  plan.  (Ver.  11.)  For  what  is  this  but  a  similar  compensation  coming  in
natural  order  round  to  the  Father  again  ?  The  Father  in  the  present  ilispeusation  has
set  himself  to  glorify,  not  himself,  but  his  self-sacrificing  other  self,  the  Son.  He  is
himself  exemplifying  the  self-forgetfulness  and  consideration  for  others  for  which  his
gospel  calls.  The  Father  is  not  looking  on  his  own  ihiugs,  any  more  than  the  Son.
Each  Person  of  the  adorable  Trinity  looks  away  from  self  to  secure  the  glory  of  his
mate.  Is  it  not  right  and  beautiful  in  these  circumstances  that  the  glory  of  the  great
Father  should  result  from  the  consideration  for  others  he  has  shown,  and  that  the
mediatorial  honours  of  Jesus  should  in  the  end  be  laid  at  the  Father's  feet  ?  It  is
sometimes  thought  that  it  savours  of  selfishness  to  say  that  God  arranges  all  things
for  his  own  glory.  But  when  it  is  analyzed  we  find  that  the  seemingly  selfish  arran<;e-
ment  has  been  really  the  most  absolute  unselfishness.  GK>d  has  been  looking  upon  the
things  and  interests  of  others  all  the  time.  He  has  been  laying  himsti'lf  out  for  the
good  of  his  creatures.  Disinterestedness  has  characterized  his  whole  history ;  and  if  it
be  arranged  that  eventually  the  Universe  recogtiizes  and  adores  the  self-^forgetfulness  of
God,  if  this  is  to  be  hailed  at  last  as  the  only  real  glory,— ^tben  surely  we  could  nut
desire  it  otherwise.->-B.  M.  £.

Vers.  12, 13. — The  awf^A  responsibiUtif  of  personal  inspiration.  The  purpose  of  the
present  passage,  as  we  have  seen,  is  to  secure  in  the  Philippian  converts  that  considera-
tion for  the  welfare  of  otliers  which  is  the  grand  secret  of  Christian  unity.  The
example  of  Christ  has  been  brought  forward  for  the  same  object.  Salvation,  as
wrought  out  by  Jesus,  has  been  the  pre-eminent  example  of  public  spirit.  But  now
we  seem  to  have  come  across  a  break  in  Paul's  idea,  as  if  he  would  centre  the  converts
in  self  once  again,  while  labouring  to  deliver  them  from  self.  And  the  passage  has
been  torn  from  the  context  and  split  up  into  antagonistic  exhortations,  so  that  it  seems
a  theological  battle-ground  rather  than  a  call  to  Christian  power  and  peaoe.  Let  lu
see  if  we  do  not  altogether  escape  the  difficulty  by  holding  hard  to  the  oonneotion  of
the  apostle's  thought.


CH.n.  1— 30.J         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  81

I.  Paul  speaks  here  unquestionably  of  personal  inspikation  as  porbbssed  bt
THESE  Philippian  CHRISTIANS.  Of  course,  we  are  here  using  inspiration  in  the  sense
tliat  the  Philippians  were  each  tenanted  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  They  were  inspired  men,
inspired  for  action,  if  not  for  authorship.  The  Holy  Spirit  had  got  their  wills  in  his
control  and  also  the  issue  of  their  wills  in  action.  Here  is  the  broad  fact,  therefore,
of  their  personal  inspirntion.  Now,  the  Holy  Spirit's  influence  upon  the  will  is  a  most
interesting  as  well  as  intricate  subject.  It  is  not,  however,  either  an  unreasonable  or  a
tyrannical  influence.  It  is  not  unreasonable,  for  it  is  upon  the  line  of  reason  and  of
moral  suasion  tliat  the  Holy  Spirit  always  moves.  It  is  not  tyrannical,  for  it  is  by  his
inspiration  we  are  delivered  from  the  prejudice  and  partiality  which  sin  induces  and
which  mar  our  liberty.  "  Where  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  liberty  "  (2  Cor.  iii.
17).  We  are  never  so  free  as  when  we  are  surrendering  ourselves  implicitly  and  com-
pletely to  God's  inspirations.  But  the  power  to  carry  out  the  impulses  of  the  inspired
will  is  also  the  gift  of  God;  so  that  the  Christian  is  2lW inspired  instrument  for  the
accomplishment  of  the  will  of  God.     He  is  moved  from  within  by  the  almighty  Spirit.

II.  Personal  inspiration  mat  well  be  entertained  with  fear  and  tremblino.
(Ver.  12.)  If  it  is  a  fearful  -thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God  when  we
have  risked  and  courted  his  displeasure,  it  is  surely  no  less  fearful  a  thing  to  lie  in  hia
hands  as  an  instrument  of  his  good  pleasure.  We  should  regard  our  personalities  with
awe  and  reverence  as  sacred  things.  The  temple  on  Mount  Moriah  was  not  half  so
sacred  as  we  are  ourselves  if  the  Holy  Spirit  really  dwells  within  us.  It  is  this
iremendous  thought  which  Paul  feels  assured  will  vanquish  fornication  and  all  the
lewdness  which  invested  Corinth  (1  Cor.  vi.  9 — 20).  We  are  Divine  temples;  we
walk  the  world  as  inspired  men ;  we  may  well  contemplate  the  organisms  we  are  with
fear  and  treml)ling.  Just  as  we  handle  with  a  fear  and  nervous  tremor  some  exquisite
piece  of  mechanism  which  some  mighty  genius  has  devised  for  some  admirable  purpose,
afraid  lest  lish  handling  might  disarrange  it;  so  are  we  to  handle  our  inspired
personalities,  and  make  body,  soul,  and  spirit  with  a  sober,  awe-inspired  joy  tributary  to
God's  praise.

III.  Personal  inspiration  issues  in  earnest  work.  (Ver.  12.)  God  does  not
inspire  men  that  they  may  turn  ouli  lotos-eaters.  The  inaction  which  Brahma  induces,
for  example,  can  never  be  induced  by  the  Christian  system.  Inspiration  is  for  work.
The  movement  in  earnest  life  is  the  proof  positive  that  the  spiritual  force  has  entered
.nto  the  professedly  Christian  soul.  But  what  will  the  work  be?  This  is  the  question.
Does  working  out  our  own  salvation  mean  living  in  a  perpetual  fever  of  spiritual
anxiety?  Does  it  mean  a  never-ending  attack  of  spiritual  despondency?  By  no
means.  It  will  be  found  in  the  spiritual  life,  as  in  life  physical,  that  the  hypochondriac$
are  in  danger,  and  that  it  is  those  who  have  no  time  to  think  upon  their  own  ailments,
they  are  so  busy  ministering  to  the  welfare  of  others,  who  are  really  making  most  pro-
gress towards  the  spiritual  perfection  which  is  salvation  in  its  fulness.  And  here  it
will  be  seen  how  consistent  these  verses  are  with  all  that  has  gone  before.  Paul  wishes
the  Philippians  in  ver.  12,  just  as  in  ver.  4,  to  be  living  the  self-forgetful  life.  It  is
only  when  we  look  away  from  self  to  Christ  as  the  ground  of  our  salvation,  and  when
we  look  away  from  self  to  others  as  the  sphere  of  our  special  work,  that  we  are  living
the  earnest  Christian  life.  Our  salvation  is  assured  when  we  are  enabled  to  make
Christ's  work  our  chief  anxiety  and  Christ's  glory  our  constant  aim.  Inspired  lives
lead  to  seli-forgetful  and  self-sacriflcing  work.  The  secret  of  all  safety  and  nobleness
lies  here. — E.  M.  E.

Vers.  14 — 18. — Inspired  to  he  hlameless  sont.  Having  seen  the  great  responsibility
of  personal  inspiration,  as  brought  out  in  the  previous  verses,  we  have  next  to  notice
what  the  inspiration  contemplates.  It  is,  in  fact,  to  produce  such  a  sense  of  sonship  in
all  hearts  as  will  ensure  unity  of  spirit,  blamelessness  of  life,  and  consequent  usefulness
in  the  world.  Paul  wished  the  I'hilippian  Christians  to  be  of  use  to  their  heathen
neighbours ;  unless  they  were  so,  he  would  regard  himself  as  having  run  in  vain ;  he
consequently  is  in  great  anxiety  that  they  should  walk  worthily,  which  will  be  his
greatest  joy.     Here  we  may  note —

I.  The  position  of  Christians.  (Ver.  15.)  The  Philippians  were  "  in  the  midst
of  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation,"  and  so  shall  Christians  be  to  the  end  of  this
philippians.  •


82  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIEPIANS.  L^"-  "•  ^—^^

dispensation.  We  may  expect  to  be  surrounded  by  the  crooked  and  the  perverse.  It
may  not  be  a  very  comfortable  position  to  occupy,  but  it  is  a  very  important  and  ought
to  be  a  very  useful  one.  It  is,  in  fact,  to  furnish  opportunities  for  promoting  the  faith
that  this  arrangement  obtains.  We  often  think  that  it  would  be  happier  to  be  trans-
lated at  once  where  "  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling  an4  the  weary  are  at  rest ; "  but
it  would  not  be  butter  for  us.  Our  best  position  is  to  have  opportunities  of  benefiting
others.

II.  God  inspires  us  to  be  UNCOMPLAiNiNa  AND  BLAMELESS  SONS.  (Vers.  14,  15.)
This  is  the  way  he  would  have  us  to  work  out  our  own  salvation.  We  are  to  "do  all
things  without  murmurings  and  disputings."  We  are  not  to  be  complaining  like
Israel  in  the  wilderness,  nor  at  war  among  ourselves.  We  are  besides  to  be  the  blame-
less and  harmless  sons  of  God.  The  pure  life  we  lead  is  to  be  such  as  to  forbid  rebuke
from  a  perverse  world.  In  this  way  we  shall  be  "  lights,"  for  through  us  the  light  of
truth,  the  light  of  "  the  Word  of  life,"  shall  be  held  forrh  before  those  who  are  in  dark-
ness, that  they  too  may  be  redeemed.  It  is  an  inspiration,  consequentlv,  for  service,  an
inspiration  towards  usefnlne.ss,  which  Grod  gives.  It  carries  the  individual  clear  of
selfish  considerations  and  makes  him  useful  among  men.  It  is  the  inspiration  of  public
spirit.

III.  Paul  expects  to  ebjoicb  in  the  day  of  Christ  that  he  has  not  run  in  vain
BECAUSE  OF  THE  USEFULNESS  OF  HIS  Philippian  CONVERTS.  (Yer.  16.)  The  present
life,  in  Paul's  regard,  is  to  be  joyfully  reviewed  in  the  day  of  Christ,  that  is,  the  day  of
judgment.  The  thought  and  memory  of  the  usefulness  of  the  Philippians  will  con-
stitute an  intense  delight  to  his  great  soul.  He  will  in  such  a  case  assure  himself  that
he  has  not  run  in  vain.  It  must  have  been  a  great  incentive  to  them  to  tliink  that
their  consistent  life  would  be  a  joy  to  the  glorified  apostle.  And  would  it  not  be  well
for  Christians  to  carry  this  thought  with  them  ?  They  are  adding  by  their  blameli'ss
and  consistent  lives  to  the  joy  of  the  heavenly  world,  adding  a  thrill  to  the  hearts  of
angels  and  of  the  redeemed  from  among  men  and  to  the  heart  of  the  Lord  himself.

IV.  Paul's  possible  martyrdom  will  not  diminish  but  increase  this  jot.  (Vers.
17, 18.)  Paul  knew  as  a  prisoner  in  Rome  that  his  martyrdom  was  possible.  He  may
not,  indeed,  have  deemed  it  probable  at  this  period,  for  if  this  Epistle  be,  as  Bishop
Lightfoot  thinks,  the  first  of  the  Epistles  of  the  captivity,  it  is  likely  that  he  enjoyed
a  little  season  of  release  before  his  final  apprehension  and  martyrdom.  And  Paul  knew
that  the  possibility  of  his  death  threw  a  shadow  over  the  minds  of  his  converts.  In
his  beautiful  consideration  for  them,  therefore,  he  tells  them  that  he  can  rejoice  even
should  his  martyrdom  be  as  a  drink  offering  upon  their  service  and  sacrifice  of  faith.
He  calls  upon  them  to  rejoice  along  with  him  in  prospect  even  of  possible  martyrdom.
It  will  not  mar  the  joy,  but  will  be  owned  of  God  in  multiplying  it.  Paul  is  thus  a
sublime  example,  after  Jesus  liis  Lord,  of  consideration  for  others.  He  does  not  mourn
over  his  lot  as  a  possible  martyr,  and  crave  their  sympathy ;  but  for  their  sakes  he
rejoices  over  it  and  asks  their  congratulation.  Grace  turns  the  app.arent  evil  into  real
good;  and  joy  is  promoted  at  Philippi  as  well  as  Rome  by  what  the  world  thinks
should  only  create  sorrow.  Paul  is  thus  an  inspired  and  blameless  son  himself,  and  a
pattern  to  his  people  at  Plulippi.  We  have  thus  set  before  us  the  magnificent  public
spirit  which  the  gospel  fosters.  It  enables  us  to  look  away  from  our  own  things  to  the
things  of  others,  and  it  brings  us  to  make  even  misfortune  a  tributary  to  spiritual  joy.
May  we  follow  after  the  things  that  make  for  peace  and  tend  to  the  edification  of
others!— K.M.B.

Vera.  19 — 30. — The  considerate  missions  of  Epaphroditus  and  Timothy.  The
passage  is  still  dominated  by  the  idea  of  consideration  for  others  as  the  proper  outcome
of  the  Christian  spirit.  The  life  God  inspires  (ver.  13)  is  the  life  of  consideration  for
others.  In  this  section  we  have  this  beautifully  illustrated  by  Epaphroditus,  Timothy,
and  the  Philippians,  as  well  as  by  Paul  himself.  We  cannot  do  better  than  look  at
tlie  public  spirit  as  thus  historically  illustrated.

I.  The  considerate  spirit  as  illustrated  in  Epaphroditus's  mission  to  Rome,
(Vers.  25,  30.)  He  had  gone  up  as  a  deputy  from  Philippi  to  Rome  to  minister  in
person  to  the  beloved  apostle.  The  long  journey  he  had  undertaken  cheerfully  for  the
sake  of  Panl.     It  w»s  just  such  an  outcome  of  the  Christian  spirit  at  Philippi   anJ


OH.n.  1— 30.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANa  83

in  Bpaphroditus  himself  as  Paul  knew  God  inspired  and  he  could  calculate  upon,
Sympathy  thus  drew  the  distant  into  close  companionship.

II.  Epaphboditus's  dangerous  illness  created  a  panic  at  Philippl  (Ver.  26.)
The  faithful  deputy  seems  to  have  caught  in  the  Campagna  at  Rome  some  dangerous
disease,  which  brought  him  to  the  gates  of  death.  Tidings  were  carried  in  due  season
about  his  sickness  to  the  brethren  at  Philippi,  and  their  anxiety  about  their  sick  brother
was  deep  and  sore.  Epaphroditus  knew  that  they  would  be  painfully  anxious,  and  this
reacted  upon  him  at  Borne.  A  Chiistian  spirit  regrets  the  necessity  of  putting
Eympathetic  hearts  to  pain  on  his  account.  Sympathy  intensiSes  suffering  as  well  as
lightens  suffering  round  the  world.

III.  This  led  to  his  considerate  proposal  to  depart  to  Philippi  and  to  Paul's
DESPATCH  of  HIM.  (Vers.  26,  27.)  The  aged  apostle  had  watched  over  his  sick
"fellow-soldier"  with  anxiety  until  he  saw  him  fairly  "on  the  mend."  Then  he
found  the  convalescent  with  a  heavy  anxiety  on  his  mind  because  of  the  trouble  his
sickness  had  caused  at  Philippi.  The  result  is  that  the  two  great  hearts  proposed  to
separate,  that  Epaphroditus  may  relieve  the  Church  at  Philippi  of  its  anxiety  by
appearing  in  health  once  more  among  them.  The  whole  picture  is  one  of  mutual
consideration.

IV.  Still  more  consideration  is  shown  in  the  proposed  despatch  or  Timothy.
(Vers.  19 — 21.)  Timothy  tarries  at  Eome  after  Epaphroditus  leaves,  but  only  for  a
time.  Paul  keeps  him  only  until  he  sees  what  turn  his  trial  will  take.  In  case  he  is
released,  he  means  to  despatch  Timothy  at  once  to  Philippi  to  carry  on  considerately
the  work  of  God  in  their  hearts.  Amid  the  general  selfishness  of  men,  Timothy  at  all
events  can  be  relied  on,  who  will,  as  a  matter  of  second  nature  or  habit,  care  for  the
Philippians'  state;  This  second  mission,  that  of  Timothy,  is  a  fresh  embodiment  of
the  considerate  Christian  spirit.

V.  Lastly,  Paul's  own  advent  is  promised  in  case  op  his  bblbasb.  (Ver.  24.)
Paul  at  Rome  has  been  experiencing  the  consideration,  not  of  earthly  friends  only,  but
also  of  his  Father  in  heaven.  He  notes  this  in  the  recovery  of  Kpaptiroditus.  God
had  raised  up  the  faithful  attendant  lest  Paul  should  have  "  sorrow  upon  sorrow."  He
thus  impresstd  his  servant  with  the  fact  that  sorrows  come  one  by  one,  in  Indian  file,
while  joys  come  thick  as  the  leaves  of  autumn.  Miss  Procter  has  brought  out  this
beautifully  in  her  poem, '  One  by  One.'    We  may  quote  here  one  precious  verse—

"  One  by  one  thy  griefs  shall  meet  thee,
Do  not  fear  an  arm%d  band ;
One  will  fade  as  others  greet  thee ;
-  Bhadowa  passing  through  the  land."

('  Legends  and  Lyric*.')

Filled,  then,  with  the  grateful  sense  of  the  Divine  as  well  as  the  human  consideration,
Paul  determines,  if  released,  to  set  out  at  once  for  Philippi.  Timothy  may  go  at  a
quicker  rate  as  forerunner,  but  Paul  means  to  follow  after  him  and  do  what  he  can  by
personal  visitation  of  the  Church  to  minister  to  their  joy.  There  is  thus  given  to  us
ample  and  vivid  illustration  of  the  considerateness  of  the  Christian  spirit.  Let  it  be
our  aim  to  show  it  always  and  act  in  some  way  worthy  of  our  high  calling !  — E.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — 11. — Exhortation  to  vnanimity  and  humility.  I.  He  appeals  to  the
Philippians  by  four  common  elements  in  their  common  conflict  to  fulfil  his
JOY.  1.  By  the  comfort  there  is  in  Christ.  "  If  there  is  therefore  any  comfort  in  Christ."
The  connecting  word  has  reference  to  the  duty  which  was  enjoined  in  the  twenty-
seventh  verse  of  the  last  chapter,  and  is  again  enjoined  in  the  second  verse  of  this
chapter.  But  there  is  also  reference  to  the  circumstances  under  which  unity  is  enjoined.
They  were  enduring  the  same  conflict  at  Philippi  which  Paul  had  once  endured  at
Philippi,  and  was  then  enduring  in  Borne.  Under  circumstances  of  common  conflict,
what  had  they  to  fall  back  upon,  and  by  which  they  could  appeal  to  each  other  ?
It  is  this  which  leads  to  the  introduction  of  the  subject  of  comfort.  Some  would
substitute  "exhortation"  for  "comfort."  But  "comfort"  is  certainly  the  word
appropriate  to  the  occasion,  and  the  following  of  it  up  in  the  second  clause  by  a  word
of  similar  import  only  serves  to  emphasize  the  tone  of  the  appeal.    The  form  of  the


84  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  n.  1— 3a

appeal  is  noticeable.  It  is  under  a  supposition,  being  simply,  "If  any  comfort  in
Chiist."  He  knew  that  he  was  touching  a  chorii  to  which  there  would  be  a  ready
response  on  the  part  of  the  Philippians.  Any  cumfort  in  Christ?  Yfs;  that  was  the
quarter  to  which  be  and  they  in  common  loolsed  for  comfort.  ,  As  oppressed  by  the
troubles  of  this  life  and  the  question  of  our  destiny,  we  need  to  be  coinfi)rted.  All
the  comfort  that  philos"pliy  affords  amounts  to  this — tl^iat  s  ich  is  the  constitution  of
things,  that  we  must  bear  what  we  cannot  mend,  that  complaining  only  makes  our
case  worse.  In  Christ  there  is  this  all-sufficient  comfort,  that,  from  his  own  experience
of  suffering,  he  can  enter  sympathetically  into  the  suffering  of  each  soul,  and,  while  for
good  ends  he  may  see  fit  to  continue  it,  he  undertakes  to  support  under  it  and  to  make
it  productive  of  good.  As  Christians  they  had  a  right  to  expect  and  to  ask  of  each
other  a  conveyance  of  the  Master's  sympathy  with  them  in  their  afSictions.  Paul
extended  loving  thought,  as  from  the  Master,  toward  the  Pliilippians  in  their  conflict;
and  it  was  his  de.<iire  that  they  should  extend  loving  thought  as  from  the  Master
toward  him.  2.  By  the  consolation  of  love.  "  If  any  consolation  of  love."  In  the
previous  clause  the  idea  was  that  they  were  to  take  of  what  was  Christ's  ai.d  show  it
to  each  other.  The  iriea  here  is  that  they  were  to  take  of  their  own  love  and  show  it
to  each  other  for  consolation.  They  had  a  common  hate  from  the  world ;  the  antidote
for  tliat  was  the  refreshing  influence  of  mutual  love.  Paul  would  have  the  Philippians
in  their  conflict  know,  for  their  consolation,  that  they  were  loved  by  him ;  and  he  looks
to  them  to  let  him  know  in  his  conflict,  for  his  consolation,  that  he  was  loved  by  them.
3.  By  the  fellowship  of  the  Spirit.  "  If  any  fellowship  of  the  Spirit."  They  were
partakers  of  a  common  life  of  strength,  of  gladness,  of  hope  in  the  Spirit.  As  thus
alike  favoured  of  the  Spirit,  they  were  bound  to  make  it  their  aim  to  promote  their
common  life.  He  was  prepared  to  do  his  utmost  for  the  Philippians,  (hat  in  their  con-
flict they  should  partake  more  largely  of  the  strong,  glad,  hopelul  life  of  the  Spirit;  he
looks  to  them  to  do  their  utmost,  so  that  in  conflict  he  shall  have  reciprocity  in  the
same  life.  4.  By  tender  mercies  and  compassions.  "  If  any  tender  mercies  and  com-
passions." The  first  seems  to  point  to  tender  feelings  confined  to  the  heart ;  the  second
to  tender  feelings  going  out  in  compassion  to  others  in  their  need.  Paul  was  no  stranger
to  tender  feeling  and  compassionate  yearning  toward  the  Philippians  in  their  conflict;
he  wishes  to  have  from  them  in  his  conflict  reciprocity  in  tlie  same  luxury.  "  Fulfil
ye  my  joy."  What  they  had  a  right  to  ask  of  him,  he,  in  the  exercise  of  his  riglit,
asks  of  them.  They  had  given  him  joy  in  the  past ;  it  was  not  yet  made  full.  Let
them  from  the  common  source  fill  up  his  joy.

II.  He  ASKS  THEM  TO  FULFIL  His  JOY  BY  ATTENTION  TO  TWO  DUTIES.  1.  Unanimity.
"  That  ye  be  of  the  same  mind."  This  has  been  explained  as  thinking,  vpilling,  and
seeking  the  same  thing.  (1)  Unanimity  proceeding  from  loving  and  being  loved  alike.
"Having  the  same  love."  This  points  to  the  condition  under  which  unanimity  is  to
be  wrought  out — there  must  be  love  on  both  sides.  If  there  is  no  love,  or  love  only  on
one  side,  then  there  cannot  be  the  same  way  of  thinking,  willing,  and  striving.  But
let  there  be  reciprocal  love,  warmed  around  the  cross  of  Christ,  then,  whatever  differ-
ences there  may  be  to  begin  with,  there  will  come  ultimately  to  be  a  seeing  eye  to  eye.
(2)  Unanimity  appearing  in  harmony  of  soul.  "  Being  of  one  accord,  ol  one  mind."
It  is  better  to  take  the  two  clauses  as  one  and  to  translate,  "  With  harmony  of  soul,
being  of  one  mind."  The  latter  expression  is  just  the  literal  meaning  of  unanimity.
And  we  are  here  taught  that  unanimity  must  not  be  mere  uniformity — subscribing  to
the  same  creed,  observing  the  same  forms  ol  worship.  It  must  be  something  deep  down
in  the  nature,  wrought  out  under  the  influence  of  love  in  the  feelinns  and  active
impulses.  It  is  what  may  be  seen  in  a  couple  who  have  long  and  deeply  loved  each
other — they  come  to  feel  and  act  alike.  It  is  what  can  be  wrought  out  without  loss  of
independence.  _  It  is  like  what  may  be  seen  in  a  choir  where  there  are  blended  many
qualiiies  of  voice.  It  is  what  may  be  seen  in  a  congregation  where  there  has  long  been
good  feeling  and  harmonious  co-operation ;  there  is  created  an  excellent  esprit  de  corps —
one  soul  animates  the  body  and  determines  its  movements.  It  is  what  will  yet,  we
hope,  be  exhibited  in  the  Churches,  when  they  have  all  received  a  larger  baptism  of  the
spirit  of  love.  Many  differences  will  disappear — no  diflerenoe  will  remain  to  provent
them  uniting  and  co-operating  in  the  work  of  the  Lord.  It  is  what  will  only  be
thoroughly  wrought  out  in  the  Church  above,  where  the  same  view  of  Christ's  work


can.  1—30.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  8S


will  take  hold  of  all  mind',  animate  all  hearts,  and  call  forth  loud  and  harmonious
praise.  2.  Humility.  (I)  M'inifestaiio"S  of  self-importance.  "Doing  nothing
tiuoHLih  laction  or  through  vain-glory."  Faction.  It  was  a  talae  estimate  of  tiieni-
Belves  thiit  threntened  to  be  a  divMing  element  among  the  Philippians.  Controversy
may  be  carried  on  in  a  spirit  of  fairness.  Parties  may  be  necessitated  by  fidelity  to
principle.  Even  separations  may  be  justified  under  certain  ciicumstances :  " Come  ye
out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate,  saith  the  Lord."  But  there  can  be  no  doubt
that  self-assertion  is  the  prolific  source  of  controversy,  of  party,  of  division.  When
men  are  concerned  to  have  thpir  own  opinions  established  rather  than  the  truth,  to
have  their  own  party  advanced  rather  than  the  cause  of  Christ,  their  own  ini|>or'ani:e
added  to  rather  than  the  peace  of  the  Church  preserved,  they  are  factious.  And  there-
fore it  is  that,  in  the  interest  of  unity,  the  apostle  warned  against  self-importance.
Vain-glory.  The  Philippians  do  not  seem  to  have  had  external  advantages  of  which  to
be  vam.  For  the  apostle  testifies  elsewhere  that  in  much  proof  of  affliction  the
abundance  of  their  joy  and  their  deep  poverty  abounded  imto  the  riches  of  their  liberality.
Nor  do  we  know  that  their  temptation  was  connected  with  superior  natural  endow-
ments. It  was  rather  connected  with  their  spiritual  excellences.  These  the  apostle
fully  acknowledges,  he  says  nothing  to  their  disparagement  as  a  Church,  only  he  seems
to  evince  an  anxiety  lest  disunion  should  creep  iu  among  them  through  their  being
vain  of  their  excellences  and  comparing  themselves  with  one  another.  (2)  Cure  for
self -imparl  mce.  "  But  in  lowliness  of  mind  each  counting  other  better  than  him.self ;
iiot  looking  each  of  you  to  his  own  things,  but  each  of  you  also  to  the  things  of  others."
We  are  to  have  a  lowly  estimate  of  ourselves.  If  we  have  external  advantnges  to  think
of,  we  have  also  to  think  of  responsiiiilities  connected  with  them.  If  we  have  cuperior
natural  gifts  to'  think  of,  we  have  also  to  think  of  the  use  we  have  made  of  them.  If
we  have  spiritual  excellences,  we  are  to  be  thankful  to  God  for  them;  but  we  are  not
to  be  vain  of  them.  Instead  of  being  vain,  we  must  think  that  we  are  not  what  we
should  have  been,  considering  the  grace  that  has  abounded  toward  us ;  that  we  have
come  far  short  in  the  working  out  of  the  plan  of  our  life.  The  more  narrowly  we  look
into  ourselves  and  our  work,  the  more  shall  we  see  that  we  are  only  keeping  to  truth,
to  reality,  when  we  humble  ourselves  before  God  as  the  chief  of  siimers.  But  what  of
our  comparing  ourselves  with  others?  The  apostle  teaches  that  a  true  looking  to  the
things  of  others  will  lead  to  our  counting  others  better  than  ourselves.  We  have  to
consider  this  regarding  others  that,  apart  from  external  advantages,  from  natural  gifts,
and  from  moral  character,  they  are  of  great  price  before  God  as  created,  planned  for,
suffered  for,  loved  by,  God.  We  have  also  this  to  consider  regarding  others,  that  we  do
not  know  the  disadvaatageous  influences,  compared  with  others,  under  which  they
may  have  been  brought  up,  and  it  is  possible  that,  when  they  fail,  we  should  not  have
done  better  if  we  had  been  in  their  position.  We  have  also  to  consider  that,  even
where  we  may  be  more  excellent  than  they  in  some  respects,  we  are  not  in  a  position
to  know  all  the  excellence  that  may  belong  to  them.  If  certainly  we  compare  our-
selves with  others  for  the  sake  of  self-exaltation,  we  are  showing  our  own  want  of
excellence.  A  true  spirit  of  humility  will  lead  us  rather  to  com(iare  ourselves  with
others,  in  points  in  which  they  are  our  superiors,  and  thus  all  such  comparison  must
be  accounting  others  better  than  ourselves.  "  Unto,  me,"  says  Paul,  "  who  am  less  than
the  least  of  all  saints."

III.  Christ  the  great  Example  op  humility.  1.  Humiliation.  (1)  Humiliation
to  humanity.  "  Have  this  mind  in  you,  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus :  who  being
in  the  form  of  God,  counted  it  not  a  prize  to  be  on  an  equality  with  God,  but  emptied
himself,  taking  the  form  of  a  servant,  being  made  in  the  likeness  of  men."  It  is  not
said  of  Christ  Jesus  that  he  was  in  fashion  as  God,  i.e.  to  appearance,  God.  Nor  is  it
said  that  he  was  in  the  likeness  of  God,  i.e.  in  nature  resembling  God.  But  it  is  said
absolutely  that  he  was  in  the  form  of  God,  i.e.  was  God.  It  is  more  decisive
than  image  of  Ood  and  impress  of  God,  elsewhere  applied  to  Christ ;  though  these,
being  used  absolutely,  testily  to  his  Divinity.  Form  points  to  Christ  having  the
manifestation  of  Divinity  which,  as  it  is  a  glorious  manifestation,  is  expressed  by  the
word  "  glory."  "  The  glory  which  I  had  with  thee  before  the  world  was."  We  are
referred  to  the  moment  when  he  contemplated  his  equality  with  God,  t.«.  not  in  its
essence,  but  in  respect  of  his  having  the  glorious  effulgence  of  Diviaity.    At  that


86  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPlANa         [ch.  n.  1-3Q

moment,  what  was  the  mind  that  was  in  him?  It  was  not  to  clutch  at  and  to  retain
his  glorious  prerogatives  as  a  prize.  On  the  contrary,  he  emptied  himself,  i.e.  of  these
glorious  prerogatives,  while  not  ceasing  to  be  God.  Emptying  himself,  the  new  form
that  he  took  was  that  of  a  servant,  i.e.  he  actually  became  a  servant.  The  particular
form  of  servant  is  pointed  to  in  its  being  added  that  he  was  made  in  the  likeness  of
man,  i.e.  had  the  human  qualities,  while  not  mere  man.  The  descent  from  the  form  of
God  to  the  form  of  the  human  servant  was  immeasurable.  From  being  infinite
(beyond  conditions),  he  became  finite  (was  placed  under  conditions).  From  having
uncreated  perfection,  he  became  subject  to  a  human  development.  From  being  eternal,
he  came  under  the  condition  of  time.  From  being  omnipresent,  he  came  under  the
condition  of  space.  From  being  omniscient,  he  came  to  know  neither  the  day  nor  the
hour  of  the  end.  From  being  almighty,  he  came  to  need  power  to  help  him  in  his
weakness.  Such  was  his  emptying  himself.  (2)  Humiliation  in  humanity.  "And
being  found  in  fashion  as  a  man,  he  humbled  himself,  becoming  obedient  even  unto
death,  yea,  the  death  of  the  cross."  This  part  of  the  humiliation  is  described  as  within
human  observation.  He  was  found  in  fashion  as  a  man.  He  was  publicly  recognized
as  having  the  outward  marks  of  a  man — "  look,  dress,  mode  of  living,  gesture,  mode  of
speaking  and  acting."  His  humiliation  did  not  stop  with  his  descent  to  humanity,
but  in  humanity  he  found  further  opportunity,  not  now  of  emptying  himself  which
could  only  be  once,  but  of  humbling  himself.  This,  which  human  eyes  witnessed,  was
his  becoming  obedient  even  unto  death,  yea,  the  death  of  the  cross,  i.e.  the  most
shameful  of  all  deaths.  And  there  was  more  than  appeared  to  human  eyes.  That
death  of  the  cross  was  really  God  in  humanity  suffering  wrath  on  account  of  sin,  and
that  obedience  to  the  death  of  the  cross  was  the  human  will  completely  and  cheerfully
given  up  to  the  Divine  will  in  the  direst  extremity.  This  marks  the  depth  of  the
humiliation — the  possessor  of  the  Divine  glory  coming  down  to  be  the  bearer,  not
merely  of  all  the  shame  that  man  could  put  upon  him,  but  of  the  Divine  wrath  against
sin.  Such,  then,  is  the  exhibition  of  the  mind  that  was  in  Christ.  He  went  through
infinite  self-abasement  for  our  salvation.  He  looked  not  merely  to  his  own  things;  he
looked  beyond  to  our  things.  Nay,  did  he  not  put  us  before  himself?  He  clung  not
to  his  Divine  position  as  what  could  never  be  parted  with ;  but  he  emptied  himself  of
position,  that  he  might  grasp  us  in  his  saving  love.  Let  the  same  mind  be  in  us.  Let
us  not  clutch  at  position  when,  by  abasement  of  ourselves,  we  can  advantage  men.
Oh,  how  the  factious  seeking  of  place  and  power  is  exposed  in  the  intense  light  of  the
Divine  Son  not  counting  his  place  and  power  a  prize?  How  is  vain-glory — glorying  in
empty  things — exposed  in  the  light  of  the  Divine  emptying  f  2.  Exaltation.  (1)  Bis
Name.  "  Wherefore  also  God  highly  exalted  him,  and  gave  unto  him  the  Name  which
is  above  every  name."  We  are  here  taught  that  the  exaltation  of  Christ  in  our  nature
was  the  reward  of  his  humiliation.  In  becoming  obedient,  even  unto  death,  yea,  the
death  of  the  cross,  he  obtained,  not  only  in%iite  merit  for  us,  but  rather  for  us  in  him-
self. And  his  recompense  was  that  he  was  exalted,  and  more  than  that,  highly
exalted.  This  pre-eminent  exaltation  consisted  in  there  being  gifted  to  him  the  Name
which  is  above  every  name,  i.e.  as  appears  from  the  language  following,  the  Name  of
Jesus.  It  is  a  way  of  honouring  men  to  give  them  names.  This  honour  does  not
always  correspond  to  worth.  For  we  are  told  that  what  is  exalted  among  men  is
abomination  in  the  sight  of  God.  And,  even  when  the  name  represents  reality,  how
confined  is  it  in  its  import,  even  at  the  best  1  The  name  of  highest  import  is  the  Name
of  Jesus,  Saviour,  as  setting  forth  the  great  saving  work  vvhish  best  illustrates  the
character  of  God.  Not  arbitrarily,  then,  but  righteously,  God  has  surrounded  this
Name  with  the  highest  dignity  and  with  lordship  too.  (2)  Universal  recognition  of  hia
Name.  "  That  in  the  Name  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  of  things  in  heaven  and
things  on  earth  and  things  under  the  earth,  and  that  every  tongue  should  confess  that
Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the  Father."  The  language  is  founded  on
Isa.  xlv.  23,  "  That  unto  me  every  knee  shall  bow,  every  tongue  shall  swear."  It  is
here  represented  that  what  is  to  move  and  animate  the  worshippers  is,  not  the
sovereignty  of  God  so  much  praised  in  the  forty-fifth  of  Isaiah,  but,  what  is  brought
also  into  connection  there,  the  glorious  significance  of  the  Name  of  Jesus.  The
worshippers  are  here  designated  by  the  external  symbol  of  adoration,  as  bowing  the
kueo.    And  they  are  classified  eihaustively,  and  with  a  oertain  indefiniteneM,  w


cm.  n.  1—30.]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  PSlLlPPIANS.  61


celestial,  terrestrial,  and  mib-terrestrial.  Of  these  classes  not  one  shall  have  his  knees
unbent.  They  are  also  represented  as  confessing  with  their  tongues.  Of  the  classes
named  not  one  shall  have  his  tongue  unused  in  oonfesiion.  To' think  of  involuntary
adoration  on  the  part  of  sonie,  is  to  mar  the  language.  All  are  to  rend-sr  to  Christ  the
specially  Christian  confession — they  are  to  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  specially
invested  with  power  to  complete  the  work  of  redemption.  They  Are  to  render  the
adoration  to  Christ  to  the  praise,  not  of  Q-od's  justice,  but  of  God's  fatherhood.
Dogmatic  inference  from  this  passage  cannot  be  drawn  with  certainty.  All  that  wa
have  to  do  is  to  allow  the  language,  in  all  its  majesty,  to  have  its  due  weight  in  our
minds  alongside  of  other  language  that  is  used  in  Scripture  with  regard  to  the  last
things. — R.  F.

Vers.  12 — 18. — Exhortations.  I.  Personal  work  fob  the  Philippians.  1.  How
he  exhorts  them  with  pleasure.  "  So  then,  my  beloved,  even  as  ye  have  always
obeyed,  not  as  in  my  presence  only,  but  now  much  more  in  my  absence."  I'he  exal-
tation of  Christ,  which  is  the  subject  of  the  three  foregoing  verses,  is  specially  fitted  to
be  an  encouragement  to  the  duty  of  humility.  It  is  not  this,  however,  that  he  now
specifies,  in  descending  from  the  sublime  Example.  He  rather  lays  hold  on  that
"  obedience  "  which  was  the  soul  of  the  humiliation,  and  on  the  name  "  Saviour  "  which
marked-the  exaltation.  And  upon  these  he  makes  his  exhortation  to  turn.  For  the
first  time  he  addresses  them  as  his  "  beloved."  It  indicates  his  drawing  closer  to  them.
He  has  a  complimentary  word  to  say  to  them.  They  had  in  the  past  obeyed,  not
him — for  it  is  no  mere  personal  request  that  he  has  to  make — but  the  gospel  of  which
a  statement  follows,  and  which  is  referred  to  as  the  Word  of  life.  They  had  alway»
obeyed,  i.e.  both  when  he  was  present  and  when  he  was  absent.  Into  this  form,  then,
he  throws  his  exhortation.  They  were  to  make  their  future,  as  they  had  made  their
past.  They  were  not  to  make  their  obedience  to  the  gospel  dependent  on  his  presence
with  them.  An  obedience  as  in  his  presence  would  have  meant  negligence  in  his
absence.  Nay,  they  were  to  mike  his  absence  a  stimulus  to  greater  exertion.  When
they  had  not  his  help  they  were  to  feel  the  greater  need  of  rousing  themselves  to
action.  2.  The  work  of  salvation.  (1)  What  it  is.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation."
It  is  thought  of  as  a  work  that  is  our  own,  i.e.  pertaining  to  ourselves  and  going  on
in  our  nature.  It  is  what  is  known  as  character,  what  is  impressed  on  our  nature,
'  according  as  we  are  obedient  to  the  will  of  Grod.  It  is  thought  of  as  that  which  has
a  heginning,  progress,  and  end.  We  are  to  wort  it  out  from  the  beginning  all  through
to  the  end.  It  is  thought  of  as  that  which  has  its  starting-point  in  the  nature  in  a  state
of  sin.  The  end  is  only  to  be  leaohed  in  conflict  with  evil,  and  in  the  salvation  of  the
nature  from  evil.  Salvation  of  the  thoughts.  It  belongs  to  us  as  thinking  beings  to
think  out  the  great  thoughts  which  God  has  given  for  our  instruction  in  the  Bible.
We  have  to  think  them  out,  so  as  to  get  the  full  advantage  of  their  quickening  influence
in  our  being.  This  is  part  of  the  great  work  which  God  has  appointed  us  to  work  out.
It  is  saving  work,  inasmuch  as  we  need  to  be  saved  from  the  darkness  of  our  minds.
We  need  to  be  saved  from  an  unworthy  conception  of  Ood.  There  is  nothing  which  more
bespeaks  our  elevation  than  that  we  think  aright  of  God.  It  is  a  work  of  no  little
difficulty  to  rise  above  such  gross  notions  of  God  as  are  derived  from  our  senses,  our
passions,  our  selfish  partialities,  and  to  think  of  hirn.  as  the  Father  of  our  spirits,  who
has  high  and  kind  thoughts  regarding  us,  who  is  interested  in  our  well-being,  who  ii
ever  present  with  us  to  inspire  us,  to  strengthen  us,  to  waken  up  our  life,  who  rebukes
us  and  is  grieved  when  we  do  wrong,  who  commends  us  and  is  glad  when  we  do  well ;
to  think  of  him  especially  as  the  God  of  salvation,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,
who  has  made  infinite  sacrifice  for  us,  who  makes  to  us  offer  of  boundless  grace,  who  is
seeking  by  every  means  to  compass  our  salvation.  We  need  to  be  saved  from  an
unworthy  conception  of  human  life,  from  thinking  that  it  consists  in  the  abundance  of
things  which  we  possess,  that  it  is  to  be  spent  in  idleness  or  pleasure,  that  it  has  not
issues  beyond  death.  It  is  no  easy  task  to  come  to  the  full  realization  of  the  thought
that  our  life  derives  its  significance  from  our  being  tried,  from  it  being  intended  to  be
a  service  rendered  to  God,  the  working  out  of  a  Divine  plan,  the  unselfish  seeking  ©f
the  good  of  others ;  derives  its  significance  especially  from  Christ  having  associated
himself  Tith  it,  having  brought  liack  it<  old  value,  and  having  given  it  an  inoreasei


88  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN3.         [oh.  n.  1—30.

value  in  his  death — having  actually  given  us  the  example  of  a  perfect  human  life.    The
idea  of  the  ajiostle  in  2  Cor.  x.  5  is  that  every  thought  is  to  be  brought  into  captivity
to  the  obedience  of  Christ.     That  involves  our  having  a  Christian  volume  ani  force  ol
thought  which  we  can  bring  to  bear  on  all  subjects.     Thtfre  is  a  philosophical  temper
of  mind,  wliich  consists  in  accurately  observing  facts,  in  discernini;  what  are  relevant,
in  giving  them  their  due  weight,  in  investigating  tlie  causes,  connections,  explana-
tions,  of  things.     So  there  is  a   Christian  temper  of  mimi,  ,which  consists  in  our
being  saturated  .with  Christian  ideas,  in  looking  beneath  the  surface,  in  testing  the
Christian  character  of  actions  and  courses  of  action,  of  thoughts  and  lines  of  thought,
in  readily  discovering  their  bearing  upon  Christ   and  his   salvation.    And  that  is
what  is  as  open  to  the  labourer  as  to  the   philosopher.     As  we  have  all  a  power
of  applying  our  minds  in  matters  connected  with  our  earthly  calling,  so  there  is
no  reason  why  we  should  not  have  the  power   of  applying  our  minds  in  matters
connected  with  our  heavenly  calling.    And  we  should  clearly  reoognize  that  as  part
of  the  great  work  of  our  salvation   which  we  are  here  commanded  to  work  out.
Salvation  of  the  affections.    It  belongs  to  us  as  social  beings  to  be  rightly  affected
toward  other  beings.     That  enters  very  deeply  into  the  question  of  our  happiness.     And
part  of  the  great  work  of  our  salvation  is  to  work  out  the  right  state  of  our  affections.
It  is  a  saving  work,  inasmuch  as  we  need  to  be  saved  from  a  depraved  state  of  our
affections.    We  need  to  be  saved  from  a  depraved  state  of  our  affections  towards  Qod.
We  have  a  natural  aversion  to  goodness,  and,  because  God  is  the  perfection  of  all
goodness,  it  is  true  that  we  are  alienated  and  enemies  in  our  mind,  that  the  mind  ol
the  flesh  is  enmity  against  God.     We  need  to  have  our  affections  changed,  so  that  we
love  God  because  of  his  goodness,  and  simply  because  of  his  goodness,  and  love  him
with  all  fervour  and  steadiness  because  he  is  supremely  good  ;  and  love  Christ  because
he  is  the  glorious  Manifestation  of  the  Divine  goodness,  the  Accomplisher  of  our  redemp-
tion.   We  need  to  be  saved  from  a  depraved  state  of  our  affections  toward  heiiigs  like
ourselves.    There  is  much  that  is  beautiful  in  the  affection  of  parents  for  their  children ;
but  it  needs  to  be  saved  even  from  mere  naturalness  or  characterlessness.     We  must
love  our  children,  not  with  a  blind  affection,  but  with  an  affection  that  is  under  the
guidance  and  restraint  of  moral  and  religious  principle ;  we  must  love  them  as  intelligent,
spiritual  beings,  who  have  been  given  us  to  train  for  God  and  immortality;  we  must
love  them  especially  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  who  has  obtained  right  to  them  by  his
blood,  and  who  wishes  to  see  them  transformed  into  his  image.     Our  affections  need  to
be  saved  from  mere  narrowness.    They  are  not  to  be  confined  to  our  home  circle  or  circle
of  our  acquaintances,  but  are  to  have  soinething  of  the  catholicity  of  the  Saviour's  love.
Our  affections  need  to  be  saved  from  shallowness.     Our  interest  in  all  must  extend
beyond  their  temporal  well-being  to  their  Christian  perfection.     Our  affections  need  to
be  saved  from  every  element  of  malice.    We  must  not  hate  or  break  forth  into  passion,
but  be  patient  and  forgiving,  after  the  example  of  the  Master.     Thus  will  a  Christian
character  be  given  to  our  affections.     And  that  is  part  of  the  work  of  salvation  which
we  are  distinctly  to  place  before  us  as  commanded  here.     Salvation  of  the  energies.
It  belongs  to  us  as  active  beings  to  have  our  energies  rightly  employed.     This  enters
largely  into  our  happiness,  and  is  part  of  the  work  of  salvation  that  we  are  appointed
to  work  out.     It  is  a  saving  work,  inasmuch  as  our  energies  need  to  be  saved  from  self.
One  form  which  self  takes  is  that  of  sloth.     That  is  a  sin  which  besets  very  many.
We  are  not  to  work  listlessly,  bringing  little  to  pass,  spreading  the  work  of  one  hour
over  many.    We  are  to  let  our  enerj^ies  out,  and  to  let  our  ener^es  out  as  a  whole,  not
restraining  especially  our  best  energies.     We  are  not  to  be  discouraged  by  difficulties,
but  rather  to  regard  them  as  an  opportunity  for  our  putting  forth  our  energies  more
vigorously.     We  are  not  to  spend  our  energies  simply  for  a  livelihood,  or  in  the
pursuit  of  pleasure,  or  in  the  pursuit  of  a  fortune,  or  in  the  pursuit  of  fame.     Our
energies  are  to  be  saved  by  being  lifted  above  self  to  Ood,  especially  by  being  connected
with  Christ,  laid  as  a  willing  tribute  at  his  feet,  concentrated  on  his  glory,  steadily
rendered  to  him,  imbued  with  his  unselfish,  philanthropic  spirit.     That  is  the  third
line  in  which  we  are  to  carry  out  the  saving  work  commanded  here.     (2)  Spirit  in
vjhich  it  is  to  be  carried  out.    "  With  fear  and  trembling."    The  latter  word  refers
more  to  the  anxious  eolicitude  that  is  connected  with  what  is  feared.     This  was  th«
ipirit  in  which  Paul  lerred  among  the  Corinthians:  "I  was  with  you  in  weakness  and


OH.  n,  l-r-30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  89

in  fear  and  in  muca  trembling."  It  is  the  spirit  which  he  requires  of  servant*  toward
their  masters  "  Servants,  be  obedient  unto  them  that,  according  to  the  tia^ti,  are  your
masters,  with  fear  and  trembling."  We  may  well  have  fear  and  trembling  as  to  the  wurk
of  our  salvation  being  really  commenced.  For  there  is  such  a  diffeience  between  a  saved
and  an  unsaved  state,  between  being  in  Christ  and  being  out  oi  Christ.  "This  is  the
work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  hinj  whom  he  hath  sent."  Have  we  unmistakably
given  ourselves  vp  to  Christ,  so  that  we  are  among  the  number  of  the  saved,  i.e.  enjoy
the  fruits  of  Christ's  work  in  the  pardon  of  our  sins,  acceptance  of  our  piT.sons,  and  the
beginning;  of  a  better  life?  "  Let  us  fear  therefore,  lest  haply,  a  promise  being  left  of
entering  into  his  rest,  any  one  of  you  should  seem  to  have  come  short  ^f  it."  A  mistake
hire  is,  of  all  mistakes,  the  most  stupendous,  and  the  very  possibility  of  it  should  make
us  fnar  and  tremble.  To  be  an  entire  stranger  to  fear  and  trembling  regarding  the
reality  of  personal  salvation  is  to  be  in  an  alarming  condition.  We  may  well  have
fear  and  trembling,  too,  regarding  the  satisfac  tory  going  forward  of  the  work  of
salvation,  which  is  more  referred  to  here.  It  is  a  work  for  which  we  are  made
responsible,  which  is  made  to  depend  on  our  fidelity,  and  we  may  well  fear  and
tremble  when  we  think  of  our  indifference,  of  our  unsteadiness  of  purpose.  It  is  a
work  which  goes  so  far  into  our  inmost  being  that  we  may  well  distrust  our  own
power  to  do  enough  in  connection  with  it.  Can  we  but  fear  and  tremble  when  we
think  that  our  doing  has  to  pass  under  the  all-seeing  eye  of  God,  and  to  be  judged
unerringly,  not  only  as  to  its  quantity,  but  as  to  its  quality?  We  do  not  need  to
crouch  as  under  the  rod,  when  we  think  of  failure ;  for  we  are  in  the  liamls  of  a  merciful-
Fatlier:  but  all  the  more  because  he  is  merciful  should  we  have  a  trembling  anxiety
lest  we  do  not  come  np  to  what  he  expects  of  us.  It  is  a  work  for  the  accomplishment
of  which  long  time  is  needed,  and  we  may  well  fear  and  tremble  when  we  think  of  the
little  time  that  we  can  calculate  on  as  at  our  disposal.  In  "hat  state  of  progress  towards
perfection  shall  our  thoughts  and  affections  and  energies  be  when  we  are  called  awny
from  the  scene  of  onr  trial  into  tlie  presence  of  our  Gud?  3.  Encouragement,  "  For.
it  is  God  which  worketli  in  you  both  to  will  and  to  work,  for  his  good  pleasure."  (1)  The
Divine  Energizer.  We  are  encouraged  to  work  out  the  wotk  of  our  salvation  in
a  spirit  of  anxious  solicitude  by  the  thou  :ht  that  it-is  God  which  worketh — literally,
energizeth — putteth  forth  power  in  us.  At  the  centre  of  our  bring  is  the  will.  It  is
it  which  wills  and  energizes  in  our  thoughts,  affections,  and  practical  activities.  We
are  here  tauiht  that  within  our  will,  a  centre  within  a  centre,  there  is  a  higher  power
that  wills  and  energizes.  It  is  God  which  energizes  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  energize.
This  power  he  has  over  us  by  virtue  of  being  our  Creator.  This  is  the  power  which
he  retains  over  his  creation,  that  he  can  touch  efficiently  the  will  in  its  choobing  and  in
its  outgoing  in  the  nature.  It  is  a  saving  power  that  we  are  here  to  think  of,  i.e.  a  power
which  only  goes  forth  in  connection  with  the  work  of  him  who  has  been  exalted  as
Saviour,  From  the  crucified  and  exalted  Saviour,  through  the  Spirit,  God  puts  forth
power  to  counteract  the  weakness  of  our  will,  to  give  it  power  in  choosing  the  good  and
refusing  the  evil.  Until  he  puts  forth  his  power  on  the  will  nothing  good  can  come  out
of  it.  There  is  only  depravity  in  it,  and  we  can  no  more  get  rid  of  it  ourselves  than
the  Ethiopian  can  change  his  skin  or  the  leopard  his  spots.  The  first  enabling  power
in  good  must  come  from  God.  While  he  enables  us  he  holds  us  responsible,  and  he
gives  us  this  to  encourage  us,  in  tremblingly  discharging  our  obligations  as  to  our
salvation  that,  as  it  is  his  almighty  grace  that  first  comes  down  upon  our  will,  so
we  have  the  same  grace  on  which  unlimitedly  to  rely  for  support  in  its  struggle  out
of  sin  toward  salvation.  Great  is  the  weakness  of  our  will,  but  greater  is  the  power
that  energizes  in  us  both  to  will  and  to  energize.  We  are  thus  in  the  position  of
carrying  forward,  while  tremblingly,  yet  hopefully,  the  work  of  our  salvation.  (2)  For
what  he  energizes.  The  idea  is  that  it  is  his  good  pleasure  that  gets  the  advantage.
We  reap  great  advantage  in  our  experience  of  salvation.  But  God  is  here  said  to  ener-
gize in  us  savingly  for  his  own  advantage.  It  is  not  lor  the  advantage  of  his  sovereignty,
so  much  as  of  that  goodness  which  is  at  the  heart  of  his  sovereignty.  It  is  his
sovereignty  that  gives  him  the  right  to  energize  in  our  wills;  but  it  is  goodness  that
determines  the  exercise  of  his  sovereignty,  as  always,  so  especially  in  our  salvation
from  sin,  in  meeting  us  in  all  our  impotence,  and  in  giving  us  the  power  to  maintain  tha
struggle;  and  so  it  is  the  goodness  of  his  pleasure  that  is  advantaged  in  qui  salvatioo.


90  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHlLlPPIAiJS.         [oa.  n.  1— 3a

II.  Duty  of  the  Philippians  in  thb  world.  1.  The  one  thing  to  'be  avoided.
"Do  all  things  without  murmurings  and  dispiitings,  that  ye  may  be  blameless  and
harmless."  The  apostle  has  been  enjoining  on  them  their  duty  with  reference  to  their
personal  salvation.  He  now  contemplates  them  as  placed  in  the  midst  of  the  world.
It  can  be  seen  that  he  has  in  his  mind  ancient  Israel.  It  is  true  that  they  were
characteristically  murmurers  and  doubters  against  God.  But  it  does  not  appear  that
the  Philjppians  were  inclined  to  murmur  and  doubt  under  the  Divine  dealings.  We
are  rather  made  to  feel  that  they  had  not  a  little  of  the  martyr  spirit.  The  danger
feared  was  the  breaking  of  their  unity  through  self-exaltation.  We  are,  therefore,  to
think  of  murmurings  and  disputinf;3  among  themselves.  It  pointed-  to  a  state  of
matters  in  their  Church  which  would  be  very  prejudicial  .to  their  spiritual  life.  This
was  the  one  thing  to  be  avoided,  in  order  that  they  should  be  blameless  in  the  judgment
of  others,  and  sincere,  as  we  should  read,  conscious  to  their  own  minds  of  good  intention.
It  was  being  not  very  far  from  the  mark.  Other  Churches  may  have  excelled  the
Phili|ipiaus  in  reference  to  this  particular;  but  of  how  few  could  it  be  said  that  there
was  one  thing  to  be  avoided  by  tliem  in  order  that  they  should  be  blameless  and  right-
minded  I  How  many  points  would  need  to  be  enumerated  in  order  that  such  language
might  be  employed  of  some  of  our  Churches  now  ?  2.  Proper  conception  of  their  duty.
(1)  To  be  free  from  spots.  "  Children  of  God  without  blemish  in  the  midst  of  a
crooked  and  perverse  generation."  There  is  a  reminiscence  here  of  language  employed
in  the  song  of  Moses :  "  They  have  corrupted  themselves,  their  spot  is  not  the  spot  of
his  chiliiren  :  they  are  a  perverse  and  crooked  generation."  They  had  not  answered  to
the  Divine  conception,  which  was  that  of  children  without  spot  in  the  midst  of  a
crooked  and  perverse  generation.  It  is  much  more  obvious  than  it  was  then  that  we
are  the  chiliiren  of  God.  "  For  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  these  are  sons
of  God.  For  ye  received  not  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  unto  fear ;  but  ye  received
the  spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba,  Father.  The  Spirit  himself  beareth
witness  with  our  spirit,  that  we  are  children  of  God :  and  if  children,  then  heirs ;  heirs  of
God,  and  joint-heirs  with  Christ."  Such  is  the  fully  expressed  Christian  standpoint.
It  is  the  Divine  arrangement  that,  as  children  of  God,  we  are  separated  into  Christian
societies ;  not,  however,  removed  to  a  separate  sphere  where  we  are  not  acted  upon  from
without,  and  have  simply  to  conserve  and  consolidate  our  Christian  life.  But  we  are
placed  in  the  midst  of  the  world,  and  the  world  is  here  thought  of  in  its  generations.
The  generation  is  characterized  by  moral  abnormity.  Both  "  crooked  "  and  "  perverse  "
contain  the  idea  of  being  bent  from  the  true  form,  as  a  tree  is  bent  or  as  the  human
body  is  sometimes  bent.  In  the  latter  the  bending  is  so  decided  as  to  amount  to  distor-
tion. All  the  generations  have  abnormity ;  but  every  generation  has  its  own  peculiar
abnormity  or  spot.  And  the  Church,  from  age  to  age,  has  especially  to  guard  against
the  spot  of  the  wicked  generation  in  the  midst  of  which  it  lives.  The  spot  of  the
present  crooked  and  perverse  generation  may  be  said  to  be  a  secularism,  which  would
make  of  the  Lord's  day  a  common  day,  of  the  Bible  a  common  book,  of  Christ  a
common  man,  of  religion  simply  the  performance  of  common  duties.  That  is  the
mask,  which  the  generation  is  more  and  more  taking,  in  all  forms  of  literature
and  in  public  movements.  That  is  the  influence  which,  through  a  thousand
channels,  is  being  brought  to  bear  upon  the  Christian  part  of  the  population.  And
there  are  always  those  who  are  inclined  to  adjust  themselves  to  what  they  see
around  them.  But  that  is  not  the  spot  of  God's  children.  Let  us  keep  clear  of  it
in  the  name  of  our  adoption  into  God's  family.  "  Do  you  requite  me  so  ?  "  it  is  said
in  the  words  following  these,  quoted  in  the  song  of  Moses :  "  Am  not  I  your  Father
that  bought  thee  ? "  Let  us  have  separateness  from  our  generation,  in  its  general
spirit,  and  in  the  particular  forms  that  may  prevail  around  us.  (2)  To  give  light  to  the
world.  "  Among  whom  ye  are  seen  as  lights  in  the  world,  holding  forth  the  Word  of
life."  Christ  is  the  Sun,  or  Light  of  the  woild ;  we  are  intended  to  be  stars,  or  lesser
lights.  Ours  is  a  borrowed  light  from  Christ,  or  rather,  as  it  is  here  regarded,  from  his
gospel,  which  is  named  the  Word  of  life,  i.e.  the  light  which  gives  an  eternal  quickening
to  the  soul.  According  as  we  have  received  the  gospel,  in  its  blessed  statements,  into
our  being,  are  we  made  light,  have  darkness  expelled  from  us.  And  our  functljn  is  to
hold  forth  the  Word  of  life— to  cast  the  light  that  we  have  appropriated  forth  upon  tha
dark  world.    That  is  the  true  way  to  meet  the  aggression  of  the  crooked  and  perverse


OH.  11.1—30.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  91

generation.  Something  more  is  needed  than  the  most  satisfactory  Christian  apologetics.
The  Church  must  show,  positively  and  decidedly,  the  living  power  of  Christianity.  It
must  make  a  better  help  to  the  spiritual  life  of  the  Lord's  day,  if  that  day  is  not  to  be
surrendered  to  the  enemy.  It  must  have  a  more  living  hold  of  the  Bible,  if  that  book
would  maintain  its  authority.  It  must  have  a  warmer  attachment  to  Christ,  if  he  is
properly  to  be  held  forth  for  the  faith  of  men.  It  must  have  greater  fervour  in  prayer
and  in  all  religious  duties,  if  it  would  commend  these  as  sanctifying  and  sweetening
common  duties.  The  Church  must,  from  the  right  use  of  the  gospel,  create  a  public
sentiment  of  a  Christian  nature,  a  body  of  strong  living  light,  if  it  would  make  an
impression  upon  the  darkness  around,  and  not  have  its  own  light  obscured.  Let  uh  see
that  individually  we  act  as  light-bearers  to  the  world,  holding  forth  the  Word  of  life.

III.  Inteetwinino  of  Paul  with  the  Philippians.  1.  Alternative  of  his  heing
spared.  "  That  I  may  have  whereof  to  glory  in  the  day  of  Christ,  that  I  did  not  run
in  vain  neither  labour  in  vain."  What  a  beautiful  intertwining  of  the  apostle  with  his
converts!  He  hoped  yet  to  run  for  them,  with  his  feet  shod  with  the  preparatinn  of
the  gospel  of  peace ;  he  hoped  yet  to  labour  for  them.  Beyond  that  he  sees  the  day  of
Christ,  the  day  when  his  running  and  labouring,  with  all  its  attendant  results,  in  them,
would  pass  under  the  eye  of  the  great  Head  of  the  Church.  He  hopes,  then,  to  have
his  destiny  so  intertwined  with  theirs  that  they  would  be  the  occasion  of  his  glorying,
as  in  successful  work  for  Christ.  Whereas  he  intimates  that  it  would  be  loss  to  him  of
a  crown  of  rejoicing,  if  his  running  and  labouring  for  them  turned  out  to  be  ineffectual.
What  minisier  would  not  thus  wish  to  be  intertwined  in  loving  service  with  bis
people?  2.  Alternative  of  his  dying.  (1)  His  Jo7/ing  and  rejoicing  with  them.  "Yea,
and  if  I  am  offered  upon  the  sacrifice  and  service  of  your  faith,  I  joy,  and  rejoice  with
you  all."  He  does  not  here  present  his  dying  as  the  probable  issue.  For  that  would
be  inconsistent  with  the  confident  anticipation  of  release,  to  which  expression  was
formerly  given.  Rather  does  he  wish  to  entertain  as  probable  or  certain  the  supposi-
tion of  the  satisfactory  nature  of  their  faith.  If  he  can  think  of  them  as  priests
ministering  at  the  altar  and  offering  thereon  a  believing  life,  then,  though  his  life-blood
should  be  poured  out  as  a  libation  around  the  offering,  he  will  joy  in  their  offering,  and
rejoice  with  them  all.  (2)  Call  to  joy  and  rejoice  with  him.  "And  in  the  same
manner  do  ye  also  joy,  and  rejoice  with  me."  Martyrdom  was  a  joyful  thought  to  him.
His  dying  when  the  cause  of  Christ  was  in  the  ascendant,  his  being  poured  out  as  a
libation  when  he  could  think  of  them  and  others  offering  up  their  faith  to  God,  would
only  send  a  thrill  of  joy  through  his  heart.  The  dark  hour  would  be  lighted  up  by
the  thought  of  their  believing  testimony,  and  of  the  crown  which  they  would  be  the
occasion  of  his  wearing.  Far  be  it  from  them,  then,  to  be  overwhelmed  by  the  event.
Let  them  joy  in  his  having  courage  to  die  for  the  Master,  and  let  them  rejoice  with
him  in  the  reward,  connected  with  them,  that  the  Master  was  to  put  into  his  hand.
— B.  F.

Vers.  19 — 30. — Timothy  and  Epaphroditus.  L  Timothy.  1.  nis  mission.  "  But
I  hope  in  the  Lord  Jesus  to  send  Timothy  shortly  unto  you,  that  I  also  may  be  of
good  comfort,  when  I  know  your  state."  He  looked  forward  to  sending  Timothy  to
them  in  the  not-distant  future.  This  hope  he  entertained  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  was
not  the  hypocrite's  hupe,  which  is  like  the  spider's  web.  It  had  to  do  with  his  being
spared;  but  that,  not  based  on  worldly  scheming  to  secure  an  acquittal  at  his  approach-
ing trial,  but  based  on  the  need  for  doing  more  work  for  the  Lord  at  Philippi.  It  was
a  hope  that  was  made  to  rise  within  his  heart  by  an  impulse  from  the  Lord.  It  was
to  the  Lord  that  he  looked  for  the  realization  of  the  hope.  It  was  particularly  the
hope  of  performing  a  friendly  ofiice  to  the  Philippians.  In  order  that  friendship  may
be  turned  to  good  account  as  a  force  in  the  advancement  of  the  cause  of  Christ,  it  is
necessary  that  there  should  be  an  honest  endeavour  to  keep  up  intercourse.  Where
long  distance  intervened,  that  was  a  more  difficult  matter  than  it  is  now.  We  have
readier  means  of  communication  with  the  mission  field.  There  can  be  more  frequent
transmission  of  letters,  an  easier  going  and  coming  of  missionaries.  In  that  respect  we
are  better  placed  for  friendship,  and  for  using  it  as  a  force  in  the  extension  of  Chris-
tianity. The  apostle  had  to  contend  with  difiScult  means  of  communication,  and  yet
ha  found  it  possible  to  keep  up  friendly  intercourse  with  distant  Churohea.    He  wa«


92  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.         [ch.  n.  1— Stt

presently  incapacitated  himpelf,  but  he  had  it  in  view  to  send  Timothy  as  his  special
messenger  to  Phili|ipi.  Thia  was  with  the  friendly  object  of  knowing  thi-ir  state.
Timothy  would  be  able  to  supplement  the  information  concerning  Paul's  state  takea
by  Epapliroditus,  and  in  that  way  would  cause  them  to  be  of  good  comfort.  But  he
also  expicted  to  be  of  good  comfort  (he  the  sender,  as  well  as  they  the  receivers)  when
Timothy  returned  with  news  from  Philippi.  He  does  not  seem  to  have  heard  to  auy
purpose  (although  there  had  been  some  communication)  since  the  coming  of  Epa|ihro-
ditus,  and  he  did  not;  expect  to  hear  until  Timothy  brought  him  back  woid.  He  was
always  paiTied,  when  he  was  Ions  in  hearing  from  any  of  the  Churches.  It  would  put
him  out  of  lain,  it  would  cause  him  to  be  of  good  comfort,  to  have  good  news  from
Pljilippi.  In  our  day  it  minlit  have  been  sufficient  to  have  sent  a  letter.  We  are  not
accustomed  to  such  long  painful  intervals,  although  we  have  had  experience  of  them
too,  as  when  Livingstone  was  lost  in  the  centre  of  Africa.  In  view  of  the  Philippiaa
Church  being  lost  to  Paul  for  a  period  at  the  least  extending  over  a  year,  he  lioped  to
send  Timothy  to  find  them,  as  Stanley  was  sent  to  find  Livingstone.  It  is  much
easier  sendins;  a  letter ;  but  more  interest  attaches  to  such  special  personal  sending,  and
there  is  more  satisfaction  in  the  end.  It  was  a  richer  manifestation  of  friendliness  on
the  part  of  Paul,  that  he  had  it  in  his  heart  to  despatch  his  delegate.  Would  not  his
prayers  and  good  wishes  go  forth  with  him  ?  Would  he  not  then,  as  he  hoped,  rejoicing
in  freedom,  see  him  on  board  ship  at  Ostia  or  Puteoli  ?  Would  he  not  send  kind
messases  witii  him?  Would  he  not  remember  him  during  his  journey,  and  calculate
the  time  of  his  arrival  at  Philippi,  so  as  to  be  present  in  spirit  with  him  and  with  them  ?
And  would  not  the  coming  of  Timothy  be  an  event  of  the  utmost  consequence  to  the
Philippian  Church?  It  would  be  looked  forward  to  with  the  greatest  interest.  After
the  painful  suspense  on  their  side,  his  arrival  would  be  hailed  with  manifestations  of
joy.  Their  thoughts  would  at  once  go  back  to  him  from  whom  he  came  ?  How  was
it  with  the  veteran  soldier  of  the  cross?  If  liberation  was  the  word  that  fell  from
'i'imothy's  lips,  what  a  thiill  of  joy  would  pass  through  the  hearts  of  all!  And  then,
as  Timotliy  delivered  himself  of  the  messages  with  which  he  was  laden  to  each,  how
would  they  drink  in  comfort,  and  think  they  had  ample  compensation  for  their  fight
of  afflictions!  And  then,  as  Timothy  stood  up  and  [)reached  to  them  the  old  i;ospel,
with  a  savour  caught  from  long  association  with  Paul  in  imprisonment,  how  earnestly
would  they  listen!  how  greedily  appropriate  its  comfort!  and  how  determinedly  they
would  resolve  to  win  the  crown  of  faithfulness !  And  then,  when  the  time  came  Ibr
Timothy  to  depart,  how  sorrowful  they  would  feel  1  how  they  would  send  their  con-
gratulations to  Paul,  and  their  hope  for  his  speedy  coming  among  them !  how  this  one
and  that  one  would  wish  it  to  be  reported  to  Paul  that  they  were  determined  to  hold
by  Christ  even  to  death !  how  some  of  them  would  go  down  to  Neapolis  and  accompany
him  to  the  ship  with  tears !  And  then,  when  the  delegate  was  met  by  the  apostle
again  at  Ostia  or  Puteoli,  or  wherever  he  had  meantime  gone  to  labour,  what  comfort
there  would  be  in  hearing -all  that  Timothy  had  to  report  to  him!  2.  His  fitness
relative  to  Paul.  "  For  I  have  no  man  like-minded,  who  will  care  truly  for  your  state.
For  they  all  seek  their  own,  not  the  things  of  Jesus  Christ."  Travelling  from  Rome  to
Philippi  would  be  attended  with  not  a  little  inconvenience  and  risk.  With  the  work
associated  with  the  journey,  it  would  probably  mean,  to  the  person  who  undertook  it,
an  absence  of  months.  It  is  to  be  remembered  that  even  emperors  then  did  not  charter
their  own  vessels  or  have  command  of  their  own  movements.  Advantage  had  to  be
taken  of  coasting  vessels  engaged  in  commerce,  and  with  delays  at  ports  and  with
winds  not  always  favourable,  travelling  by  sea  was  generally  slow.  We  read  of  a.
journey  which  Paul  made  from  Philippi  to  the  coast  of  Palestine  in  the  seven  weeks-
that  intervened  between  the  Passover  and  Pentecost.  A  jouruey  from  either  of  the
harbours  of  Home  to  Philippi  would  not  be  so  formidable  an  undertaking ;  but  Scylla
and  Charybdis  had  to  be  passed,  the  point  of  Italy  rounded,  the  Ionian  Sea  crosseil,  the
Grecian  archipelago  passed  through,  and  the  Mge.a.n  Sea  encountered  as  far  as  A'eapolis.
There  would  probably  be  waiting  at  some  Grecian  port  for  a  vessel  Ibr  Philippi.  There
was  always  the  danger  of  a  storm  by  sea,  and  there  was,  especially  to  the  mes-
senger of  the  cross,  the  danger  of  persecution  wherever  he  prosecuted  his  labours.
The  apostle  was  ill  placed  for  fit  men  to  undertake  such  a  journey.  There  was  such  a
general  disposition,  even  among  those  who  professed  to  work  for  Christ,  to  place  their


OH.  n.  1-50.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPWANS.  93

personal  comfort  and  convenience  before  the  claims  of  Christ  on  their  service.  Of  those
available  theru  were  none  (with  only  one  exception)  who  could  stand  the  test  of  such  a
journey.  There  is  a  side  li^ht  thrown  here  on  one  of  the  trials  of  Paul  in  his  imprison-
ment. As  all,  when  it  came  to  the  crisis,  forsook  Christ  and  fled,  so  Paul  was  so
isolated  as  to  be  at  a  loss  to  find  a  delegate  of  the  right  stamp  for  this  mission  to
Philippi.  "  All,"  he  has  to  say, "  seek  their  own,  not  the  things  of  Jesus  Christ."  In  no
haste,  in  all  sob)iety,  does  he  bring  this  heavy  indictment  against  them.  They  were
all  so  afflicted  with  selfishness  that  they  could  not,  at  the  call  of  Christ,  brave  a  journey
from  Rome  to  Philippi.  And  before  we  cast  a  stone  at  them,  let  us  ask  if  we  could
have  stood  the  test  ourselves.  Do  we  habitually  place  the  claims  of  Chiist  before
personal  comfort  and  convenience  ?  May  the  same  charge  of  selfishness  not  be  brought
home  to  very  many  still  ?  If  there  was,  even  among  those  who  profess  to  be  Christ's,
a  willingness  to  set  aside  comfort  and  convenience  for  Christ,  would  there  not  be  a
hundredfold  more  of  men  and  of  money  for  Christian  work  ?  The  one  exception,  the
one  unselfish  man  of  those  who  might  have  gone  to  Philippi,  was  Timothy.  He  is
commended  as  like-minded,  or  like-souled,  with  the  apostle.  And  this  is  to  be
explained  by  the  fact;  of  his  spiritual  parentage.  The  language  used  in  various  places
is  "  son,"  "  my  own  son,"  "  my  beloved  son,"  "  my  dearly  beloved  son."  It  is  common
to  see  the  features  of  the  father  repeated  in  the  son.  This  is  true,  not  only  of  the
bodily  features,  but  extends  even  to  the  mental  and  spiritual  configuration.  Timothy
had  been  moulded  by  his  mother  Eunice  and  his  grandmother  Lois  in  the  Jewish
religion,  and  no  doubt  they  had  left  their  mark  on  him.  But  in  his  conversion  to
Christianity  he  had  so  completely  come  under  the  formative  influence  of  the  apostle
that  there  was  a  kind  of  natural  assimilation  to  him  in  what  he  cared  for.  With  his
father's  instincts,  is  Chrysostom's  explanation  of  the  word  "truly"  that  is  used  here.
Because  Paul  cared  for  the  state  of  the  Philippians,  Timothy  his  son  could  not  help
caring  for  their  state.  3.  Eis  fitness  relative  to  the  Philippians.  "  But  ye  know  the
proof  of  him,  that,  as  a  child  serveth  a  father,  so  he  served  with  me  in  furtherance  of
the  gpspel."  Timothy  had  been  with  Paul  at  Philippi,  as  is  borne  out  by  the  narrative
in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  his  qualities  had  been  there  put  to  the  proof.  Their
experience  of  him  was  this,  that — ^as  a  child  serveth  a  father,  so  he  had  served  with  Paul
in  furtherance  of  the  gospeU  It  is  an  excellent  arrangement,  by  which  the  younger  is
made  to  serve  under  the  elder.  It  is  beautiful  to  see  a  son  free  from  opinionativeness
and  self-will,  and  spending  his  time  and  employing  his  powers  as  the  father,  in  his
larger  experience  and  superior  wisdom,  directs.  Soldiers  who  have  plenty  of  strength
and  courage,  when  they  go  into  battle  are  placed  under  the  best  military  skill  that  is
obtainable,  and  thus  in  the  result  it  is  as  though  each  had  the  skill  of  his  commander.
It  will  be  a  source  of  strength  for  us,  the  men  of  this  generation,  to  be  guided  by  what
has  been  proved  to  be  good  by  the  men  of  former  generations,  especially  by  those
principles  of  religion  which  have  stood  the  test  of  the  ages,  and  have  had  the  approval
ot  the  wisest  and  best  of  our  race.  Timothy  must  have  been  a  very  young  man  when
working  at  Phdippi,  and  very  unaccustomed  to  the  work.  Some  years  after  the  date
of  this  Epistle,  Paul  wrote  to  him  in  these  words :  "  Let  no  man  despise  thy  youth."
In  his  inexperience  in  the  work  of  furthering  the  gospel  he  had  grace  given  him  to
take  the  course  marked  out  for  him  by  Paul ;  and  thus  he  was  preserved  from  many  a
fall,  and  was  able  to  work  to  the  best  advantage.  In  this  he  was  an  example  to  a
junior  pastor  serving  with  a  senior.  Blessed  are  those  who,  filled  with  a  sense  of  their
own  imperfections,  value  the  assistance  of  the  wise  in  the  direction  of  their  energies.
4.  Timt  of  his  mission.  "Him  therefore  1  hope  to  send  forthwith,  so  soon  as  I  shall
see  how  it  will  go  with  me."  He  hoped  shortly  to  send  Timothy  to  them ;  he  hoped,
therefore,  shortly  to  see  how  it  would  go  with  him.  As  soon  as  he  saw  the  result  of
the  trial,  which  he  was  confident  would  be  his  liberation,  forthwith,  without  any  loss
of  time,  would  he  send  forth  Timothy,  that  the  Phili|ipian  and  other  Churches  might
rejoice.  5.  The  mission  of  Timothy  was  not  to  supersede  a  visit  from  himself.  "  But
I  trust  in  the  Loid  that  I  myself  also  shall  come  sliortly."  In  the  same  spirit  and
sphere  of  confidence,  he  gives  them  to  understand  that,  while  thus  writing  of  the
mission  of  'J'imothy,  he  does  not  forget  his  promise  to  pay  them  a  visit  himself,  on  his
liberation.  It  might  not  be  an  immediate  or  a  prolon;jed  visit ;  but  he  held  himseli
bound  (God  willing)  to  include  Philippi  in  his  plan  of  visitation


>»»  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  u.  1— SO.

n.  Epaphkoditub.  1.  The  Christian.  (1)  In  relation  to  Paul,  (a)  Commen
sympathy.  "  But  I  counted  it  necessary  to  send  to  you  Epaphroditus,  my  brother."
Paul  was  not  without  natural  attachments.  We  do  not  read  of  his  being  married  ;  but
we  read  of  his  sister  and  his  sister's  son.  And  he  seems  to  have  interested  himself  in
the  highest  form  in  his  relations  ;  for  we  read  of  several  of  his  kiusmen  sendinij  their
Christian  salutations  to  the  Church  at  Rome.  But  especially  did  he  form  noble  attach-
ments in  connection  with  his  work.  If  he  had  no  brother  alter  the  flesh,  there  were
many  toward  whom  he  exercised  brotherliness.  Epaphroditus,  we  may  conclude,  was
a  Pliilippian,  of  a  diflerent  race,  of  a  different  nation.  Thrown  into  contact  with  the
apostle,  and  converted  to  Christianity  probably  through  his  instrumentality,  they  were
closely  drawn  together  on  the  ground  of  sym|iathy  on  the  great  subject  of  salvation.
Their  acquaintance  had  been  renewed  at  Rome,  and  now,  in  parting  with  him,  Paul
affectionately  names  him  to  the  Philippians  as  his  brother.  And  it  is  only  on  the
ground  of  a  common  Christian  sympathy  that  the  idea  of  the  Christian  brotherhood
can  be  wrought  out.  This  sympathy  must  be  real,  active,  else  it  will  prove  to  be
inefficient.  It  is  only  when  it  is  no  mere  matter  of  courtly  phrases,  but  when,  in  all
genuineness,  we  feel  drawn  to  one  another  in  Christ,  that  we  shall  be  able  suc-
cessfully, unmistakably,  to  get  over  difference  of  race,  difference  of  class,  difference
of  pursuit,  difference  of  ecclesiastical  connection.  Let,  then,  the  brotherly  feeling  be
in  us,  with  its  roots  deeply  struck  into  Christ.  (6)  Common  wmh.  "  And  fellow-
worker."  Christians  are  organized  into  a  society,  not  merely  on  the  ground  of  common
sympathy,  but  for  common  work.  Our  impression  of  the  apostolic  Churches  is  that
all  the  members  were  workers,  male  and  female.  If  they  did  not  all  preach  the  gospel
or  serve  tables,  they  worked  in  trying  to  induce  friends  and  acquaintances  to  go  with
them  to  hear  the  gospel.  And  it  was  because  there  was  so  much  movement,  interest
manifesting  itself  in  all  kinds  of  work,  in  those  early  Churches,  that  they  prospered  so_
wonderfully.  Paul  knew  how  to  take  advantage  of  men  who  were  fitted  for  special
work.  He  called  such  a  man  as  Epaphroditus  to  his  side,  and,  with  Epaphroditus  at
his  side  and  working  with  him,  he  felt  stronger  and  gladder.  Union  makes  us  stronger ;
we  each  count  more  than  one  when  we  all  work  side  by  side.  Union  makes  us  gladder.
"  What  makes  the  harvest-field  so  cheerful  a  scene  ?  Because  each  is  cheered  by  the
other's  alacrity,  word,  and  song."  (c)  Common  warfare.  "  And  fellow-soldier."  We
have  to  conquer  men's  hearts  for  Christ.  We  have  to  conquer  the  world's  evils —
sensuality,  intemperance,  mammon-worship,  carelessness,  infidelity.  We  must  fight,
for  there  is  a  subtle  and  powerfully  aggressive  influence  from  the  world ;  and  if  we  do
not  conquer  the  world,  the  world  will  conquer  us.  It  becomes,  then,  all  who  are  true
soldiers  of  the  cross  to  stand  side  by  side,  that  they  may  act  to  more  purpose  against
the  common  foe.  Paul  felt  more  raised  above  his  personal  temptations,  and  a  braver
soldier  against  the  heathenism  of  his  day,  when  he  had  such  soldiers  as  Epaphroditus
and  Archippus  at  his  side.  We  should  come  up  to  the  idea  of  the  Theban  sacred  band.
Thebans,  making  common  cause  with  Thrasybulus  and  his  Athenian  co-patriots,  set
out  together,  resolved  to  dethrone  the  Thirty  Tyrants  of  Athens,  or  die  in  the  attempt.
"  That  is  what  God  means  his  Church  to  be :  a  band,  not  of  friends  merely,  but  of
brothers,  united  heart  to  heart  and  hand  to  hand,  and  going  forth  resolved  never  to
yield  up  the  warfare  till  they  are  called  to  lie  down  in  death  or  see  victory  crowning
their  efforts."  (2)  In  relation  to  the  Philippians.  "  And  your  messenger  and  minister
to  my  need."  Epaphroditus  seems  to  have  been  a  Philippian  office-bearer ;  we  may
think  of  him  as  a  Philippian  minister,  with  a  gift  of  preaching  as  well  as  of  administra-
tion. As  Timothy  was  intended  to  be  special  messenger  from  Rome  to  Philippi,  so
Epaphroditus  had  come  as  special  messenger  from  Philippi  to  Rome.  He  was
undoubtedly,  personally,  in  sympathy  with  the  special  object  of  his  mission — ministering
to  Paul's  need.  As  the  love  of  Christ,  as  it  takes  possession,  opens  the  heart  to  the
need  of  all  mankind,  so  it  must  have  opened  the  heart  of  Epaphroditus  to  the  need  of
his  spiritual  father,  of  the  founder  of  the  Philippian  Church,  of  the  truest  and  bravest
of  Christ's  servants.  For  his  sake  he  was  willing  to  leave  beloved  friends  in  Christ
behind,  and  to  brave  all  the  dangers  of  the  deep.  And  it  would  be  with  peculiar
tenderness  that  he  would  hand  over  to  the  chained  apostle  the  contribution  of  the
Philippian  Church.  2.  Season  for  his  return- in  his  otvn  state  of  mind.  "  Since  ht
longed  after  you  all,  and  was  sore  troubled,  because  ye  bad  heard  that  be  was  »i<}^  *


ran.  1—30,]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  95

This  was  the  necessity  of  the  case.  The  Philippians  had  heard  of  his  sickness;
apparently  they  had  not  heard  of  his  recovery.  This,  somehow  coming  to  the  know-
ledge of  Epaphroditus,  threw  him  into  a  state  of  sore  trouble,  or  dividednesa.  He  knew
how  he  stood  in  their  aflection,  and  that  they  would  be  anxious  about  him.  How
could  he  remain  longer  away  from  them  ?  He  must  go  and  relieve  their  anxiety.  And
so  he  took  a  longing  for  them — what  is  known  as  home-sickness.  3.  Information
regarding  his  sickness  and  recovery.  "  For  indeed  he  was  siok  nigh  unto  death :  but
God  had  mercy  on  him ;  and  not  on  him  only,  but  on  me  also,  that  I  might  not  have
sorrow  upon  sorrow."  The  report  of  liis  having  been  siok  was  correct,  and  bis  sickness
had  been  of  a  very  serious  nature — he  had  been  sick  nigh  unto  death.  But  God  had
recovered  him,  and,  in  recovering  him,  had  mercifully  considered,  not  one  but  two.
The  Philippians  are  not  included,  because  they  were  not  on  the  spot.  Paul  writes  as
one  who  was  with  Epaphroditus  through  his  sickness,  or  was  kept  regularly  informed
of  his  condition.  And  therefore  we  are  to  think  of  the  locality  of  the  sickness  as  Rome,
and  not  on  board  ship  on  his  way  to  Rome.  God  mercifully  considered  Epaphroditus,
who  was  more  immediately  concerned,  to  whom  he  gave  more  life,  even  as  he  gave  to
King  Hezekiah.  He  who  has  the  ordering  of  all  lives  in  his  hands  suffered  him  not  to
be  stricken  down  away  from  his  home.  He  set  this  mark  of  his  favour  on  his  servant,
that  he  brought  him  back  from  the  gates  of  death,  so  that  he  could  say  with  one  in  like
circumstances,  "  Tlie  sorrows  of  death  compassed  me.  I  was  brought  low,  and  he
helped  me.  Return  unto  thy  vest,  0  my  soul,  for  the  Lord  hath  dealt  bountifully  with
thee."  But  God  also  mercifully  considered  Paul,  It  would  have  been  a  severe  blow
to  have  had  one  of  his  companions  stricken  down.  It  would  have  been  the  sorrow  of
a  peculiar  bereavement  upon  the  sorrow  of  imprisonment.  But  as  God  considered  the
children  of  Israel  when  they  sighed  by  reason  of  the  bondage,  so  he  considered  his
bond-servant  Paul,  and  ordained  that  it  should  not  be  that  Epaphroditus  should  die,
were  it  only  for  Paul's  sake.  No  additional  bui'den  must  be  laid  on  him,  already
burdened  enough.  And  so,  not  to  increase  but  to  alleviate  his  sorrow  at  that  sick-bed
in  Rome,  he  who  made  the  seven  stars  and  Orion  mercifully  turned  the  shadow  of
death  into  the  morning.  4.  Season  for  his  return  in  PauVs  state  of  mind.  "  I  have
sent  him  therefore  the  more  diligently,  that,  when  ye  see  him  again,  ye  may  rejoice,
and  that  I  may  be  the  less  sorrowful."  The  Philippians,  he  felt,  were  to  be  considered.
He  entirely  entered  into  the  feelings  of  Epaphroditus  regarding  them.  Personally,  he
would  very  gladly  have  kept  him  with  hlra  at  Rome  for  a  time,  until  perhaps  the  time
of  the  liberation,  when  he  would  have  returned  to  Philippi  with  the  news.  But,
however  useful  and  comforting  he  found  him,  he  must  deny  himself  for  the  sake  of  the
Philippians.  He  must  give  them  the  pleasure  of  seeing  their  pastor  again  after  all
their  anxiety  about  him.  And,  while  giving  them  pleasure,  he  would  really  be
alleviating  his  own  sorrow.  With  more  haste,  therefore,  than  he  would  in  other  circum-
stances have  shown,  he  sent  him  to  them.  5.  He  hespeaks  for  Epaphroditus  a  good
reception.  "  Receive  him  therefore  in  the  Lord  with  all  joy  ;  and  hold  such  in  honour :
because  for  the  work  of  Christ  he  came  nigh  unto  death,  hazarding  his  life  to  supply
that  which  was  lacking  in  your  service  toward  me."  There  is  no  reflection  on  the
Philippians  in  the  concluding  words.  They  had  done  their  utmost  in  service  in  giving
Paul  what  he  characterizes  as  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well-
pleasing  to  God.  What  was  lacking  in  their  service  was  what  they  could  not  supply
in  the  distance,  viz.  personal  service  to  Paul.  They  supplied  it  representatively  in
Epaphroditus.  It  was  the  very  height  of  their  interest  in  Paul  that  they  could  deny
themselves  the  service  of  their  pastor  for  a  considerable  time,  in  order  that,  besides
supplying  him  with  money  for  his  personal  use  and  for  carrying  on  the  work,  they
might  have  the  luxury  in  him  of  personally  waiting  upon  him  in  his  imprisonment.
Epaphroditus  was  the  substitute  of  each  Philippian,  who  would  gladly  have  taken
his  turn  in  waiting  upon  the  apostle.  And  it  was  in  seeking  to  render  in  the  fullest
measure  what  was  thus  lacking  in  their  service,  that  he  brought  on  an  illness  which
proved  well-nigh  fatal.  He  is  called  a  soldier,  and  he  had  the  spirit  of  the  true  soldier
in  heroic  devotion.  A  soldier  must  not  consult  his  ease,  he  must  not  linger  beside  wife
and  children,  he  must  not  count  his  life  dear  unto  himself.  He  must,  at  the  call  of  his
commander,  be  willing  to  undertake  difficult  and  even  perilous  service,  to  form  one  of
a  storming  party  who  have  to  march  "  i'  the  cannon's  mouth."    Verily  he  must  endure


96  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [ch.  n.  1— 30,

hardness.  And  so  the  good  soldier,  Epaphroditus,  for  the  work  of  Christ,  in  the  hattla
carried  on  by  Paul  at  Home,  in  undertaking  difficult  service  against  the  enemy  there,  came
nigh  unto  death,  hazarding  his  life.  They  were  to  receive  liim  then  in  the  Lord,  with  all
joy,  in  fiUowship  with  the  Lord  and  in  gratitude  to  the  Lord  vfho  had  mercifully  dealt
with  them  in  giving  him  back  to  them  as  from  the  dead.  And  they  were  to  hold  him  in
honour,  the  ground  of  their  honouring  him  being,  not  that  he  was  in  office  among  them,
but  that  in  working  for  Christ  in  their  name  he  had  risked  his  life.  They  were  to  heap
honour  upon  him  as  upon  a  soldier  who  had  distinguished  himself  in  battle.  And
Epaphroditus  was  only  to  be  taken  as  a  specimen  of  a  class.  Hold  siich,  says  Paul,  in
honour.  Whom  are  we  to  honour  ?  It  is  not  those  who  have  lived  to  Indulge  them-
selves. It  is  rather  those  "  who  have  walked  in  a  rugged  path,  and  clung  to  good  and
great  ends  in  persecution  and  pain;  who  amid  the  solicitations  of  ambition,  ease,  and
private  friendship,  and  the  menaces  of  tyranny  and  malice,  have  listened  to  the  voice
of  conscience  and  found  a  recompense  for  blighted  hopes  and  protracted  suffering  in
conscious  uprightness  and  the  favour  of  God."  Hold  in  honour  the  Christian  brother,
like  Archer  Butler,  who  nobly  lost  his  life  in  volunteering  to  visit  the  infected  houses
during  a  visitation  of  cholera  in  Dublin;  and  the  Christian  sister' who,  resigning  the
comforts  of  her  home,  devotes  her  life  to  caring  for  the  bodies  and  souls  of  patients  in
a  hospital.  Hold  in  honour  the  Christian  missionary  who,  leaving  his  people  and
civilization,  goes  forth  to  a  distant  land  and  submits  to  isolation  and  a  trying  climate
and  peculiar  difficulties  of  work,  that  he  may  bring  the  ignorant  to  the  knowledge  of
the  Saviour.  And  hold  in  honour  all  who  can  be  unselfish  in  the  place  which
Providence  has  assigned  to  them,  and  do  not  grudge  the  sacrifice  of  their  tiioe  and
comforts  in  giving,  in  praying,  in  working,  in  order  that  Christ  may  be  magnified.
-R.F.

Vers.  1— 4« — Oenuine  socialism  apostoUcally  urged.  "  It  there  be  therefore  any  con-
solation in  Christ,  if  any  comfort  of  love,"  etc.     Notice —

I.  Gekuike  socialism.  Man  is  a  social  being,  and  his  normal  social  condition  is
unity.  iSociety  is  one  body,  and  all  men  are  members  thereof,  all  animated  by  one  life,
and  contributing  to  the  good  of  the  whole.  This  is  the  social  ideal ;  but,  alas  I  siu  has
created  a.  schism.  Instead  of  unity  there  is  a  division  everywhere,  and  the  divided
parts  become  antagonistic.  The  mission  of  the  gospel  is  to  remedy  this  and  to  restore
to  perfect  social  unity.  This  unity,  we  infer  from  the  text,  includes  three  things.  1.
Harmony  of  feeling  to  one  another.  "That  ye  be  like-minded,  having  the  same  love,
being  of  one  accord,  of  one  mind."  Having  noticed  this  point  in  the  preceding  article,
we  have  only  to  repeat  that  the  harmony  can  only  be  realized  by  all  having  the  one
same  object  of  reigning  love.  Two  men,  however  different  in  the  kind  and  measure  of
native  talent,  in  the  nature  and  measure  of  information,  in  the  degree  of  culture,  in  the
character  of  their  opinions  and  beliefs,  are  indissolubly  united  in  soul  if  their  yreafcsi
love  is  centred  in  the  same  object.  So  of  any  number.  The  design  of  the  gospel  is  to
centre  all  men's  love  on  God  in  Christ.  There  is  no  other  way  of  producing  this  har-
mony ;  no  theological  system,  no  ecclesiastical  organization,  no  legislative  enactment
can  do  it ;  it  is  simply  by  this  love  that  it  can  be  done.  2.  Humility  of  deportment
among  one  another.  "  Let  nothing  be  done  through  strife  or  vain-glory ;  but  in  lowli-
ness of  mind  let  each  esteem  other  better  than  themselves."  "  This  verse  expresses  the
negative  result  of  this  unity  of  soul — that  nothing  will  be  done  in  strife,  that  is,
fertiousness  (the  word  used  in  ch.  i.  17),  or  '  vain-glory ; '  nothing,  that  is,  with  the
desire  either  of  personal  influence  or  of  personal  glory.  For,  he  adds,  each  will  esteem
other  better  than  himself,  or  rather,  will  hold  that  his  neighbour  is  worthy  of  higher
consideration,  and  a  higher  place  of  dignity  than  himself  (compare  the  use  of  the  word
in  Rom.  xiii.  1 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  13,  of  temporal  dignity),  for  the  idea  is  of  the  ascription  to
others,  not  of  moral  superiority,  but  of  a  higher  place  and  honoar.  Self-assertiou  will
be  entirely  overborne.  So  he  teaches  us  elsewhere  that 'charity  vaunteth  not  itself,
is  not  puffed  up,  doth  not  behave  itself  unseemly,  seeketh  not  her  own '  (1  Cor.  xiii.
4,  5)  "  (Dr.  Barry).  The  proud,  the  haughty,  the  supercilious,  are  not  only  the  dis-
turbers of  social  unity,  they  are  the  destroyers  of  it.  According  to  the  law  of  souls,
they  loathe  and  recoil  from  all  arrogance  and  pretension  in  others,  hence  the  exhorta-
tion, "  Let  nothing  be  done  through  strife  or  vain-glory."    3.  Generous  concern  om/ot


OH,n.  1— 30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  W

another.  "  Look  not  every  man  on  his  own  things,  but  every  man  also  on  the  things
of  others."  This  does  not  mean,  of  course,  that  you  are  to  neglect  your  own  things.
There  are  things  tliat  every  man  must  attend  to  for  himself — his  own  physical  health,
intellectual  culiure,  etc.,  but  it  means  that  we  are  not  to  attend  to  our  own  things
chiefly,  and  in  such  a  way  as  to  neglect  the  concerns  of  others.  There  is  no  real
antagonism  between  the  interest  of  self  and  the  interest  of  others;  on  the  contrary,  we
can  only  secure  our  own  individual  well-being  or  happiness  by  promoting  the  interests
of  others.  It  is  only  as  men  become  generously  engrussed  in  the  interests  of  others
that  they  can  realize  their  own  individual  happiness  and  perfection.  The  man  rises
only  as  he  becomes  self-oblivious ;  thus  Paul  felt,  "  I  am  crucified  with  Christ,  never-
theless I  live."  The  ego  must  be  swallowed  up  in  the  non-ego — the  spirit  of  universal
benevolence.     This  is  genuine  socialism,  and  it  is  here  urged  by —

II.  Apostolic  pbbsuasion.  "  If  there  be  therefore  any  consolation  in  Christ,  if  any
comfort  of  love,  if  any  fellowship  of  the  Spirit,  if  any  bowels  and  mercies,  fulfil  ye  my
ioy,  that  ye  be  like-minded."  "  Tliere  are  here  four  influencing  motives  to  inculcate  the
four  Christian  duties  corresponding  respectively — that  ye  be  like-minded,  having  the
same  love,  of  one  accord,  of  one  mind.  1.  '  If  there  be  [with  you,  as  I  assume]  any  con-
solation in  Christ,'  i.e.  any  consolation — but  Ellicott,  to  avoid  tautology,  '  comfort '  fol-
lowing, translates  (^parahlesis) '  exhortation,'  Rom.  xii.  8 — of  which  Christ  is  the  source,
leading  you  to  console  me  in  my  afflictions  borne  for  Christ's  sake,  ye  ought  to  grant
my  request.  2.  '  If  there  be  any  comfort  of  [i.e.  flowing  from]  love,'  the  adjunct  of
consolation  in  Christ.  3.  '  If  any  fellowship  of  [joint  participation  of]  thu  Spirit '  (2  Cor,
xiii.  14).  As  '  pagans '  meant  those  who  were  of  one  village  and  drank  of  one  fountain,
how  much  greater  is  the  union  which  conjoins  those  who  drink  of  the  same  Spirit
(1  Cor.  xii.  4)  I  4.  '  If  any  bowels  [tender  emotions]  and  mercies '  ('  compassions,'  Col.
iii.  12),  the  adjuncts  of  fellowship  of  the  Spirit.  The  first  and  third  mark  the  objective
sources  of  the  Cbtistian  life — Christ  and  the  Spirit;  the  second  and  fourth,  the  sub-
jective principle  in  believers.  The  opposites  of  the  two  pairs  into  which  the  four  fall
are  repiobated  in  vers.  3  and  4"  (Fausset).  A  man  like  the  apostle  would  not  have
urned  this  true  socialism  with  such  mighty  earnestness  had  he  not  been  impressed
with  its  importance ;  and  what  can  be  of  greater  importance  than  this  unity  among
the  race  ?  For  this  Christ  prayed  the  night  before  his  death,  "  that  they  all  may  be  one ;
as  thou.  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee,  that  they  also  may  be  one  in  us." — D.  T.

Vers.  5 — 11. — The  moral  history  of  the  Chrietly  spirit.  "  Let  this  mind  be  in  you,
which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus,"  etc.  "  From  a  praciical  introduction  in  the  familiar
exhortation  to  follow  the  example  of  our  Lord,  St.  Paul  passes  on  to  what  is  perhaps
the  most  complete  and  formal  statement  in  all  his  Epistles  of  the  doctrine  of  his  great
humility.  In  this  he  marks  out  first  the  Incarnation,  in  which,  '  being  in  the  form  of
trod,  he  took  on  him  the  form  of  a  servant,'  assuming  a  sinless  but  finite  humanity  ;
and  next  the  passion,  which  was  made  needful  by  the  sins  of  men,  and  in  which  his
hurnan  nature  was  humiliated  to  the  shame  and  agony  of  the  cross.  Inseparable  in
themselves,  these  two  great  acts  of  his  self-sacrificing  love  must  be  distinguished.
Ancient  speculation  deli;j,hted  to  suggest  that  the  first  might  have  been  even  if
humanity  had  remained  sinless,  while  the  second  was  added  because  of  the  fall  and  its
consequences.  Buch  speculations  are  indeed  thoroughly  precarious  and  unsubstantial
—for  we  cannot  ask  what  might  have  been  in  a  difi'erent  dispensation  from  our  own,
and  moreover,  we  read  of  our  Lord  as  '  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  from  the  foundatiop
of  the  world '  (Rev.  xiii.  8 ;  see  also  1  Pet.  i.  19),  but  they  at  least  point  to  a  true  dis-
tinction. As  the  '  Word  of  God '  manifested  in  the  Incarnation,  our  Lord  is  the
treasure  of  all  humanity  as  such ;  as  the  Saviour  through  death,  he  is  the  especial
treasure  of  us  as  sinners  "  (Dr.  Barry).  This  is  one  of  the  grandest  passages  in  the
Bible ;  it  has  been  the  arena  of  many  a  theological  battle,  the  subject  of  many  a  sermon
ay,  and  of  many  volumes  too.  Eschewing,  as  far  as  possible,  all  verbal  criticism  and
speculation,  I  shall  turn  it  to  a  practical  account  by  using  it  to  illustrate  the  ni'irai
history  of  the  Ohristly  spirit — the  spirit  which  the  Philippians  in  the  preceding  verses
are  exhorted  to  obtain  and  cherish.  Using  it  with  this  view,  there  are  two  great  fiacts
to  be  noticed.

I.  It  is  a  bpibit  of  sblf-abneoatioh.    "  Let  this  mind  be  in  you,  which  was  also

PHILIPPIANS.  ■


98  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN3.  [ch.  n.  1— 30.

in  Christ  Jesus,"  etc.  Now,  this  "  mind,"  or  spirit,  he  details  as  developed  in  Christ
himself.  1.  In  wJiat  Christ  did  not  do.  "  Who,  being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it
Eot  robhery  to  be  equal  with  God."  Or,  as  Dr.  Davidson  renders  the  words,  "  Did  not
think  equality  with  God  a  thing  to  be  grasped  at."  "  The  term  '  God '  here  and  in  the
following  paragraph,"  says  Bengel,  "  does  not  denote  God  the  Father ;  the /orm  of  God
does  not  mean  the  Deity  himself  nor  the  Divine  nature,  but  something  rising  out  of  it.
Again,  it  does  not  signify  the  being  equal  with  God,  but  something  prior,  the  mani-
festation of  God,  that  is,  the  form  shining  out  of  the  very  glory  of  the  invisible  Deity."
The/orm  of  man  is  not  the  man  himself,  so  the  manifestation  of  God  is  not  God  him-
self. Now,  Christ  did  not  seize  at  this  manifestation,  did  not  consider  it  a  thing  to  be
grasped  at.  Of  the  true  Christly  spirit  it  may  be  said  that,  when  great  good  is  to  be
done,  it  does  not  hold  on  to  privileges,  honours,  dignities, -etc.  This  is  strikingly
illustrated  in  St.  Paul,  "  What  things  were  gain  to  me,  those  I  counted  loss  for  Christ  '
(ch.  iii.  7).  2.  In  what  Christ  did  do.  (1)  "  He  made  himself  of  no  reputation.''
This  should  be  rendered,  "  he  emptied  himself,"  or  stripped  himself  of  his  original  glory,
the  glory  which  he  had  with  the  Father  before  the  world  was.  Not  that  he  was  less
Divine  and  great  in  time  than  he  was  before  all  time.  But  he  did  not  appear  so.  He
concealed  his  splendour  in  the  veil  of  his  flesh,  so  as  to  fulfil  his  redemptive  mission.
(2)  He  "  took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant."  "  The  three  words,"  says  Bengel,
"'form,'  'likeness,'  'fashion,'  are  not  synonymous,  neither  are  they  virtually  inter-
changeable; there  is,  however,  a  connection  between  them;  form  means  something  posi-
tive, Zifewess  signifies  a  relation  to  other  things  of  the  same  condition, /asAion  relates  to
ihe  sight  and  perteption."  The  King  of  the  universe  a  servant !  (3)  "  He  was  made  in  the
likeness  of  men,"  and  "  found  in  fashion  as  a  man."  This  does  not  mean  that  he  had
merely  the  appearance  of  a  man  and  nothing  more.  He  was  a  man, "  made  in  all  parts
like  unto  his  brethren."  (4)  He  "  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the  death  of  the
cross."  "  His  death,"  says  Dr.  Barry,  "  is  not  here  regarded  as  an  atonement,  for  in
that  light  it  could  be  no  pattern  to  us,  but  as  the  completion  of  the  obedience  of  his
life.  He  followed  out  the  Divine  will  even  to  death,  and  to  the  death  of  the  cross — a
death  of  anguish  and  ignominy."  Here  is  self-abnegation,  and  this  self-abnegation  is
essentially  the  Christly  spirit.  Self-saoriflce  is  the  essence  of  religion.  He  that  does
not  lose  himself  in  the  swelling  tide  of  benevolent  sympathy  for  lost  souls  has  not  the
"  mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus."

II.  It  18  A  SPIRIT  OF  Divine  exaltation.  Because  of  this  self-abnegating  love
"  God  also  hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  Name  which  is  above  every
name ; "  rather, "  the  Name  above  every  name."  Perhaps  all  intelligent  creatures  through
the  universe  have  appellations  by  which  they  are  distinguished  from  others  and  recog-
nized. Angels  have  their  names:  Michael,  Gabriel,  etc.  Some  names  are  greater
than  others.  It  often  happens  that  the  name  of  one  man  towers  in  significance  and
grandeur  above  the  name  of  a  whole  generation.  Such  names  as  Moses,  Paul,  Luthei-,
Howard,  Garibaldi.  But  the  apostle  declares  that  there  is  one  "  Name  above  every
name,"  either  on  earth  or  in  heaven.  1.  It  is  a  transcendent  Name.  "A  Name  which
is  above  every  name."  It  is  idealistically  and  independently  perfect.  There  is  no
name  like  unto  it  in  the  universe.  Above  every  name  in  every  hierarchy  in  the
creation.  2.  It  is  a  morally  conquering  Name.  "  That  at  the  Name  of  Jesus  every
knee  should  bow."  There  is  a  talismanic  energy  in  this  Name.  It  has  wrought  won-
ders on  our  earth  already,  and  far  greater  wonders  it  will  work  in  the  human  mind
"until  all  his  enemies  be  made  his  footstool."  It  wins  the  mastery  over  the  soul,  ay,
and  gains  ascendency  over  all  minds  in  the  universe.  "Of  things  in  heaven,  and  thiigj
in  earth,"  etc.  For  "  things,"  read  "  heings."  "  And  every  creature  which  is  in  heaven,
and  on  the  earth,  and  under  the  earth,  and  such  as  are  in  the  sea,  and  all  that  are  in
them,  heard  I  saying.  Blessing,  and  honour,  and  glory,  and  power,  be  unto  him  that
sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  for  ever  and  ever."  3.  It  is  a  Ood-glori-
fying  Name.  "  And  that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the
glory  of  God  the  Father."  The  acknowledgment  of  the  glory  of  Christ  is  the  acknow-
ledgment of  the  glory  of  the  Father  as  the  source  of  Deity  manifested  perfectly  in  him.
"  And  when  all  things  shall  be  subdued  unto  him,  then  shall  the  Son  also  himself  b«
subject  unto  him  that  put  all  things  under  him,  that  Ood  may  be  all  in  all "  CI  Cor.
XV.  28).


n.n.1— 30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANa  99

Conclusion.  Here  is  the  fixed  law  of  heaven.  The  moral  spirit  that  would  ascend
to  true  dignity,  win  a  name  that  shall  command  the  reverence  hoth  of  earth  and  heaven,
must  empty  itself  of  all  selfish  motives  and  personal  interests.  There  are  two  hills
lying  opposite  each  other,  one  is  the  hill  of  personal  pride — barren,  bleak,  cloudy ;  the
otlier  is  the  hill  of  Divine  dignity — grand,  sunny,  blooming  in  beauty,  and  abounding
in  fniit,  crowned  with  the  pavilion  of  the  Goiihead.  No  soul  can  ascend  the  one
without  descendins  the  other;  he  must  go  down  the  brow  of  selfishness  step  by  step,
till  he  reaches  the  daik  valley  of  self-abnegation,  and  then  upward  he  may  commence
•caling  the  sublime  altitudes  of  Divine  dignity  and  bliss. — D.  T.

Vers.  12, 13. — Salvation  as  a  work  in  the  soul.  "  Wherefore,  my  beloved,  as  ye  have
always  obeyed,  not  as  in  ray  presence  only,  but  now  much  more  in  my  absence,  work
out  your  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling.  For  it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you
both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure."  It  is  worthy  of  note  that  this,  of  all  the
Epistles  of  Paul,  is  the  only  one  that  contains  no  direct  rebuke.  The  apostle  here
speaks  of  them  as  "  having  always  obeyed,"  not  only  in  his  presence,  but  in  his  absence.
The  passage  leads  us  to  coiitem])late  salvation  as  a  work  in  the  soul.  The  word  "  salva-
tion "  implies  a  previous  lost  condition.  The  soul  is  lost ;  but  in  what  seiise  ?  Not  in  the
sense  of  missing,  as  the  piece  of  silver  was  lost,  the  sheep  was  lost,  the  prodigal  son
lost ;  God  knows  where  every  soul  is.  Not  in  the  sense  of  destruction,  as  the  tree  or
house  is  lost  when  burnt  to  ashes;  but  in  the  sense  in  which  a  viorthless  child  is  lost
to  his  parents,  a  worthless  soMier  to  an  army,  a  worthless  citizen  to  his  country.  All
souls  are  lost  to  God  in  this  sense — they  fulfil  not  their  mission,  which  is  (1)  truthfully
to  reveal,  (2)  loyally  to  obey,  and  (3)  religiously  to  serve  him.  I  offer  three  remarks  on
this  subject.

I.  Salvation  is  a  supeemb  wobk  in  uan.  The  apostle  urges  it  here  as  supreme :
"  Wherefore,  my  beloved,  as  ye  have  always  obeyed,  not  as  in  my  presence,"  etc.  As  if
he  had  said,  "Mind,  attend  to  this,  wherever  I  am,  in  whatever  condition,  wir-ther  I  am
living  or  dying,  do  not  neglect  your  salvation."  This  is  the  supreme  work.  If  the  soul
i.s  not  restored  to  the  knowledge  and  image  of  the  true  God,  wliat  matters  it  what  else
a  man  may  possess  ?  "  What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose
his  own  soul  ?"

II.  Salvation  is  A  Divine  wohk  in  man.  "It  is  God  which  worketh  in  you
both  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure."  1.  He  works  in  you.  He  works  every-
where outside  of  you.  He  is  the  /oj-ce  of  all  forces,  the  Spirit  in  all  the  wheels  of
nature;  but  in  the  soul  he  has  a  higher  sphere.  As  outsid'-  in  unreasoning  nature  he
works  in  harmony  with  the  laws  which  he  has  established,  so  in  the  soul  he  works
accoriling  to  its  laws  of  thoufjht  and  volition.  2.  He  works  in  yon  for  your  salvation.
Not  for  your  drstruction  ;  destruction  would  require  no  work  on  his  pait,  a  mere  voli-
tion would  extiuguish  you  for  ever,  but  he  works  to  save  you — works  as  the  physician
works  to  save  his  patient,  as  the  lifeboat  woiks  to  save  the  sinking  bark.  3.  He  works
in  you  for  your  salvation  "  according  to  his  good  pleasure."  It  is  not  his  will  that  you
should  perish;  the  desire  of  his  great  fatherly  heart  is  that  you  should  be  saved.
Hence  he  works  in  you,  works  silently,  constantly,  and  m  connection  with  all  the
influences  of  uauire,  events  of  history,  and  the  laws  of  your  own  being.

III.  Salvation  is  a  human  woek  in  man.  1.  It  is  a  work  which  the  man  must
do  for  himself.  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation."  No  one  can  do  the  work  for  you ;
no  one  can  believe,  repent,  and  love  for  you ;  the  work  is  absolutely  personal.  2.  Man's
encouragement  to  this  work  is  the  co-operation  of  Ood.  "  God  worketh  in  you  both  to
will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure,"  His  agency,  instead  of  superseding  the  necessity
of  yours,  shouh'  stimulate  yours.  If  he  did  not  work  with  you,  your  efforts  would  be
futile  ;  if  against  you,  your  efforts  would  be  baffled  and  confounded.  But  your  salva-
tion is  his  "  good  pleasure."  He  works  with  you  as  he  works  with  the  industrious
agiiculturist ;  he  supplies  all  the  nece-sary  conilitions  for  success  in  the  production  of
golden  LTops.  He  works  with  you  as  he  works  witu  the  genuine  truth-seeker,  touche*
the  spriii  ;s  of  thought  and  stiniulat'S  by  ever-ojiening  piospeets.

Conclusion.  Never  let  us  f  ^r-et  that  our  supreme  work  is  spiritual  salvation,  that
kll  other  works  should  be  made  subservient  to  this. — D.  T,


100  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.         [ch.  a  1— Stt

Vers.  14—16, — Chweh  activity.  "  Do  all  things  \rithout  murmurings  and  disput-
ings :  that  ye  may  be  blameless  and  hannless,  the  sons  of  G-od,  without  rebuke,  in  th«
midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  nation,  among  whom  ye  shine  as  lights  iu  the  world  j
holding  forth  the  Word  of  life ;  that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  day  of  Christ,  that  I  have  not
run  in  vain,  neither  laboured  in  vain."  The  Church  is  essentially  an  active  society.
An  inactive  Church  is  a  solecism.  Activity  is  not  only  the  condition  of  its  health,
strength,  and  growth,  but  the  condition  of  its  very  existence.  Inactivity  is  death.  The
text  leads  us  to  look  upon  its  activity  in  relation  to  various  things.

I.  In  relation  to  the  spirit  which  should  inspieb  it.  1.  The  spirit  should  b«
uncomplaining.  "Do  all  things  without  murmurings  (yoYyvir^uiv)."  In  Peter  this
word  is  translated  "  grudging."  It  represents  a  discontented  soul.  It  is  not  uncom-
mon, alas!  to  find  men  in  the  Church  discontented — discontented  with  their  fellow-
members,  their  minister,  their  work.  This  govgusmos  is  a  ^rowl  which  is  most  painful
and  mischievous  in  Church  operations.  2.  The  spirit  should  be  uncontentious.  "Dis-
putings."  There  is  a  strong  tendency  in  some  persons  to  enter  into  contention  and
raise  a  strife.  The  smallest  points  of  difference  are  seized.  This  disputatious  spirit  has
been  rife  in  all  ages.  The  theological  controversies,  sectarian  battliags,  the  schismatic
strifes  of  the  Church,  have  been  her  disgrace  and  her  bane.  3.  The.  spirit  should  be
irreprehensible.  "  That  ye  may  be  blameless  and  harmless.''  The  expression  means
faultless  and  sincere.  Christians  should  exem|jlify  such  a  spirit  and  maintain  such  a
deportment  as  would  guard  them  from  the  rebukes  of  the  severest  critics  of  life.

II.  In  relation  to  the  bphbbb  of  its  operations.  "  A  crooked  and  perverse
nation."  Though,  perhaps,  Paul  especially  refers  in  these  words  to  the  bigoted  Jews
and  Gentiles,  amongst  whom  the  Philippians  lived,  they  are  not  inapplicable  to  the
unconverted  world.  The  world,  as  distinguished  from  the  Church,  living  outside  and
around  it,  is  indeed  wicked  and  perverse.  The  world  is  the  sphere  of  the  Church.
And  how  corrupt  in  its  maxims,  in  its  aims,  in  its  spirit,  in  its  theories,  practices,  and
institutions!  The  prince  of  darkness  is  its  ruler.  He  worketh  in  the  children  of
disobedience.

in.  In  relation  to  the  mission  it  pbosbcutes.  "  Holrling  forth  the  Word  of
life."  Observe :  1.  Its  instrument.  "  The  Word  of  life."  The  gospel  is  the  Word  of
life.  It  reveals,  generates,  nourishes,  and  perfects  Divine  life  in  the  soul.  2.  Its  method.
"Holding  forth."  Tlie  language  is  figurative.  Hold  this  Word  forth  as  a  standard-
bearer  holds  forth  his  banner  to  direct  the  march  and  animate  his  soldiers  in  the  day  of
battle.  Hold  it  forth  as  a  light  in  the  midst  of  surrounding  darkness.  Some  think
there  is  in  the  text  an  allusion  to  those  towers  which  in  ancient  times  were  built  at  the
entrance  of  harbours,  and  on  which  fires  were  kept  burning  to  direct  ships  into  port
It  should  be  held  forth  as  the  lighthouse  holds  forth  that  flaming  lamp  that  flashes  its
radiance  on  the  dark  sea  to  guide  the  mariner  on  his  way.  Hold  it  forth,  not  only  doo-
trinally,  hnt  practically ;  let  it  turn  your  whole  being  into  alight  that  shall  shiucj
brightly  as  a  star  in  the  world's  dark  firmament.

IV.  In  relation  to  the  ministry  that  stimulates  rr.  Christ  has  appointed  a
ministry  in  the  Church.  The  design  of  that  ministry  is  to  stimulate  and  guide  itn
activity.  Paul  had  ministered  to  the  Church  at  Philippi,  and  he  uses  the  service  he  had
rendered  as  an  argument  for  their  continued  Christian  activity.  "  Thai  I  may  rejoice
in  the  day  of  Christ,  that  I  have  not  run  in  vain,  neither  laboured  in  vain."  There  is
nothing  selfish  in  this  reason.  But  there  is  something  very  suggestive  in  Paul's  words.
They  imply :  1.  That  the  Church  may  render  fruitless  the  labours  of  its  minister.
This  is  a  solemn  truth,  and  one  exemplified  in  the  history  of  many  congregations.  An
indolent,  ignorant,  worldly,  inconsistent  Church  must  ever  render  futile  the  services  of
the  best  of  ministers.  EvenPaul  dreaded  it.  2.  That  such  an  event  is  a  calamity  to
be  deprecated.  Paul  did  so  now.  Deprecated,  not  on  selfish  grounds,  for  the  true
minister  has  his  reward  in  his  own  holy  efforts.  But  on  account  of  those  who  augment
their  responsibility  and  increase  their  guilt  by  an  abuse  of  the  means  of  grace.  3.  That
the  results  of  the  Christian  ministry  will  be  fully  revealed  on  the  day  of  judgment.
This  day  is  here  called  "  the  day  of  Christ."  It  is  his  day,  because  he  will  appear  on
that  day;  he  will  be  the  most  prominent  object  on  that  day;  he  will  rule  tha
destinies  of  that  day. — ^D.  T.


eB.li.  1—30.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHIIilPPIANS.  101


Vers.  17,  18. — Ghristly  love.  "  Yea,  and  if  I  be  offered  upon  the  sacrifice  and  service
of  your  faitl',  I  joy,  and  rejoice  with  you  all.  For  the  same  cause  also  do  ye  joy,  and
rejoice  with  me."  There  are  difff  rent  kinds  of  love.  Christly  love  is  love  in  the  highest
form,  the  love  which  is  the  inspiraiion  of  all  human  activities,  approved  of  God,  and
spiritually  useful  to  man.     Two  remarks  are  here  suggested  conoerniDg  this  love.

I.  It  18  SELF-coNSECRATiNa.  It  was  so:  1.  In  the  conduct  of  the  Philippian
Christians.  I'aul  speaks  of  their  religion  as  the  "  sacrifice  "  and  "  service  "  of  their
"  faith."  The  life  of  a  genuine  Christian  is  the  life  of  a  true  priest ;  he  is  at  once  the
offering  and  the  offerer.  It  is  a  self-dedication  to  God.  In  this  priesthood  of  personal
Christianity  two  things  are  to  be  observed.  (1)  Every  man  is  his  own  saorijice.  The
sacrifice  of  anything  short  of  his  own  self  will  not  do.  The  wealth  of  the  world  would
not  be  a  substitute  fur  this.  He  must  lay  himself  on  the  altar.  It  is  not  until  he  has
done  this  that  anything  else  that  he  can  do  has  aught  of  virtue  in  it.  What  does  this
offering  of  self  imply '/  (o)  Not  the  loss  of  personality.  Man  does  not  lose  himself  by
consecrating  his  existence  to  the  Eternal.  He  will  never  be  absorbed  in  the  Infinite ;
a  man  once,  a  man  for  ever.  (6)  Not  the  loss  of  free  agency.  In  the  consecration  man
does  not  become  the  mere  limb  or  machine  of  Omnipotence.  In  truth  he  only  secures
his  higliest  liberty  by  yielding  up  himself  to  God.  What  does  it  mean,  then  ?  It
includes  two  things — yielding  to  his  love  as  the  inspiration  of  his  being,  and  adopting
his  will  as  the  rule  of  his  activities.  (2)  Everyman  is  his  own  minister.  He  must  offer
the  sacrifice  himself;  no  one  can  do  it  for  him.  Could  my  being  be  offered  to  the  '
Almighty  by  another,  it  would  be  a  crime  in  the  offerer  and  no  virtue  to  me.  I  must
do  it  fully,  devoutly,  manfully.  2.  In  the  life  of  the  apostle.  "  Yea,  and  if  I  be
offered  [or,  'poured  forth']  upon  the  sacrifice."  The  allusion  is  to  the  practice  of  pouring
out  libations  or  drink  offerings  over  sacrifices  both  Jewish  and  heathen.  Paul  regards
his  own  possible  martyrdom  in  the  sense  of  a  libation.  He  felt  that  his  possible  death
was  to  serve  that  practical  Christianity  which  the  Philippians  were  exemplifying  in
their  "  sacrifice  "  and  "  service."  He  had  consecrated  his  existence  to  the  furtherance
of  the  gospel.

II.  It  is  jot-inspikino.  "  I  joy,  and  rejoice  with  you  all.  For  the  same  cause  also
do  ye  joy,  and  rejoice  with  me."  This  self-consecrating  love  to  the  cause  of  Divine
benevolence,  the  cause  of  Christ  and  humanity,  is  "  joy."  Such  disinteiested  love  is
happiness,  nothing  else,  is  heaven  and  nothing  else.  Just  as  the  individual  man  loses
himself,  his  ego,  in  the  love  of  God  and  the  interests  of  his  universe,  all  personal
anxieties  and  sorrows  sink  into  the  depths  of  oblivion,  the  soul  gets  filled  with  all  the
fulness  of  God.  Genuine  religion  is  joy ;  it  is  not  the  means  to  heaven,  it  is  heaven
itself.  Such  is  Christly  love,  and  such  alone  is  true  religion.  Selfish  love,  sectarian
love,  and  theological  love  are  not  constituents,  but  antipathies,  to  this  love. — D.  T.

Vers.  19 — 24. — ITie  true  spirit  of  Christian  usefulness.  "  But  I  trust  in  the  Lord,"
etc.  These  words  might  be  fairly  employed  to  illustrate  the  trtie  spirit  of  Christian
usefulness,  and  the  following  remarks  are  suggested.    This  spirit  is —

I.  SuPEEME  CONCERN  FOE  THE  SO0L-INTEEBST8  OP  OTHERS.  This  was  exemplified  in
Paul.  1.  In  thinking  of  them  at  all  in  his  condition.  Paul  was  now  a  prisoner  in
Eome,  exposed  to  martyrdom,  "  ready  to  be  offered."  One  might  have  thought  that
in  such  a  condition  his  mind  would  have  been  wholly  occupied  with  his  own  affairs,
and  that  he  would  be  utterly  dead  to  the  concerns  of  others.  Not  so ;  he  feels  a  vital
and  deep  interest  in  the  Church  at  Philippi.  2.  In  despatching  to  them  the  lest  man
he  could  find  to  promote  their  spiritual  good.  "  But  I  trust  in  the  Lord  Jusus  to  send
Timotheus  shortly  unto  you,  that  I  also  may  be  of  good  comfort,  when  I  know  your
state."  See  what  he  says  of  this  Timothy,  whom  he  purposes  shortly  to  send  to  them.
(1)  He  was  the  only  man  be  cuuld  find  of  a  similar  mind  to  his  own,  "  I  have  no
man  like-minded,  who  will  naturally  care  [or, '  care  truly ']  for  your  state."  It  would
not  be  difiBciilt,  perhaps,  for  him  to  find  men  who  would  go  down  to  the  Philippians
and  preach  to  them ;  but  very  difficult  to  find  a  man  who  would  visit  them  with  that
tender  interest  and  self-sacrificiug  love  which  Paul  had.  (2)  He  was  a  man  who
was  devoted  to  the  things  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  not  to  his  own.  "  For  all  seek  their
own."  This,  perhaps,  must  be  taken  in  a  qualified  sense — the  "all"  for  most.  Tlje
millions  in  every  age  seek  their  own,  self  is  the  centre  and  circumiferenee  of  their  aimi


102  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  n.  1—30

.ind  activities.  Self  is  not  only  uncrucified,  but  in  the  ascendant.  Pew  seek  tha
"  tiling:^  nf  Jesus  Oliiist,"  such  things  as  truth,  benevolence,  holiness,  entire  consecration
to  tlie  Divine  will.  The  spirit  of  usefulness  is  devotion  to  the  things  of  Chri.st.  3.
In  des2)atching  to  them  a  man  well  known  to  them,  dear  to  him  as  a  son  and  a  laving
coUea:iue.  "  But  ye  know  the  proof  of  him,  that,  as  a  son  with  the  father,  he  hath
served  with  me  in  the  gospel."  They  knew  Tiraotheus.  He  was  with  Paul  when  he
first  preached  the  gospel  to  them  (Acts  xvi.  12 — 14).  And  also  with  Paul  when  he
visited  them,  on  another  occasion,  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem.  He  was  with  him  as  a
"  son,"  loving  and  loyal.  Thus  Paul  showed  his  absorbing  interest  in  them.  Why
did  he  think  of  them  at  all  ?  Above  all,  why  did  he  send  Timotheus,  a  man  so  dear
to  him,  to  minister  to  them  ?  Why  did  he  not  keep  him  with  himself,  to  soothe  and
succour  him  in  his  terrible  position  1  It  was  because  he  had  that  spirit  of  Christian
usefulness  that  absorbed  his  whole  nature  in  the  concerns  of  others.  With  his  liberty
gone,  and  death  before  him,  he  says — I  want  to  "know  your  state,"  how  you  thinlt,
feel,  purpose,  and  act  in  relation  to  the  gospel  which  I  preached  unto  you — the
glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed  God,  and  for  this  purpose  I  send  Timotheus  to  you,  the
most  valuable  man  I  know,  and  the  most  dear  to  me.  So  it  is  ever ;  a  man  imbued
with  the  true  genius  of  spiritual  usefulness  will  think  more  about  the  moral  coQcerns
of  others  than  about  himself.  Elsewhere  we  hear  our  apostle  say,  "I  could  wish  thai
I  myself  were  anathema  from  Christ,  for  my  brethren's  sake,  my  kinsmen  according
to  the  flesh:  who  are  Israelites"  (New  Version).  Ah  me!  Where  is  this  spirit  of
usefulness  now  ?  Where  are  the  men  to  whom  their  own  personal  and  worldly  interests
are  as  dross  to  the  wellare  of  souls  ?

II.    A  SPIRIT  OP    SETTLED   TEUST   IN   THE  WILL   OF  THE  GKBAT  MaSTEB.      "  Him  [that

is,  Timotheus]  therefore  1  hope  to  send  presently,  so  soon  as  I  shall  see  how  it  will  go
with  me.     But  I  trust  in  the  Lord  that  I  also  myself  shall  come  shortly."    Ohserve  :

1.  He  was  in  a  state  of  uncertainty  as  tohis  destiny.  He  did  not  kuow  whether  he
should  be  liberated  or  martyred.  The  future  of  our  personal  existence  is  concealed
from  all,  even  from  inspired  men.     "We  know  not  what  shall  be  on  the  morrow."

2.  Though  in  this  state  of  uncertainty  he  entertained  the  hope  of  visiting  them  shortly.
"  I  trust ...  I  myself  shall  come  shortly."  This  was  natural.  It  not  only  implied  a
deliverance  from  his  horrible  position,  but  the  gratification  of  renewing  old  and  tender
associations.  3.  This  hope  he  entertained  in  subjection  to  the  Divine  will.  I  do  not
know  my  future,  but  I  trust  in  the  Lord.  I  do  hope  to  visit  you  "  shortly."  I  should
like  once  more  to  be  amongst  you ;  I  trust  I  shall ;  but  my  trust  is  in  submission  to  the
Divine  will.  Herein  he  acted  according  to  the  directions  of  St.  James  :  "  For  that  ye
ought  to  say.  If  the  Lord  will "  (Jas.  iv.  15).

Conclusion.  Such  is  the  spirit  of  Christian  usefulness,  a  spirit  that  regards  the
soul-interests  of  men  as  supreme,  and  that  makes  all  hopes  and  calculations  of  the
future  subject  to  the  Divine  will. — ^D.  T.

Vers.  25 — 30. — True  labourers  for  Christ.  "  Yet  I  supposed  it  necessary  to  send
to  you  Epaphroditus,"  etc.  Bpaphroditus,  it  would  seem,  had  been  sent  from  the
Church  at  Philippi  to  Paul  at  Rome,  with  supplies  for  his  temporal  necessities.  In  the
execution  of  his  commission  he  had  fallen  sick,  and  now,  having  reached  convalescence,
he  longed  to  return  home  in  order  to  relieve  the  anxieties  of  his  friends,  who  had  heard
of  his  mdisposition.  The  text  presents  to  us  two  genuine,  if  not  model,  workers  for
Christ — men  thoroughly  imbued  with  the  Christly  spirit,  and  subject  to  those  trinls
which  generally  attend  in  this  world  the  faithful  discharge  of  the  gospel  mission.  In
them  we  discover —

I.  A  FEELING  OF  SFlBiTUAL  EQUALITY.  Paul  speaks  of  Epaphrofiitus  as  "my
brother,"  "my  companion,"  or,  as  in  the  New  Version,  "my  fellow-worker"  and  "my
fellow-soldier."  Whatever  difference  existed  in  their  natural  or  acquiied  abilities,  their
worldly  position  and  social  standing,  a  sense  of  spiritual  equality  possessed  and  ruled
them.  They  were  children  of  the  same  great  Father,  labourers  in  the  same  great  cause,
soldiers  in  the  same  moral  cam  paign — a  campaign  against  the  evils,  physical,  intellec-
tual, social,  and  moral,  that  alBict  the  world.  Where  is  this  sense  of  spiritual  equality
displayed  now  amongst  those  who  profess  to  be  labourers  of  Christ  ?  What  would  be
thouglkt  of  »n  archbishop  writing  a  letter  to  a  Church  concerning  a  primitive  local


can.  1—30.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  103


preacher,  a  true  labourer  withal,  with  these  words,  "  my  brother,  my  labourer,  my
fellow-soldier,"  receive  him  with  all  gladness;  and  hold  such  in  reputation?  Such
conduct  from  the  primate  would  shock  the  fawning  sycophancy  which  is  too  rampant
in  Church  and  state.

II.  A  SENTIMENT  OP  TENDER  SYMPATHY.  Here  is  Sympathy  manifested  by  three
parties.  1.  By  the  Philippian  Church  towards  Paul.  Touched  with  Paul's  wretched
condition  in  Rome,  a  prisoner  lacking  food,  they  sent  Epaphroditus  to  him  with  means
of  relief,  maHe  him  the  "  messenger "  of  charity.  2.  By  Epaphroditus  towards  the
Philippian  Church.  Paul  says,  "  he  longed  after  you  all,  and  was  full  of  heaviness."
Why  was  he  "full  of  heaviness,"  or  in  sore  trouble?  It  does  not  say  that  it  was  on
bis  own  account,  but  because  "  ye  had  heard  he  had  been  sick."  He  was  afraid  that
the  tidings  which  they  had  received  of  his  indisposition  would  distress  them  with
anxieties,  and  he  hurries  home  to  relieve  them.  3.  By  Paul  for  loth.  "  I  sent  him
therefore  the  more  carefully  [diligently],  that,  when  ye  see  him  again,  ye  may  rejoice,
and  that  I  may  be  the  less  sorrowful."  As  if  he  had  said,  "  I  want  your  sorrows
removed,  for  in  your  sorrows  I  sorrow."  How  beautiful,  tlirice  beautiful,  is  all  this !
How  rare,  withal !  how  Christly!  Nay,  there  is  no  Christliness  without  it.  Unless
Christianity  unites  all  souls  in  this  living  sympathy,  it  has  failed  in  its  mission.  All
true  disciples  are  members  of  one  body,  of  which  Clirist  is  the  Head,  and  what  one
feels,  all  leel,  and  they  rejoice  with  those  that  rejoice,  and  weep  with  ttiose  that  weep.

III.  A  CONDITION  OF  TRYING  AFFLICTION.  Paul  was  a  Sufferer.  He  was  not  only  a
prisoner  at  Rome,  awaiting  a  terrible  fate,  but  in  actual  "  need,"  dependent  on  the
charity  of  others.  Epaphroditus  had  been  in  sore  affliction,  "  nigh  unto  death."  Now,
it  is  worthy  of  note  that  the  affliction  that  came  on  both  these  men  caine  on  tliem  in
consequence  of  their  Christianity.  One  might  have  thqjight  that  their  Christianity,
their  generosity,  purity,  and  moral  nobleness,  would  have  guarded  them  from  even  the
common  ills  of  life.  Not  so.  Paul  knew  that  such  afflictions  were  to  be  expected,
and  elsewhere  he  says,  "  No  man  should  be  moved  by  these  afflictions.  Ye  yourselves
know  that  ye  are  appointed  thereimto."  Afflictions,  however,  that  come  in  this  way
are  distinguished  from  all  other  afflictions  in  two  respects.  1.  They  have  a  disciplinary
influence.  They  are  not  judicial  penalties,  but  parental  chastisements.  They  cleanse,
they  spiritualize,  they  ennoble  the  soul.  2.  They  have  Divine  supports.  So  abundant
are  the  consolations  they  experience  that  they  "  glory  in  tribulation,"  etc.

IV.  A  REALIZATION  OP  DiviNE  MBBCY.  "  For  indeed  he  was  sick  nigh  unto  death :
but  God  had  mercy  on  him ;  and  not  on  him  only,  but  on  me  also,  lest  I  should  have
sorrow  upon  sorrow."  He  ascribes  both  the  restoration  of  Epaphroditus  to  health,  and
his  own  deliverance  from  the  terrible  "  sorrow  "  which  would  have  befallen  himself
had  his  friend  expired,  to  the  mercy  of  God.  Not  to  any  secondary  instrumentality,
not  to  the  value  of  their  services  in  the  cause  of  Christ,  but  to  mercy.  A  practical
realizaiion  of  Divine  mercy  is  at  once  a  sign  and  element  of  vital  Christianity.  In  the
gift  of  life  there  is  mercy,  in  the  sustentation  of  life  there  is  mercy,  in  the  afflictions  of
life  there  is  mercy ;  to  a  Christian  all  is  mercy.

V.  A  EIGHT  TO  Christian  eegaed.  "Receive  him  therefore  in  the  Lord  with  all
gladness  ;  and  hold  such  in  reputation :  because  for  the  work  of  Christ  he  was  nigh  unto
death,  not  regarding  his  life,  to  supply  your  lack  of  service  toward  me."  1.  Give  him
a  heariy  reception.  "  Receive  him  therefore  in  the  Lord  with  all  gladness."  Welcome
him,  not  with  mere  conventional  civility  and  social  politeness,  but  with  exultant
affection.  2.  Treat  him  with  honour,  "  Hold  such  in  reputation."  He  is  a  noble
man ;  treat  him  as  a  noble  man  should  be  treated.  The  honour  which  is  paid  to  worldly
men  on  account  of  their  wealth,  their  grandeur  and  position,  is  a  spurious  honour,  is
flunkeyism.  There  can  be  no  true  honour  where  there  is  not  the  honour-worthy,  and
the  honour-worthy  implies  moral  excellence.  3.  Do  all  this  hecuuse  he  deseroes  it.
"  Because  for  the  work  of  Christ  he  was  nigh  unto  death."  He  is  thoroughly  dis-
interested ;  he  suffered  and  risked  his  life,  not  fi-om  any  personal  motives,  but  from  the
inspiration  of  Christian  love  and  charity.  Disinterestedness  is  the  soul  of  virtue  and
the  only  foundation  of  greatness.  A  disinterested  man  has  a  right  to  Christian  regard,
ay,  more,  to  enthusiastic  reception. — D.  T.

Yen.  1,  2. — Exhortation  to  unity :  (2)  J%e  testimony  of  our  spiritual  and  moral


104  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [ch,  n,  1— «a

conscience.    St.  Paul  is  now  on  higher  ground,  showing  how  unreal  is  all  Christian
profession  which  does  not  desire  unity.

I.  1.  What  consolation  (or,  exhortation)  is  there  in  Christ  without  this  desire  f  What
growtlj  in  the  knowledge  of  him  or  in  union  with  him?  2.  What  comfort  oflovet
How  can  the  royal  law  of  love  of  the  brethren  be  fulfilled  without  this?  3.  What
fellowship  of  the  Holy  Spirit  f  It  is  the  office  of  the  Holy  Ghost  to  bind  togetiier.
How  can  we  be  partakers  of  him  unless  he  is  working  in  us  his  peculiar  work?  4.
MTiat  tender  mercies  and  compassions  f  Even  natural  loving-kindness  prompts  the
desire  for  unity.

II.  How  much  nearer  to  unity  should  we  be  if  all  who  profess  to  love  the  Lord  Jesus
would  dwell  on  these  points,  rather  than  on  the  points  about  which  they  differl —
V.  W.  H.

Vers.  3,  4. — Exhortation  to  unity:  (3)  Causes  of  its  hreach.  L  To  conquer  a
MALADY  WB  MUST  ASCERTAIN  ITS  CAUSE.  St.  Paul  lays  bare  the  causes  if  the  nivisions
which  exist  among  Christians.  1.  Strife:  faction;  party  spirit;  the  desire  to  promote
the  success  of  a  cause  rather  than  to  be  guidi  d  by  the  Holy  Spirit  into  that  which  is
true.  2.  Vain-glory :  personal  vanity ;  the  desire  to  be  noticed,  and  the  hatred  of
owning  one's  self  to  be  wrong.  These  are  the  solvents  of  Christendom.  ~  Often  the
theological  disputes  which  have  been  the  apparent  causes  of  separation  have  not  been
the  real  causes.

II.  Remedies.  1.  Humility.  Many  controversies  proceed  from  an  endeavour  to
explain  that  which  is  beyond  definition.  2.  Cansideration  for  others.  Controversy
would,  to  a  great  extent,  cease  if  each  man  would  be  satisfied  with  bearing  witness  to
the  truth,  which  has  made  ijpulf  a  living  thing  to  himself,  without  insisting  that  his
experience  must  be  that  of  every  one  else. — V.  W.  H.

Ver.  5. — Exhortation  to  unity :  (4)  Its  highest  motive  and  most  powerful  agent.  L
What  the  mind  of  Christ  ib.  It  is  the  mind  of  perfect  love  manifesting  itself  in
perfect  humility.

II.  Why  wb  need  it.  It  is  the  only  cure  for  our  want  of  unity.  Disunion  comes
from  self-exaltation.  Union  from  losing  self  in  Christ.  St.  Paul  here  urges  the  highest
motive  to  unity  and  the  only  method  by  which  it  can  be  secured.  Cnniroversies  are
hushed  when  we  realize  the  presence  and  the  example  of  the  incarnate  Christ.

III.  How  WE  CAN  HAVE  IT.  By  Uniting  ourselves  to  him.  So  long  as  we  are  in
our  Father's  house,  all  that  he  has  is  ours.  The  humility  and  the  love  of  which  Christ
is  full  are  imparted  to  us  it'  we  are  in  him.  We  must  receive  him  if  we  would  imitate
him ;  fur  if  we  receive  him  he  lives  his  life  in  us.

IV.  What  it  will  be  to  us.  In  the  heat  of  controversy  we  shall  learn  to  see  that
servant's  form  in  our  midst,  set  there  as  he  once  set  a  little  child  in  the  midst  of  his
disciples  disputing  among  therasilves  which  should  be  the  greatest.  He  is  himself
that  little  child ;  by  his  self-humiliation  he  for  ever  rebukes  our  self-exaltation. —
V.  W.H.

Vers.  6 — 8. —  The  humiliation  of  Crist.  I.  The  height  fkom  which  he  came  is
THE  measure  of  THE  DEPTH  TO  WHICH  HE  DESCENDED.  He  was  for  ever  "  iu  the  form
of  God  ;  "  i.e.  with  the  essential  nature  of  God  (cf.  John  xiii.  3,  4).

II.  His  HUMILIATION  WAS  NO  LOSS  OF  GLOKV  OR  ESSENTIAL  WORTH.  He  is  for  ever
in  the  form  of  God ;  this  he  could  not  renounce.  He  laid  aside  for  a  time  his  external
equality  with  God.  This  he  cons'dered  not  to  be  a  possession  of  any  great  importance.
How  contrary  to  ordinary  human  ideas,  which  "catch  at"  anything;  which  confers
external  honour!  But  to  catch  at  an  external  resemblance  argues  that  we  do  not
possess  the  essential  likeness.     Only  the  truly  great  can  afford  to  humble  themselves.

III.  Hl8  HUMILIATION  A  REALITY.  He  takes  the  "  form  of  a  servant ; "  i.e.  he  actually
becomes  such,  as  he  was  actually  in  the  "  form  of  God."  He  assumes  also  the  "  like-
ness of  a  man,"  becoming  in  appearance,  as  in  reality,  one  of  ourselves.

IV.  He  accepts  the  true  position  of  man,  which  is  that  of  obedience.  This  is
man's  truest  and  essential  glory.  The  true  man  cannot  live  any  other  life  than  that
ef  obedience  and  service.    His  obedience  is  to  death,  even  to  a  death  of  shame,  if  anch


.  n.1— 30.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN3.  105


Is  required  of  hint.    Our  glory  ia  to  accept  whatever  may  be  the  will  of  God  for  ua.

V.  W.  H.

Ver.  9. — Exaltafton  (hrough  humiliation.  I.  1.  Our  Lord's  teaching.  He  is  con-
tinually urging,  undi^r  different  forms  of  expression,  the  elementary  gospel  truth,  that
to  humble  ourselves  is  the  true  way  of  exaltation.  "  Except  a  man  be  born  again  ; "
"  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit ;  "  "  He  that  humbleth  himself ;  *'  "  Except  ye  be  con-
verted," etc.  2.  Our  Lord's  example.  He  is  himself  the  great  exam [ile  of  that  which
he  teaches.  He  humbled  himself  as  none  other  can  humble  himself,  and  he  is  exalted
as  none  other  is  exalted.

II.  OUB   EXALTATION    CAN   ONLY  BE    ACHIEVED    AS   HIS    WAS.      1.    We    mUStr  humble

ourselves.  Being  humiliated  is  not  the  same  thing  as  humbling  ourselves.  Unless  we
accept  it  as  from  God,  and  for  our  benefit,  humiliation  may  rouse  anger  and  pride,  and
thus  hinder  our  exaltation.  2.  We  must  humble  ourselves  in  the  way  of  obedience.
We  shall  not  find  grace  in  any  self-chosen  methods  of  self  humiliation  not  imposed
upon  us  by  God.

III.  1.  It  is  a  matter  of  spiritual  experie/ntx  that  self-exaltation  always  leaves  us
humiliated,  whereas  the  cheerful  acceptance  of  the  cross  which  God  lays  upon  us,
making  us  to  share  in  the  humiliation  of  our  Lord,  gives  us  some  share  also  in  his
exaltation,  2.  It  is  a  matter  of  historical  proof.  The  builders  of  Babel  proposed  to
" make  themselves  a  name,"  and  were  confounded;  Abraham  left  himself  in  God's
hands,  who  undertook  to  make  his  name  great  (Gen.  xi.  4,  8 ;  xii  2). — V.  W.  H.

Vers.  10, 11. — The  exaltation  of  the  Son  of  man.  I.  Contrast  the  glort  which
THE  Son  01'  God  kenounobd  with  the  gloet  which  has  been  bestowed  upon  him
BECAUSE  op  that  RENUNCIATION.  Contrast  also  the  position  of  a  servant  wliich  he
voluntarily  took,  with  the  position  of  Lord  which  he  thereby  won.  Although  exalted
to  be  Lord,  he  still  remains  in  the  likeness  of  men ;  for  it  is  as  Man  that  he  won  bis
kingship,  and  as  Man  that  he  draws  all  men  to  himself.

II.  The  feelings  excited  in  us  by  this  revelation  of  the  exaltation  of  the
Son  of  man.  1.  Wonder  and  adoration.  Wojider  that  One  in  our  own  nature  should
be  thus  exalt' d,  and  that  prayer  may  now  be  addressed  to  One  who  is  still  our  fellow-
man  !  All  creation  worships  him  in  whom  creation  is  united  to  its  Creator.  2.  Faith.
Every  tongue  is  to  confess  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord.  This  is  the  essential  Christian
creed.  In  it  is  contained  all  Christian  doctriue  and  practice.  It  is  Jesus,  tlie  loving
Son  of  man,  who  is  exalted  to  be  our  Lord.  The  change  in  his  condition  does  not
change  his  disposition,  which  is  that  revealed  to  us  in  the  gospel  story.  All  power
is  now  given  to  him  who  is  all  loving.  What  further  revelation  of  God  can  we
need?

III.  The  final  purpose  of  his  work  and  op  cub  confepsion  of  faith  in  him.
,  "  The  glory  of  God  the  Father."    The  humiliation  and  exaltation  of  the  Son,  the  loving

adoration  of  mankind,  have  this  as  their  final  object.— V.  W.  H.

Vers.  12, 13. — "  Our  own  salvation."  The  command  that  we  should  "  work  out  oiu-
own  salvation  "  is  not  in  opposition  to  the  truth  that  all  salvation  is  the  gift  and  the
work  of  God.  It  has  no  reference  to  this,  but  is  an  exhortation  to  rely  upon  ourselves
and  upon  God  in  us  rather  than  upon  any  human  guide  or  teacher.

I.  This  salvation  is  an  individual  thing.  It  is  "our  own."  To  trust  to  human
guides  is  to  doubt  the  guidance  of  God.  It  was  expedient  for  the  disciples  that  the
Lord  Jesus  should  go  away.  While  they  were  in  his  visible  presence  they  trusted  to
that  rather  than  to  his  Spirit  within  them.  The  presence  of  the  teacher  hinders  the
spiritual  life  if  it  tends  to  lead  the  disciples  to  trust  to  it  rather  than  to  God.  A  lesson
useful  both  for  our  own  spiritual  training  and  for  the  work  which  we  would  do  for  the
souls  of  others.

II.  It  is  to  be  worked  out  with  feae  and  teemblino.  This  fear  ir  not  a  servile
fear,  but  it  is  the  consciousness  of  the  presence  of  God  and  of  our  relationship  to  him.
Note  that  among  these  Philippians  bidden  to  work  out  their  own  salvation  with  fear
and  trembling,  there  must  have  been  that  jailor  to  whom  St.  Paul  had  said,  "  Believe
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."    That  hrst  act  of  faith  placed  him


106  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.       [oh.  n.  1— Stt

in  a  state  of  salvation,  and  in  this  sense  "  saved"  him,  and  now,  being  saved,  he  hai  to
work  out  a  full  salvation.

III.  This  salvation  is  of  God.  From  him  comes  firstly  the  (desire  by  which  we
long  for  it  and  the  power  by  which  we  can  attain  to  it.  All  is  of  his  grace.  He  gives
grace  for  grace,  not  grace  for  good  works.  Consider  the  strength  which  this  truth
bestows.  The  One  to  whom  we  trust  is  not  a  guide  outside  us,  but  a  God  within  us.
He  is  not  only  One  who  can  teach  us  when  we  are  willing  to  be  taught,  but  One  who
can  give  us  the  will  to  be  taught.  He  is  not  One  whom  we  have  to  persuade  to  help
us  against  his  will,  but  the  whole  that  we  need  is  already  of  "  his  good  pleasure." —
V.  W.  H.

Vers,  14 — 16. — 2%e  Christian  life :  its  effect  upon  the  world.  L  How  this  effect
HAT  BE  OBSCURED.  By  murmuriugs  {i.e.  active  rebellions  against  the  will  of  God)  and
disputings  (i.e.  efforts  of  the  intellect  to  persuade  ourselves  that  God's  voice  is  not
speaking  to  us).

II.  How  it  is  manifested.  Where  God's  will  is  accepted,  it  will  render  our  lives
llameless  towards  him  and  harmless  towards  our  fellow-men.  Thus  are  we  manifested
as  the  sons  of  God,  being  partakers  of  his  life.

III.  What  it  consists  in.  1.  Shining  as  lights.  The  faithful  are  the  illuminated,
shining,  not  in  their  own  light,  bat  in  the  presence  of  the  Light  of  the  world  within
them.  He  so  fills  them  with  himself  that  their  whole  body  becomes  full  of  light.
2.  Holding  forth  the  Word  of  life.  The  light  is  the  life  of  men.  They  who  are
possessors  of  the  light  must  impart  it.  One  light  may  be  kindled  from  another  with-
out diminution  of  its  illuminating  power.  It  is  the  Word  of  God,  i.e.  the  revelation  of
God,  the  Word  of  life  (cf.  1  John  i,  1),  which  is  "  a  lantern  unto  our  feet,  and  a
light  unto  our  path."— V.  W.  H.

Vers.  17, 18. — The  law  of  sacrifice.  St.  Paul  takes  his  metaphor  from  the  methods
of  sacrificial  worship  in  common  use  among  heathen  nations.  He  sees  "  the  soul  of
good  in  things  evil,"  and  even  in  the  notions  of  corrupt  human  imaginations  a  dis-
torted reflection  of  truth.  He  compares  the  faith  and  devotion  of  the  Philippian
Christians  to  a  sacrifice  presented  on  the  altar,  and  he  is  ready  to  pour  out  his  own
life's  blood  as  the  libation  which  sliall  complete  this  offering  and  render  it  acceptable.

I.  The  tkue  Christian  sacrifice.  The  offering  of  ourselves,  our  powers,  and
possessions.  How  can  these  be  offered  ?  Only  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who
offered  himself  for  us,  because  we  had  nothing  wortliy  of  God's  acceptance.  His
sacrifice  becomes  ours,  inasmuch  as  we  are  in  him.  By  his  being  in  us  he  now  enables
us  to  offer  ourselves.

II.  The  true  Christian  priesthood.  To  offer  ourselves  for  one  another  is  the  true
privilege  of  priesthood.  Christ  is  the  one  Priest,  for  he  alone  is  worthy  to  offer  any-
thing acceptable  to  God.  In  as  far  as  we  are  partakers  of  his  spirit  we  share  in  his
priesthood  and  are  permitted  to  offer  ourselves  for  each  other.— V.  W.  H.

Vers.  19 — 30. — Two  characters,  representing  two  aspects  of  Christian  work.  I.
Timotht,  a  man  of  sympathy.  The  secret  of  true  sympathy  is  to  be  seeking  for  the
things  of  Jesus  Christ.  He  who  seeks  for  these  feels,  as  his  Master  feels,  for  all  human
sorrows.  Such  a  one  is  thoroughly  "  like-minded,"  and  is  delivered  from  the  selfish-
ness which  cares  for  nothing  but  aeVL  None  can  work  for  Christ  except  they  are
possessed  of  this  sympathy.

II.  Epaphroditds,  a  man  of  active  ministry.  He  is  the  chosen  messenger  of  the
Church  at  Philippi  to  minister,  in  its  name,  to  St.  Paul's  wants.  The  sickness  from
\fbich  he  was  recovering  was  probably  caused  by  his  exertions  in  this  work  (ver.  30).

III.  St.  Paul  combines  in  himself  both  these  aspects  of  Christian  work.  He
is  a  man  of  intense  sympathy.  Notice  his  readiness  to  deny  himself  the  society  of
these  two  men  in  order  that  the  Philippians  may  be  benefited.  His  reward  will  be
suflcient  if  ho  hears  a  good  report  of  them.  At  the  same  time,  his  whole  life  is  a  life
of  active  ministry.

IV.  The  secuet  of  both  sympathy  K&it  aotiviiv.  His  life  is  lived  "in  the  Lord  "
(vers.  19,  24,  29).— V.  W.  H.


CH.  n.  1—30.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  107

Vers.  1,  2. — Brotherly  union.  St.  Pawl  had  already  much  joy  in  contemplating  the
gpiritual  prosperity  of  the  Philippians  (ch.  i.  4).  One  thing  only  was  wanting  to  make
that  joy  coinplete.  There  was  some  danger  lest  a  spirit  of  faction  should  creep  in  and
mar  the  family  unity  of  the  Church,  especially  among  the  women  (cli.  iv.  2).  If  this
danger  were  averted  and  harmony  established,  the  joy  of  the  apostle  would  be  full.

I.  Beotherlt  union  is  the  cbowning  grace  op  the  Church.  Many  other  graces
may  be  attained  before  this  is  realized — knowledge  as  in  the  Corinthian  Church,  a
faithful  martyr  spirit  as  in  the  Philippian  Church.  But  the  chief  grace  is  brotherly
love.  The  idta  of  the  Church  is  essential  to  Christianity.  The  gospel  does  not  simply
offer  individual  salvation  and  call  to  isolated  missions.  It  brings  men  into  a  family
and  unites  them  in  close  bonds.  The  ideal  Christian  is  not  the  lonely  hermit,  but  the
large-hearted,  sympathetic,  social  man.  Close  union,  however,  is  only  possible  on
conditions  of  deep  sympathy.  We  may  differ  and  yet  be  at  peace  while  we  live  apart,
with  sufficient '"  elbow-room^"  for  our  several  crotchets.  But  Church  fellowship
necessitates  internal  harmony  for  the  maintenance  of  peace.  Intellectual  unity,  unity
of  thought,  is  impossible  to  thinking  men.  The  essential  unity  is  unity  of  purpose  and
of  sympathy — the  one  mind  and  the  one  love.  Christians  above  all  men  must  realize
the  duties  of  a  democracy — how  to  subordinate  private  ends  to  the  general  good,  how
to  yield  individual  opinions  in  obedience  to  the  general  voice  of  the  community.  Party
spirit,  personal  amlsition,  self-will,  domineering  self-assertion  in  the  leaders,  and
obstructive  self-assertion  in  the  rank-and-file,  are  the  dangers  that  threaten  such  com-
munities as  were  founded  by  the  apostles.     Only  a  spirit  of  love  can  conquer  them.

II.  Great  Chbistian  motives  urge  us  to  brotherly  union.  1.  Our  living  union
with  Christ.  "Any  comfort" — i.e.  practical  experience,  help,  grace  of  fellowship — "in
Christ."  Christians  are  united  together  through  a  common  union  with  Christ.  Con-
nectinn  with  the  Head  leads  to  harmotiious  co-operation  of  the  members  of  the  body.
2.  The  blessedness  of  love.  It  is  found  to  be  a  joy,  a  strength,  and  a  comfort.  In
trouble  and  persecution  especially  it  is  happy  and  helpful  to  unite  our  individual
feelings  in  love  one  to  another.  3.  The  fellowship  of  the  Spirit.  The  one  Spirit  of  God
that  inhabits  the  whole  Church  is  a  mystical  bond  of  union  and  inspiration  of  love.
4.  Natural  affection,  "Tender  mercies  and  compassions,''  which  are  natural  to
humanity,  are  never  so  well  employed  as  in  Christian  brotherhood. — W.  ¥.  A.

Ver.  4. — Selfishness.  I.  Selfishness  is  the  boot  op  bin.  Selfishness  is  living  in
and  for  ourselves.  It  mani  fests  itself  in  various  aspects.  1.  In  thought.  Self  becomes
the  largest  figure  in  a  man's  conception  of  the  universe.  The  shadow  of  self  lies  acioss
everything  else.  The  merits  of  self  are  magnified  in  pride.  Vanity  craves  the  admira-
tion ot  others  for  one's  self.  Self-worship  makes  a  man  prejudiced  in  holding  to  his  own
opinions  and  bigoted  in  rejecting  those  of  other  men.  2.  In  feeling.  Self-love  tills  a
selfish  man's  heart.  He  has  no  grief  at  another's  trouble  and  no  pleasure  in  another's
joy.  Instead  of  feeling  as  a  member  of  a  great  body  moved  by  the  common  pulse  of  a
common  life,  he  is  like  a  solitary  cell  detached  and  self-concentrated.  3.  Jn  action.
Self-will  becomes  the  predominating  energy  and  self-seeldng  the  prevailing  motive.  In
its  extreme  development  this  becomes  positive  cruelty — a  pursuit  of  one's  own  pleasure
throujjh  the  pain  of  others.  Now,  all  this  is  sinful  in  the  siiht  of  God  and  man,  and
frightfully  injurious  to  society.  War,  crim«,  intemperance,  etc.,  all  spring  from  some
form  of  selfishness.

II.  Cheistianity  requires  the  eradication  op  selfishness.  So  long  as  a  man
thinks  only  of  himself  he  has  not  learnt  what  the  gospel  means.  He  may  be  seeking
what  he  calls  his  spiritual  welfare — escape  from  hell,  a  happy  future,  or  peace  here.
But  all  this  is  selfish.  Selfishness  in  every  respect  must  be  uprooted  in  order  that
the  true  Christian  life  may  be  estabhshed.  1.  In  thought.  This  is  essential  to
repentance.  Humility  and  confession  of  sin  are  necessary  before  we  can  even  enter  the
kingdom  of  heaven.  2.  In  feeling.  Love  to  Christ,  not  the  saving  of  our  own  souls,
is  the  great  motive  that  should  inspire  us.  Love  to  our  fellow-men,  not  personal
comfort,  is  the  spirit  that  should  pervade  our  lives.  We  are  only  Christian  in  so  far
as  we  follow  Christ.  And  Christ  denied  himself  and  "  went  about  doing  good."  All
pretensions  of  saintly  devotion  count  just  for  nothing,  or  for  worse  than  nothing,  for
hypocrisy,  so  long  as  the  self  sits  enthroned  in  our  hearts.    3.  In  action.    Faith  pre«


108  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.         [oh.  n.  1—30.

supposes  self-abnegation ;  it  is  the  surrender  of  ourselves  to  another.  It  takes  two
forms — (1)  submission  of  our  souls  to  the  will  of  God  in  reliance  upon  his  grace  in  Christ
as  our  Saviour  ;  and  (2)  obedience  of  our  lives  to  the  will  of  God  in  loyal  service  to
Christ  as  our  Master. — W.  F.  A,

Vers.  6—11. — The  mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  experience  of  Christ  is  the
supreme  exaraiile  of  liis  doctrine  that  "he  thathumbleth  himself  shall  be  exalted."  It
is  here  described  as  an  incentive  to  our  duty  of  unselfish  humility.  But  as  the  apostle
narrates  the  wonderful  facts,  and  enumerates  the  details  with  evident  delight  on  their
own  account,  we  may  find  in  them  an  inexhaustible  subject  for  meditation,  and,  while
not  forgetting  the  object  of  drawing  a  practical  lesson  from  them,  we  may  be  prepared
to  receive  thnt  lesson  more  fully  by  realizing  more  thoroughly  the  great  example  with
which  it  is  enforced.

I.  The  humblinq  of  Christ.  1.  It  was  voluntary.  The  example  of  Christ  is  very
different  from  that  of  Job.  Job  suffered  from  misfortunes  that  came  upon  him
unsought;  but  Christ  freely  chose  his  own  humilirttion.  Therelbrethemind  that  was  in
Chi'ist.was  not  simply  like  Job's,  a  mind  of  patience  and  faithfulness  ;  it  was  a  mind
of  self-abnegation.  2.  It  was  great  in  extent.  We  measure  a  fall,  not  by  the  absolute
level  reached,  but  by  comparison  with  the  altitude  left.  To  fall  from  a  steeple  to  the
common  earth  on  which  most  men  walk,  is  to  make  a  tremendous  descent.  In  becoming
man  Christ  humbled  himself.  As  a  man  he  humbled  himself  further  than  ever  man
did  before,  in  submitting  to  shame  and  death.  3.  It  was  perfect  in  guality.  Look  at
some  of  the  particulars.  (1)  The  abdication  of  lawful  rights.  Though  of  Divine  form,
Christ  sought  not  Divine  rank.  (2)  The  surrender  of  natural  powers.  "He  emptied
himself."  He  cast  away  possessions  and  influences  and  faculties,  till  he  reduced  him-
self to  the  capacity  of  a  babe.  Most  of  us  would  be  more  ready  to  sacrifice  our  external
honours  than  to  abandon  any  internal  superiority  of  gifts  and  powers.  Christ  did  both.
(3)  The  submission  to  servitude.  "  Taking  the  form  of  a  bond-servant."  There  is  a
humility  that,  only  helping  others  in  its  own  way,  is  consistent  with  much  pride  of
self-will.  It  is  harder  to  obey  than  to  condescend.  Christ  did  both.  (4)  The  descent
to  shame  and  death.  This  is  humiliation  in  a  man.  What  is  it  in  One  who  is  naturally
"m  the  form  of  God"?

II.  The  exaltation  of  Chbist.  The  story  of  Christ  does  not  end  with  Calvary.
The  sequel  is  as  glorious  in  the  experience  as  the  first  part  is  in  the  character  of  Christ.
1.  The  exaltation  is  Ood^s  act.  Christ  humbled  himsrlf,  but  Christ  never  sought  his
own  glory,  not  even  after  his  humiliation,  "  God  highly  exalted  him."  Neither  on
earth  nor  in  heaven,  neither  now  nor  ever,  neither  when  ill  deserved  nor  when  well
deserved,  does  the  highest  glory  come  to  those  who  seek  it  for  themselves.  It  is  always
conferred  unsou/ht  on  the  self-forjietful.  2.  The  exaltation  is  a  consequence  of  the
humbling  of  Christ.  "  Wherefore,"  etc.  Christ  is  not  simply  reinstated  in  his  old
dignity.  He  receives  new  honours  in  direct  recognition  of  his  self-sacrifice.  It  ig  not
merely  as  a  compensation  for  the  suffering,  but  rather  as  a  reward  for  the  disposition
and  will  of  self-abnegation,  that  the  higher  glory  is  accorded  to  Christ.  The  spirit  in
which  he  suffered,  the  "  will "  that  sanctifies  us,  the  "  mind  "  that  was  in  him,  receive
the  reward.  3.  The  exaltation  is  perfect.  (1)  Honour.  All  knees  bow.  For  shame
there  is  glory.  (2)  Power.  He  is  confessed  to  be  Lord,  i.e.  King  and  Master.  (3)
Universal  supremacy.  Heaven,  earth,  and  hell  are  ultimately  to  confess  Christ's
authority.  What  a  victory  I  Nothing  short  of  voluntary  submission  could  ever  please
Jesus  as  he  was  known  on  earth  and  as  he  is  changeless  in  character  through  eternity.
In  his  glowing  vision  of  the  future,  St.  Paul  sees  all  evil  conquered  and  all  beings  in
the  universe  turned  from  their  rebellion  to  the  acceptance  of  Christ  as  their  Lord.

III.  The  example.  This  sublime  picture  is  not  simply  drawn  to  excite  our  admira-
tion, nor  merely  to  move  our  gratitude,  but  directly  to  rouse  us  to  imitation.  Unlike
our  modern  selfish  use  of  the  experience  of  Christ  when  we  too  commonly  dwell  upon
it  simply  that  we  may  "  appropriate  the  fruits  "  of  it,  the  apostles  almost  always  refer
to  it  by  way  of  illu.-tration  to  urge  us  to  show  the  same  spirit.  Indeed,  our  enjoy-
ment of  the  results  of  Christ's  humbling  of  himself  for  us  is  closely  connected  with  this
use  of  his  experience }  for  we  profit  by  them  when  we  follow  him  (1  Pet  iii.  17, 18). —
W.F.A.


CH.  II.  1— 30.J  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  in9


Vers.  12, 13. — Working  out  our  own  salvation.  I.  We  must  wokk  out  oub  ows
SALVATION.  1.  Our  salvatioD  is  from  evils  within  our  reach.  If  it  consisted  chiefly  of
deliverance  from  future  punishment,  we  could  not  touch  it.  But  it  is,  in  the  main,
deliverance  from  present  ills — the  sins,  temptations,  and  troubles  that  beset  us.  A
man's  foes  are  them  of  his  own  houseliold,  even  of  his  own  heart.  2.  Our  salvation  ii
not  yet  accomplished.  It  may  be  nearer  than  when  we  first  believed.  But  while  one
sin  still  haunts  us,  one  temptation  still  attacks  us,  or  one  trouble  still  threatens  us,  our
salvation  is  not  fully  accomplished.  We  can  only  be  called  "saved"  in  the  first  act
of  faith,  because  salvation  then  begins  and  the  promise  of  its  completion  is  given  us.
But  the  perfecting  of  salvation  is  a  lifelong,  gradual  process.  3.  The  securins  of  this
ssiivaiion  is  in  our  own  hands,  St.  Paul  gives  no  justification  for  that  one-sided  p'jr-
version  of  the  doctrine  of  grace,  according  to  which  "doing  is  a  deadly  thing."
Except  we  work  and  fight,  Christ's  work  and  victory  cannot  profit  us.  4.  The  salva-
tion must  be  worked  out  to  be  perfected.  We  have  to  carry  on  what  God  begins,  to
develop  the  seed  he  sows,  to  work  from  the  new  heart  within  to  the  outer  life.  5.
This  process  must  be  carried  on  "  ivith  a  nervous  and  trembUng  anxiety  to  do  right "
(Ligttfoot).

II.  We  can  woek  out  our  own  salvation  because  God  works  in  us.  1.  Ood  is
in  us.  The  language  of  the  apostle  is  no  empty  metaphor.  It  describes  a  spiritual
fact.  The  Christian  is  a  temple  because  God  inhabits  him.  2.  God  works  in  us.
We  may  contrast  this  truth  with  tlie  Stoic  doctrine  of  the  indwelling  Divinity.
"  Reverence  the  Divmity  that  is  within  thee,"  says  Marcus  Aurelius.  But  the  Stoic,
though  reverencing,  does  not  look  for  much  active  aid  from  the  indwelling  God.  The
Christian  receives  God  in  him  for  a  great  purpose.  God  works,  creating  the  disiwsition
to  do  well — "  to  will,"  giving  energy  for  the  execution  of  it ;  "  to  do,"  and  directing  ihe
course  of  our  action,  "  for  his  good  |ileasure."  3.  This  working  of  God  in  us  should
prevent  us  from  looking  too  much/or  extraneous  human  aid.  The  early  Church  was
in  danger  of  leaning  too  much  on  the  apostles.  When  the  guidance  and  inspiration  of
an  apostle  was  lemoved,  the  Christians  felt  the  loss  of  a  great  support.  Especially
must  this  have  been  the  case  with  Churches  founded  and  fostered  liy  so  great  a  man  as
St.  Paul.  There  was  danger  in  this.  The  apostle  warns  the  Philippians  against  it,
and  teUs  them  that  they  should  do  as  well  in  his  absence  as  in  his  presence,  because
God  dwells  in  them.  We  often  make  too  much  of  human  teachers  and  leaders,  instead
of  seeing  that  our  real  strength  lies  in  immediate  personal  communion  with  God.  He
who  trusts  Ood  most  can  be  most  self-reliant.  4.  The  working  of  God  within  us
should  be  the  great  enamraijemsnt  of  our  own  enorgits.  This  great  truth  has  been
abused  so  as  to  encourage  indolence,  or  at  least  to  discourage  effort.  It  is  here  brought
before  us  with  the  veiy  opposite  purpose.  For  God  works  to  enable  us  to  work.  His
work  in  us  is  frustrated  if  we  do  not  co-operate.  But  when  we  work  we  find  the
power  in  God,  and  so  are  encouraged  to  labour,  knowing  that,  when  most  weak  in  our-
selves, we  are  most  strong  in  God. — W.  F,  A.

Ver.  15. — Lights.  I.  Christians  are  lights.  Such  was  their  appearance  in  St.
Paul's  time.  It  was  a  dark  age'  for  the  world.  Old  faiths  were  lost ;  horrible  vices
overshadowed  society;  gloom  settled  down  ou  the  most  thoughtful  minds.  In  this
spiritual  midnight  the  Christians  appear  like  stars,  each  with  the  light  of  truth  and
goodness.  A  similar  position  always  belongs  of  right  to  Christian  men  and  women.
1.  The  light  that  comes  with  CIiri><t  is  not  confined  to  him.  He  is  first  of  all  the
Light  of  the  world.  But  througli  him  his  disuiples,  reflecting!  his  light,  become  also
ilie  light  of  the  world  (Matt.  v.  14).  2.  This  light  is  not  diffused  through  the  atmo-
sphere as  a  vague  radiance.  It  is  fooussed  and  concentrated  in  Christian  men  and
women.  The  truth  influences  the  world  through  the  persons  who  hold  it.  3.  This
lii'ht  is  in  individuals.  It  is  not  the  general  illumination  of  the  Church,  but  the
particular  light  of  each  Christian,  that  enlightens  the  world.  Every  Christian  is  a
distinct  luminary.

II.  Christians  abb  lights  because  they  hold  forth  the  Word  of  life,  ihey
do  not  shine  in  their  own  goodness,  nor  merely  to  spread  abroad  their  own  notions.
Ihey  are  the  lamps ;  God's  truth  is  the  flame.  Christians,  then,  like  the  Jews  of  old,
have  the  custody  of  "  the  oracles  of  God  j "  but  not  merely  in  the  literal  senM  of


110  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  n.  1—30.

possessing  the  Bible.  Rather  they  declare  and  interpret  the  truth  of  revelation  by
uianifestinu;  the  character  and  power  of  it  in  their  own  lives.  The  truth  thus  revealed
is  a  word  of  life.  It  is  a  vital  truth,  the  secret  of  the  Cijristian  life,  the  promise  of  lif«
to  the  world.

III.  The  Christian  lights  are  seen  by  the  tvobld.  "  Ye  are  seen  as  lights  in
the  world."  It  is  our  duty  to  let  our  light  shine,  not  to  hide  it  under  a  bushel.  The
Church  exists  for  the  good  of  the  world.  She  receives  light  that  she  may  give  it  to
the  people  that  sit  in  darkness.  This  is  the  most  effectual  way  of  oommeniling  the
Word  of  life  to  the  world.  Moreover,  wliether  we  shine  well  or  ill,  the  eye  of  the  world
is  upon  us.

IV.  The  chaeacter  or  Christians  determines  their  effectiveness  as  :,igiits  in
THE  WORLD.  The  Church  has  made  too  much  of  orthodoxy  to  the  neglect  of  goodness.
We  may  have  the  best  oil,  and  yet,  if  the  lamp  be  out  of  order,  the  flame  will  flicker
painfully,  and  if  the  glass  be  foul,  the  light  will  be  dull.  Christians  may  have  the
pure  Word  of  life  within  them,  but  they  will  only  hold  it  foi  th  clearly  to  the  world
when  the  lamp  is  trim  and  the  glass  clean — when  their  own  life  is  healthy  and  no  earthly-
mindedness  checks  the  outflow  of  the  Divine  radiance.  No  hing  is  more  fatal  to  the
clear  shining  of  the  Christian  light  than  quarrels  among  Christiaus  (ver.  14).  Love  in
the  Church  is  an  essential  condition  of  light  in  the  world. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  25 — 30. — Epaphroditus.  Epaphroditus  was  a  member  of  the  Philippian
Church  who  brought  the  contributions  from  that  Church  to  St.  Paul  at  Eome.  While
in  ihe  imperial  city,  he  threw  himself  so  zealously  into  the  work  of  the  apostle  as  to
bring  on  an  illness  and  seriously  endanger  his  life.  Eecovering,  he  feared  that  his
friends  at  Phi'ippi  might  l)e  over-anxious  about  him,  and  was  desirous  to  return  to
them  as  suon  as  possible.  St.  Paul,  therefore,  commended  him  to  the  Philippians,  in
this  letter  which  he  was  to  bear  with  him.  We  know  nothing  about  Epaphroditus
beyond  «  hat  the  Epistle  tells  us.  But  that  is  enough  to  reveal  him  as  a  man  of  greai
btanty  of  character.

I.  Epaphromtos  was  a  devoted  friend  of  St.  Paul.  He  took  the  long  journey
to  Rome  in  order  to  bring  gifts  to  the  apostle.  When  there,  his  arduous  efforts  were
especially  spent  in  service  towards  St.  Paul.  While  party  s|  irit  in  following  one  man
to  the  disparagement  of  others  is  a  disgrace  to  the  Chuich  (see  1  Cor.  i.  12), -devotion
to  good  and  great  men  is  natural,  right,  and  helpful  for  their  work.  It  is  well  when
external  adversity  only  intensifies  the  devotion.  Epaphroditus  was  most  energetic  when
the  apo.^tle  was  a  prisoner.

II.  EpAPHitODiTus  was  a  self-denvinglaboubeh  FOR  Christ.  Thouuhin  assistance
uf  St.  Paul,  his  work  was  Christ's  work.  And  he  wrought  at  it  till  he  was  sick  almost
to  death.  The  best  Christian  work  cannot  be  relegated  only  to  leisure  hours,  carried
on  listlessly,  and  abandoned  at  the  least  excuse  of  ill  health.  We  may  not  be  called
to  lay  down  our  lives  in  the  violent  martyr's  death.  But  the  noblest  servants  ol  Christ
are  ready  to  be  faithlul  unto  death  in  wearing  life  out  with  arduous  service.  Such
men  should  be  held  in  honovir.

III.  Epaphroditus  was  most  unselfish  in  his  sufferings.  His  one  trouble  was
that  they  should  cause  distress  to  his  friends  at  Philippi.  His  was  not  the  complaining
S|iirit  that  makes  every  one  else  miserable  with  its  own  sufferings,  much  less  was  it
the  mock-martyr  spirit  that  attitudinizes  sentimentally  and  lays  itself  out  to  move  the
compassion  of  others.  There  is  often  much  selfishness  in  trouble,  even  when  it  does
not  take  these  extreme  forms.  But  the  Christian  endurance  of  suffering  will  ijivolve
unselfish  regard  for  the  feelings  of  others  and  anxiety  not  to  hurt  them.

IV.  Epaphroditus  was  anxious  to  return  home  after  his  illness.  Christianity
does  not  destroy  natural  affection.  It  deepens  and  strengthens  the  love  of  those  who
are  near  to  us.  It  is  difficult  to  know  how  to  divide  our  attention  between  public  and
private  claims.  But,  remembering  the  fatherly  love  of  God,  who  is  the  Creator  of  ou'
human  nature,  may  we  not  give  more  scope  to  the  impulses  of  affection  as  Divine,  and
theretore  right  when  purified  and  guided  by  Christian  principle?

V.  Epaphroditus  was  a  man  much  beloved.  Such  a  man  deserved  love;  ard
lovable  men  are  generally  loved.  Except  where  peculiar  circumstances  and  mis-
understandings intervene,  it  is  generally  our  own  fault  if  we  are  unable  to  win  the


OH.  m.  1—21.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.


in


affections  of  others.  God  may  not  always  spare  those  we  love.  But  when  he  does,  wa
should  recognize  his  goodness  in  not  adding  "  sorrow  to  sorrow"  and  in  blessing  the  tie
of  Chriiitiau  affection.—  W.  F.  A.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  in.


Ver.  1. — Pinally,  my  brethren,  rejoice  in
foe  Lord.    This  word  "  finally  "  (to'  hoiwSv
is  frequently  used  by  St.  Paul  to  introduce
a  practical  cnnclusion  after  the  doctrinal
portion  of  his  Epistles :  thus  it  occurs  again
in  ch.  iv.  8,  and  also  in  2  Cor.  xiii.  1 1 ;  Eph.
Ti.  10 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  1 ;  2  These,  ili.  1.    Some
render  xo'p^'^f  "  farewell ; "  but  "  rejoice  "
icems  more  suitable  here.  The  golden  thread
of  spiritual  joy  runs  through  this  Epistle.
"  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  "  is  the  oft-repeated
refrain  of  St.  Paul's  solemn  hymn  of  praise.
To  write  the  same  things  to  yon,  to  me  in-
deed is  not  g^evons,  hut  for  yon  it  is  safe.
"The  same  things:"  does  he  refer  to  his
oral  instructions,  to  a  previous  Epistle  now
lost,  to  his  exhortations  to  unity,  or  to  his
reiterated  command  "  Rejoice  "  ?  The  words
seem  most  naturally  to  point  to  something
in  the  same  Epistle  rather  than  to  advice
given  on  former  occasions.    It  is  true  that
Polycarp,  .in  his  letter  to  the  Philippians
(section  3),  says  that  St.  Paul  wrote  Epistles
(itTKTToXds)  to  them ;  but  there  is  no  trace
of  any  other  Epistle ;  and  the  mere  plural
number  is   not  sufficient  to   support  the
theory  of   other  letters,   the  plural  word
being  frequently  used  of  a  single  letter.
Bishop  Lightfoot  suggests  the  exhortation
to  unity  in  ch.  ii.  2.  But  this  topic  does  not
reappear  before  oh.  iv.  2.  And  the  hypothesis
of  an  interruption,  which  (as  Bishop  Light-
foot  and  others  think)  suddenly  turned  the
apostle's  thoughts  into  another  channel  and
prevented  him  from  explaining  ri  aird  (the
same  things)  till  ch.  iv.  2,  seema  forced  and
unnecessary,    notwithstanding    the    great
authority  by   which  it   is    supported.    It
seems  more  probable  (Bengel  and  others)
that  St.  Paul  refers  to  the  constant  admo-
nition of  this  Epistle,  "Rejoice  in  the  Lord."
To  repeat  this  again  and  again  was  to  him
not  grievous  (rather,  with  R.V.,  "irksome  "),
but  safe  for  the  Philippians.    Christian  joy
has  a  close  connection  with  safety,  for  it
implies  unswerving  faith,  and,  more  than
that,  the  presence  of  Christ.    Compare  the
nft-repeated  exhortation  of  Ps.  xxxvii,, "  Fret
not  thyself:  it  tends  only  to  evil-doing"
(ver.  8,  in  the  Hebrew).    Possibly,  however,
aa-iba\h  here,  as  in  Acts  xxii.  30  and  xxv.
26,  may  mean  "  certain."    The  repetition  is
not  irksome  to  St.  Paul,  while  it  makes  his
meaning   and   his  wishes   certain  to  the
Philippians.


Ver.  2. — Beware  of  dogs,  beware  of  evil

■workers,  beware  of  the  concision.  The  con-
nection is,  as  given  in  ver.  3,  Rejoice  in  the
Lord,  not  in  the  flesh ;  have  confidence  in
him,  not  in  the  ceremonies  of  tlie  Jewish
Law.  Compare  tlie  same  contrast  in  Gal.
vi.  13,  14.  There  is  certainly  something
abrupt  in  the  sudden  introduction  of  this
polemic  against  Judaizing,  especially  in
writing  to  Philippi,  where  there  were  not
many  Jews.  But  there  may  have  been
circumstances,  unknown  to  us,  which  made
the  warning  necessary ;  or,  as  some  think,
the  apostle  may  have  written  this  under
excitement  caused  by  the  violent  opposition
of  the  Jewish  faction  at  Rome.  Beware;
literally,  mark,  observe  them,  to  be  on  your
guard  against  them.  The  dogs.  The  article
must  be  retained  in  the  translalion.  The
Jews  called  ti)e  (ien tiles  "dogs"  (comp.  Matt.  •
IV.  26,  27;  Bev.  xxii.  15),  i.e.  unclean,
mainly  because  of  tlieir  disregard  of  the
distinction  between  clean  and  unclean  food.
St.  Paul  retoits  the  epithet:  they  are  the
dogs,  who  have  confidence  in  the  flesh,  not
in  spiritual  religion.  JSvil  workers;  so  2  Cor.
xi.  13,  where  he  calls  thorn  "deceitful
workers."  The  Judaizers  were  active  enough,
like  the  Pharisees  who  "  compiissed  sea  and
land  to  make  one  proselyte ; "  but  their
activity  sprang  from  bad  motives — they  were
evil  workers,  tliough  their  work  was  some-
times overruled  for  good  (comp.  oh.  i.  15 —
18).  Theconcision  (KaT<x.TOij.'fi,  cutting,  muti-
lation); a  contemptuous  word  for  "circum-
cision" (TrepiTo/i^).  Compare  the  Jewish
contemptuous  use  of  Islibosheth,  man  oi
shame,  for  Eshbaal,  man  of  Baa],  etc.  Theij
circumcision  is  no  better  than  a  mutilation.
Observe  the  paronomasia,  the  combination
of  like-sounding  words,  which  is  common  in
St.  Paul's  Epistles.  Winer  gives,  many  ex-
amples in  sect.  Ixviii.

Ver.  3. — For  we  are  the  circumcision.
We :  the  apostle  of  the  Gentih  s  identifies
himself  with  the  Gentiles  (1  Cor.  ix.  21);
himself  circumcised,  he  recoguizes  the  great
truth  that  they  only  are  the  true  circum-
cision whose  hearts  are  mortilied  from  all
worldly  and  carnal  lusts.  Which  worship
God  in  the  spirit ;  read,  with  the  best  manu-
scripts, which  worship  hy  the  Spirit  of  God.
The  word  Karpela,  worship,  is  used  specially
of  the  Jewish  ceremoninl  service  (comp.
Bom.  ix.  4;  Luke  ii.  37;  Acts  xxvi.  7).
We  Christians,  St.  Paul  means,  have  not
only  the  true  ciicumoision,  but  the  only  trua


112


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHHilPPIANS.        ICH.  in.  1— 21


worship :  the  temple  service  prefignied  the
spiritual  worship  of  the  Christian  Church.
By  the  Spirit;  by  his  assistance,  inspiration :
•'  We  know  not  what  we  should  pray  for  as
we  ought :  but  the  Spirit  itself  maketh
intercession  for  u«"  (Eom  viii.  26).  And
rejoioe  in  Christ  Jesus;  rather,  glory  (kou-
Xiifievot).  "  He  that  glorieth,  let  him  glory
in  the  Lord,"  througli  whom  alone  we  can
obtain  salvation,  not  in  any  external  privi-
leges. And  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh.
Neither  in  circumcision  nor  in  any  other
outward  rites.

Ver.  4. — Though  I  might  also  have  confi-
dence in  the  flesh;  literally,  though  having
myself  eonfidenee  in  the  flesh  also ;  that  is,
as  well  as  in  Clirist.  The  apostle  had  both
grounds  of  confidence :  the  one  he  renounces
for  the  other ;  but  no  man  could  accuse  him
of  despising  that  which  he  did  not  himself
possess.  If  any  other  man  thinketh  that  he
hath  whereof  he  might  trust  in  the  flesh,  I
more.  He  claims  the  privileges  of  the  Jew ;
they  are  his  by  right,  but  he  count*  them
loss  for  Christ.

Ver.  5. — Circumcised  the  eighth  day;
literally,  at  circumcision  eight  days  old.
The  apostle  was  not  a  proselyte,  circumcised
at  his  reception  into  the  Jewish  Church ;
nor  an  Ishmaelite,  circumcised,  like  lahmael,
at  the  age  of  thirteen.  Of  the  stock  of
Israel,  Neither  were  his  parents  proselytes ;
he  was  by  descent  an  Israelite.  He  uses
here  the  highest  title  of  God's  ancient
people,  the  title  which  implied  the  in-
heritance of  the  covenant  made  with  Jacob.
Other  nations  were  descended  from  Abra-
ham and  Isaac ;  the  Israelites  alone  could
claim  Jacob  for  their  ancestor ;  they  only
could  glory  in  the  covenant  name  given  to
liim  when  he  wrestled  all  night  long  with
the  angel,  and  proveii  himself  a  prince  with
God  (comp.  Trench, '  Synonyms  of  the  New
Testament,'  sect,  xxxix.).  Of  the  tribe  of  Ben-
jamin. His  family  had  preserved  their  genea-
logy; he  came  from  the  tribe  which  gave
the  first  king  to  Israel ;  which  never  swerved
in  its  allegiance  to  the  house  of  Ditvid ;  which,
after  the  Captivity,  united  with  Judah  and
the  Levites  to  go  up  and  build  the  house  of
tlie  Lord  (Ezra  i.  5);  the  tiibe  of  Esther
and  Monleoai;  the  tribe  within  whose
boundary  stood  the  holy  city.  A  Hebrew
of  the  Hebre\7s;  rather,  of  Hebrews ;  omit
the  article.  His  father  and  mother  were
not  only  Israelites,  but  also  they  retained,
though  living  at  Taraus,  the  Hebrew  lan-
guage and  customs.  St.  Paul  was  not  a
Hellenist ;  he  was  brought  up  at  Jerusalem
under  the  great  Kabbau  Gamsiliel ;  he  spoke
Hebrew  (Acts  xxi.  40),  and  used  the  Hebrew
Scriptures  as  well  as  the  Septuagint  trans-
lation. All  the  descendants  (jf  Jacob  were
Israelites ;  thos^  were  called  Hebrews  distinc-


tively who  adhered  to  the  use  of  the  sacred
language  (Acts  vi.  I).  As  tonching  the
Law,  a  Pharisee.  He  wag  by  birth  an  Israel-
ite, by  education  a  Hebrew  ;  he  became  by
choice  a  Pharisee  (Acts  xxiii.  6) ;  he  em-
braced  the  straitei^t  sect  "  as  regards  Law,"
the  sect  which  took  the  strictest  view  of  the
Law  of  Moses.

Ver.  6. — Concerning  zeal,  perseonting  the
Church.  He  was  not  only  a  Pharisee,
but  an  energetic,  zealous  Pharisee ;  he
carried  out  the  principles  of  his  sect,  think-
ing that  he  did  God  service  by  perSLCuting
those  whom  he  counted  as  heretics.  Touch-
ing the  righteousness  which  is  in  the  Law,
blameless.  As  far  as  "  the  righteousness  of
the  scribes  and  Pharisees  "  went,  the  right-
eousness which  is  "  in  Law,"  which  consists,
that  is,  in  the  observance  of  formal  rules ;
or  which  is  "  of  Law  "  (ver.  9),  which  springs,
that  is,  from  such  observance,  St.  Paul  was
found  blameless.  "  Kara  sane  laus  et  prope
singuUiris,"  says  Calvin,  quoted  by  Alford  ;
"  videamus  tamen  quanti  earn  fecerit."  (For
the  whole  of  this  passage,  comp.  2  Cor.  xi.
21,  22.)

Ver.  7. — But  what  things  were  gain  to
me,  those  I  counted  loss  for  Christ ;  literally,
hut  such  things  as  used  to  he  gains  to  me,
those  I  have  counted  at  loss  for  Christ's  sake.
He  used  to  regard  these  uutwaid  privileges,
one  by  one,  as  so  many  items  of  ghin ;  now
he  has  learned  to  regard  tliem,  all  in  the
aggregate,  as  so  much  loss  because  of  Chribt.
They  were  loss  because  confidence  in  out-
ward things  tends  to  keep  the  soul  from
Christ.  Tou  ydp  r)\i(m  (pavivros,  says  Chry-
BOstom,  iTpoa'Kad7}(T9aL  t^  \ix^V  C'lWi'a.

Ver.  8. — Yea  doubtless,  and  I  count  all
things  but  loss.  He  holds  faat  the  truth
which  be  once  learned;  he  still  counts  all
things  as  loss  in  comparison  with  the  one
thing  needful.  The  particles  used  here  (see
Winer,  sect,  liii.)  correct  and  strengthen  the
assertion  of  the  last  verse,  both  as  to  time,
"I  count,"  and  us  to  extent,  "all  things,"
not  only  the  privileges  mentioned  above.
For  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  ol
Christ  Jesus  my  Lord.  The  preposition  may
be  rendered  "  for  the  sake  of,"  us  iu  ver.  7,
or  "  because  of."  The  knowledge  of  Christ
is  a  blessing  so  surpassing  and  transcendent
that  nothing  else  is  worthy  to  be  called
good  in  comparison  with  that  one  highest
good.  Its  glory,  like  the  rising  sun,  over-
whelms and  hides  all  lesser  lights.  My
Lord.  Tlie  pronoun  expresses  the  warmtti  of
his  affection,  the  close  personal  communion
between  the  apostle  and  the  Saviour  (see
eh.  i.  3).  For  whom  I  have  suffered  the  loss
of  all  things;  rather,  I  suffered  the  loss  of;
literally,  I  was  ^ned  oi  mulcted ;  the  aorist
refers  to  the  time  of  bis  conversion.  All
things  (rci  wivTa);  all  that  I  had  in  tba


OH.  lu.  1—21.]        THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.


113


world,  my  all,  all  tilings  together  (comp.
Rom.  viii.  32).  He  lost  his  all  for  Christ,
for  the  Bake  of  possessing  Christ:  with
Christ  God  will  freely  give  him  all  things
(tc)  ircivra  again).  And  do  oomit  them  but
dung,  that  I  may  win  Christ.  3KiPa\a  (also
in  Ecolus.  xxvii.  4) ;  dung,  or  perhaps  refuse,
dogs'  meat;  comp.  Matt.  xv.  26,  27.  There
the  Jews  were  the  children,  the  Gentiles
dogs.  St,  Paul  here,  as  in  ver.  2,  reverses
the  terms  of  the  comparison ;  the  legal
privileges  of  the  Jew.  are  but  as  crumbs
thrown  to  dugs  in  comparison  with  the  rich
blessings  of  the  gospel.  Comp.  also  Matt.
xvi.  26,  where  our  Lord  uses  the  same  verbs,
to  lose  and  to  gain ;  the  whole  world  is  but
logs,  the  Saviour  says,  compared  with  the
never-dying  soul.  The  loss  of  one's  all  in
this  world  (St.  Paul  echoes  the  sacred  words)
is  as  ncithing;  all  things  put  together  are
but  as  dung,  compared  with  the  one  thing
which  St.  Paul  so  longed  to  gain,  Christ
himself — his  presence  in  the  soul,  spiritual
union  with  tlie  Lord.  "  To  gain  Christ  is
to  lay  fast  hold  upon  him,  to  receive  him
inwardly  into  our  bosoms,  and  so  to  make
him  ours  and  ourselves  his,  that  we  may  be
joined  to  him  as  our  Head,  espoused  to  him
as  our  Husband,  incorporated  into  him  as
our  Nourishment,  engrafted  in  him  as  our
Stock,  and  laid  upon  him  as  a  sure  Foun-
dation" (Bis  1 1  op  Hall, '  Christ  Mystical,'  ch.
vi.,  quoted  by  Bishop  Ellicott).

Ver.  9. — And  be  found  in  him;  now,  at
the  last  day,  always.  In  Christ;  a  member,
that  is,  of  his  body,  a  living  branch  of  the
true  Vine.  Not  having  mine  own  righteous-
ness, which  is  of  the  Law ;  rather,  as  R.V.,.
not  having  a  righteousness  of  wine  oum,  even
(hat  which  is  of  the  Law.  Not  any  righteous-
ness of  my  own,  such  as  that  described  in
ver.  6,  the  righteousness  which  consists  in
and  results  from  conformity  to  an  exteinal
law.  But  perhaps  the  words  are  best
rendered,  as  in  the  margin  of  E.V.,  "  Not
having  as  my  righteousness  that  which  is
of  the  Law."  St.  Panl  was  blameless  as
regards  that  righteousness  which  lies  in
legal  observances :  in  that  he  puts  no  con-
fidence, he  seeks  a  better  righteousness.
But  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of
Christ ;  rather,  as  R.V.,  through  faith  in
Christ.  There  is  no  article,  and  the  geni-
tive is  objective.  Through  faith.  Goii  is
the  Giver,  the  Source  of  righteousness ;  it  is
given  through  faith  as  the  means,  on  con-
dition of  faith.  The  righteousness  which  is
of  God  by  faith.  Greek, "  upon  faith,"  based
upon  faith,  or  on  condition  of  faith.  St.
Paul  speaks  of  "  having  "  this  righteousness.
Then  it  is  his;  yet  it  is  not  any  righteousness
■  of  his  own,  "  Not  by  works  of  righteous-
ness wliich  we  have  done;"  but  a  righteous-
ness of  God  given  to  him,  merited,  not  by

PHILIPPIANS,


his  works,  but  by  the  perfect  obedience  and
the  precious  death  of  Christ,  and  granted
unto  all  who  are  found  in  Christ.  It  comes
from  God,  the  one  only  Giver  of  all  good
things  ;  it  is  obtained  through  faith  as  the
instrument  or  means ;  and  it  is  given  on
that  faith — on  condition,  that  is,  of  a  living
faith  abiding  in  the  soul.  Thus  St.  Paul
states  inciduntally,  but  simply  and  forcibly,
the  great  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.

Ver.  10. — That  I  may  know  him  (toS
■yvwi/ai  aiTSf}.  For  the  grammatical  con-
struction, see  Winer,  sect.  xliv.  b.  For  the
sense,  comp.  John  xvii.  3,  where  Dr.  West-
cott notes,  "In  such  a  connection,  know-
ledge expresses  the  apprehension  of  the  truth
by  tlie  whole  nature  of  man.  It  is  not  an
acquaintance  with  facts  as  external,  nor  an
intellectual  oonTiotion  of  their  reality,  but
an  appropriation  of  them  (so  to  speak)  as  an
influencing  power  into  the  very  being  of
him  who  knows  them."  TiyviaKiiv  differs
from  fiSEVdi:  eiScVai  is  "to  know,"  yiyvi-
a-Kiw  is  "to  recognize"  or  "to  become  ac-
quainted with."  We  must  be  found  in
Christ  in  order  to  know  him ;  we  must  have
that  righteousness  which  is  through  the
faith  of  Christ,  for  we  can  know  him  only
by  being  made  like  unto  him.  Comp.  1
John  iii.  2, "  When  he  shall  appear,  we  shall
be  like  him ;  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he
is ; "  and  now  those  who  see  him  by  faith
are  in  their  measure  being  transformed  into
the  same  image.  For  the  knowledge  here
spoken  of  is  a  personal  knowledge,  gained,
not  by  hearing  or  reading,  but  by  direct
personal  communion  with  the  Lord ;  it  is
not  theoretical,  but  experimental.  "  Qui
non  expertuB  fuerit,  non  intelligit "  (Anselm,
quoted  by  Meyer).  And  the  power  of  his
resurrection.  The  resurrection  of  Christ
was  a  glorious  manifestation  of  Divine  power
(Bom.  i.  4).  That  resurrection  is  now  a
power  in  the  spiritual  life  of  Christians  :  it
stimulates  the  spiritual  resurrection,  the
resurrection  from  the  death  of  sin  unto  the
life  of  righteousness  (comp.  Bom.  vi.  4;
Col.  ii.  12).  It  is  the  centre  of  our  most
cherished  hopes,  the  evidence  of  our  im-
mortality, the  earnest  of  the  resurrection  of
the  body.  And  the  fellowship  of  his  suffer-
ings. This  clause  £nd  the  last  are  bound
together  under  one  article,  according  to  the
best  manuscripts.  There  is  a  vefy  close
connection  between  them  (comp.  Bom.  viii.
17 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  1 1, 12).  To  know  the  quicken-
ing power  of  his  resurrection,  we  must  ihare
his  sufferings.  The  Christian,  meditating
in  loving  thought  on  the  sufferings  of  Christ,
is  led  to  feel  ever  a  deeper,  a  more  awful
sympathy  with  the  suffering  Saviour.  And
if,  when  we  are  called  to  suffer,  we  take  it
patiently,  looking  unto  Jesus,  then  oar
Bufferings  are  united  with  his  sufferings,


114


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.        [oh.  in.  1—21.


"  we  Buffer  with  him  "  And  he  who  hath
borne  our  griefs  and  carried  our  sorrows
feels  for  ns  in  his  sacred  heart,  being
"  touched  with  th  e  feelin  g  of  our  i  i  ifirmities."
This  fellowship  in  suffering  leads  through
his  grace  to  fellowship  in  glory  (oomp.  2
Cor.  iv.  10 ;  Eom.  vi.  5).  Being  made  coa-
fonuable  unto  his  death ;  rather,  as  B.V.,
hecoming  conformed.  The  participle  is  present:
it  implies  a  continual  [irogrcss.  It  is  derived
from  the  word  /iopipij,  f  >rm,  used  in  ch.  ii.  6
(where  see  note),  iind  denotes,  not  a  mere
external  resemblance,  but  a  deep,  real,  inner
conformity.  The  reference  is  not  to  the
impending  death  of  martyrdom,  but  to  that
daily  dying  unto  self  and  the  world  which
the  apostle  exhibited  in  the  heroic  self-
denials  of  his  holy  life :  he  was  "  crucified
with  Christ "  (Gal.  ii.  20 ;  oomp.  also  1  Cor.
XV.  31).

Ver.  11. — If  by  any  means  I  might  attain
unto  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  The
apostle  uses  the  language  of  humble  ex-
pectation. For  the  particles,  "if  by  any
means ''  (rf  irws),  oomp.  Acts  Jtxvii.  12 ;
Eom.  i.  10;  xL  14.  The  verb  "attain"
means  to  arrive  at  the  end  of  a  journey ;  it
presents  the  figure  of  a  pilgrimage.  Bead,
with  K.V.  and  the  best  manuscripts,  the
resurrection  from,  the  dead.  This  phrase
(used  also  in  Luke  xx.  35  and  Acts  iv.  2)
means  the  resurrection  of  the  blessed  dead
(comp.  1  Cor.  xv.  23;  1  Thess.  iv.  16).  This
meaning  is  strengthened  here  by  the  repe-
tition of  the  preposition  with  the  word
"  resurrection  "  (_4^avti<rTaiTis).  The  general
resurrection  is  always  called  the  resurrection
of  the  dead.

Ver.  12. — Not  as  though  I  had  already
attained,  either  were  already  perfect ;  the
E.V.  renders  this  clause  more  accurately,
not  ihat  (J  do  not  say  that)  I  have  already
obtained.  The  verb  is  not  the  same  with  that
translated  "attain"  in  ver.  11 ;  it  means  to
get,  to  win  a  prize,  as  in  1  Cor.  ix.  24.  The
tense  is  aorist :  "I  say  not  that  I  did  at  once
win  the  prize ;  "  that  is,  at  the  time  of  hia
conversion.  Compare  the  tenses  used  in  ver.
8,  "  I  suflered  the  loss  of  all  things ; "  and
ver.  12,  "  I  was  apprehended  ; "  which  botli
refer  to  the  same  time.  The  prize  was  not
gained  in  a  moment;  it  needs  the  continued
effort  of  a  lifetime.  St.  Paul  proceeds,
using  now  the  perfect  tense,  "  Nor  have  I
been  already  made  perfect."  He  has  not
even  now  reached  perfection;  he  is  still
working  out  his  own  salvation.  There  may
be  here  a  delicate  allusion  to  the  spiritual
pride  which  seems  to  have  disturbed  the
unity  of  the  Philippians  (see  ch.  ii.  2 — 4).
Bat  I  follow  after ;  rather,  I  pursue,  I presi
on.  If  that  I  may  apprehend  that  for  which
also  I  am  apprehended  of  Christ  Jesus.  The
words  rendered  "for  which"   (if'  ^)  will


admit  three  different  interpretations :  (1)
that  of  A.V.,  which  implies  the  ellipse  of
the  antecedent  '•  that ; "  (2)  that  ^iven  in
the  margin  or  E.V.,  " seeing  that ; "  and  (3)
that  of  the  E.V.,  "  for  which,"  for  which
purpose  (that  is,  that  I  may  press  on  and
persevere)  I  was  also  apprehtijiled  by  Ch.'ist
Jesus.  All  these  translations  are  possible,
and  all  give  a  good  sense.  Perhaps  (2)  best
suits  the  coutext,  "  I  press  on  to  lay  hold  ot
the  prize,  because  Christ  first  laid  hold  of
me."  The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  furnislies
the  highest  motive;  't  is  the  Christian's
boundeii  duty  to  press  on  always  in  the
Christian  race,  because  Christ  first  oalled
him.

Ver.  13. — Brethren,  I  count  not  myself  to
have  apprehended ;  rather,  perhaps,  i  recfton.
Two  of  the  best  manuscripts  read  "not  yet"
(oi/Trw).  The  pronouus  are  emphatic :  what-
ever others  may  think  of  me  or  of  them-
selves, "/reckon  not  myself  to  have  appre-
hended." But  this  one  thing.  The  ellipse
here  is  forcible;  some  supply  "  I  reckon ; "
others,  "I  say;"  others,  as  A.V.,  "I  do,"
which  seems  best  suited  to  the  context.  I
do,  forgetting  those  things  which  are  behind,
and  reaching  forth  unto  those  things  which
are  before.  St.  Paul  concentrates  all  his
thoughts  and  all  his  energies  on  the  one
great  end  of  life,  the  one  thiug  needful,  lie
forgets  those  things  which  are  behind ;  that
is,  not,  as  some  explain,  his  Jewish  privileges
and  distinctions,  but  that  part  of  his
Christian  race  already  past.  So  Chrysostom,
Kal  yap  i  Spoiisiis  ovx  Haovs  tjmaey  ava\oyi(e-
Toi  SmiKovs,  iW'  itrovs  \fheriu.  .  .  .  Ti  ydp
^IMS  ii(l>s\u  ri  avv(r8(v,  Srav  rh  \tmip.ivov
fiil  irpoaTeSy;  Beaching  forth.  The  Greek
word  eVe/cTeii'if/ievos  is  singularly  emphatic :
it  means  that  the  athlete  throws  himself
forward  in  the  race  with  all  his  energies
strained  to  the  very  utmost.  Compare
Bengel,  "Oculus  manum,  manus  pedem
prsevertit  et  trahit."

Ver.  14. — I  press  toward  the  mark  for  the
prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ
Jesus ;  rather,  with  the  best  manuscripts,
unto  thi  prize.  The  first  preposition,  "to-
wards," expresses  the  aim;  the  second,
"unto,"  the  end  of  the  race.  The  high
calling;  the  upward,  heavenward  calling.
God  is  calling  us  all  upward,  heavenward,
by  the  voice  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  is  the
Word  of  God.  Comp.  Heb.  iii.  1, "  Partakers
of  the  heavenly  calling."  The  words,  "  in
Christ  Jesus,"  are  to  be  taken  with  "the
high  calling."  It  is  God  who  calls:  he
calls  us  in  the  person  of  Christ,  by  the  voice
of  Christ,  "  Come  unto  me."  "  It  was  his
will  that  thou  shouldst  run  the  race  below ;
he  gives  the  crown  above.  Seest  thou  not
that  even  here  they  crown  the  most  honoured
of  the  athletes,  not  on  the  racecourse  below.


m.  ni.  1— 21.]       THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.


115


bnt  the  Mug  calls  them  up,  and  crowns

them  there  "  (Chrysostom).

-Ver.  15. — Let  us  therefore,  as  many  as  be
perfect,  be  thus  minded.  "Perfect"  here
means  mature,  full  prown,  as  opposed  to
babes  or  children.  The  word  is  so  used  (in
the  Greek)  in  1  Cor.  xiv.  20;  Eph.  iv.  13;
Heb.  V.  14.  "There  is  a  difference,"  says
Bengel,  on  ver.  12,  "  between  the  perfect  and
the  perfected:  the  first  are  ready  for  the
race ;  the  last  are  close  upon  the  prize."  St.
Paul  exhorts  all  full-grown  Cliiistians  to
imitate  his  perseverance;  like  him,  to  for-
sake any  claims  to  legal  righteousneaa ;  to
seek  that  righteousness  which  is  through
the  faith  of  Christ ;  to  know  Christ,  to  win
Christ ;  to  press  ever  forwards  to  obtain  the
prize.  And  if  in  anything  ye  be  otherwise
minded,  God  shall  reveal  even  this  unto  you.
If  only  we  be  in  earnest,  pressing  on-
wards in  the  Christian  race  with  sustained
perseverance,  God  will,  by  the  manifestation
of  his  Spirit  in  our  heart,  correct  any  minor
errors  of  doctrine  or  of  practice.  Comp.
John  vii.  17,  "If  any  man  willeth  to  do
(Se'Ap  Ttoiftv)  liis  will,  he  shall  know  of  the
doctrine  whether  it  be  of  God."  "  Other-
wise "  (eTf'pais)  seems  here  to  mean  other-
wise than  is  right,  wrongly,  amiss — a  meaning
which  it  has  not  unfrequently  in  classical
Greek,  and  in  our  word  "  heterodox."  Er.en
this ;  rather,  thie  too,  as  well  as  the  one  thing
needful,  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  which  he
has  already  revealed.  Mark  the  word  "  re-
veal." Paul  may  teach,  but  living  spiritual
knowledge  is  a  revelation  from  God.  This
passage  shows  that  the  word  "perfect"  is
used  here  in  a  restricted  sense,  not  of  con-
summated holiness  ;  as  it  implies  that  some
of  the  "  perfect"  may  be  "  otherwise  minded,"
may  be  involved  in  minor  errors.  Good
Chiistians  must  have  that  righteousness
which  is  through  faith ;  they  must  perse-
vere :  they  may  err  in  less  essential  points.
It  is  a  lesson  of  charity  and  humility.

Ver.  16. — Nevertheless,  whereto  we  have
already  attained,  let  us  walk  by  the  same
rule,  let  us  mind  the  same  thing.  Omit,
with  the  best  manuscripts,  the  words  from
"rule"  to  "thing,"  and  translate,  with
K.V.,  only,  whereunto  toe  have  already  at-
tained, by  that  same  (rule)  let  us  walk ;  or,
more  literally,  only,  what  we  arrived  at,  by
that  same  walk.  Let  there  be  no  falling
back;  let  us,  at  each  point  in  our  Christian
course,  maintain  and  walk  according  to  that
degree  of  grace  at  which  we  arrived.  This
explanation  seems  more  probable  than  the
other  view,  which  understands  the  words,
"by  the  same,"  of  the  rule  of  faith  as
opposed  to  the  works  of  the  Law.

Ver.  17.— Brethren,  be  followers  together
of  me,  and  mark  them  which  walk  so  as  ye
have  us  foi  aa  ensample ;  rather,  u  B.V,,


imitators  together.  They  are  to  unite,  one
and  all,  in  imitating  him.  In  1  Cor.  xi.  1
he  gives  the  ground  nf  this  advice,  "  As  I
also  am  of  Christ."  Mark,  here  in  order  to
iniitate;  elsewhere  (as  Kom.  xvi.  17)  in
order  to  avoid.  He  changes  the  singular
number  to  the  plural,  modestly  slirinking
from  proposing  himself  alone  as  their  ex-
ample. But  "  ensample  "  is  still  singular,
because  they  all  (Timothy,  Epaphroditus,
etc.)  present  the  same  image,  all  imitating
Christ.  Observe  the  change  of  metaphor :
hitherto  the  Christian  life  has  been  com-
pared to  a  race ;  now  he  speaks  of  walking ;
literally,  walking  about  (irepiTraTeij'),  moving
hither  and  thither  in  the  daily  path  of  life.

Ver.  18. — For  many  walk,  of  whom  I  have
told  you  often,  and  now  tell  you  even  weep-
ing, that  they  are  the  enemies  of  the  cross
of  bhrist ;  rather,  I  used  to  tell  you  ■  the
tense  is  imperfect.  He  used  to  speak  thus
of  them  when  he  was  at  Philippi ;  now,
during  his  absence,  the  evil  has  increased,
aild  he  repeats  his  warning  with  tears.
"Paul  weeps,"  says  Chrysostom,  "  for  those
at  whom  others  laugh ;  so  true  is  his  sym-
pathy, so  deep  his  care  for  all  men."  He
seems  to  be  speaking  here,  not  of  the  Jews,
but  of  nominal  Christians,  who  used  their
liberty  for  a  cloke  of  licentiousness.  Such
are  enemies  of  the  cross ;  they  hate  self-
denial,  they  will  not  take  up  their  cross.
By  their  evil  lives  they  bring  shame  upon
the  religion  of  the  cross.

Ver.  19.— Whose  end  is  destruction ;  rather,
as  B.V.,  perdition.  Observe  the  contrast :
not  the  prize  of  the  high  calling,  but  ever-
lasting death.  Whose  god  is  tlieir  lelly,
and  whose  glory  is  in  their  shame  (comp.
Eom.  xvi  18).  They  boast  of  their  liberty,
and  pervert  it  into  licence  (2  Pet.  ii.  19).
Who  mind  earthly  things ;  rather,  they  who
mind.  The  irregularity  of  the  construction
(he  returns  to  the  nominative)  seems  ex-
pressive of  the  apostle's  indignation.

Ver.  20. — For  our  conversation  is  in
heaven.  The  word  "  our  "  is  emphatic ;  the
apostle  refers  back  to  ver.  17 :  "  Follow  us,
not  those  enemies  of  the  cross  ;  our  conver-
sation is  in  heaven;  they  mind  earthly
things."  The  A.V.  has  this  same  word
"conversation  "  in  ch.  i.  27,  where  the  Greek
(iroMreieaSe)  is  the  verb  corresponding  with
the  noun  (noAiTev/iu)  which  occurs  here.
The  verb  is  osed  in  the  sense  of  a  certain
mode  of  life  or  conversation,  as  in  Acts  xxiii.
1,  but  it  does  not  appear  that  tlie  noun  ever
bears  that  meaning.  The  rendering  "  citizen-
ship "  also  seems  deficient  in  authority.  In
classical  Greek  the  word  has  three  meanings:
(1)  a  form  of  government ;  (2)  political  acts,
politics;  (3)  a  commonwealth.  The  last
seems  the  most  suitable  here.  The  un-
worthy Christians  mentioned  in  the  last


116


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN3.         [oh.  hi.  1— 2L


Terse  mind  earthly  things ;  hxA  oxa  city,  onr
country,  our  liome,  is  in  heaven :  there  is  the
state  of  wliich  we  are  citizens ;  there  is  the

general  assembly  and  Church  of  tlie  First-
om,  whose  names  are  inscribed  in  the  roll
of  tlie  citizens  of  the  heavenly  city.  Our
real  hnme  is  there  now  (iiriJpx*')  •"  oomp.
Eph.  ii.  19,  "  Ye  are  no  longer  strangers  and
foreigners,  but  ye  are  fellow-citizens  of  the
saints  "  (comp.  also  Heb.  xi.  10, 16  and  xiii.
14;  Gal.  iv.  26).  From  whence  also  we
look  for  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;
rather,  we  eagerly  wait  for  (comp.  Rom.  viii.
23,  25 ;  Gal.  v.  5)  llw  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as
•  Saviour  ;  comp.  Isa.  xxv.  9,  "  This  is  the
liord  ;  we  have  waited  for  him ;  we  will  be
glad  and  rejoice  in  his  salvation."

Ver.  21. — Who  shall  change  our  vile  body
that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his
glorious  body ;  rather,  as  B.V.,  who  shall
fashion  anew  the  body  of  our  humiliation,
that  it  may  he  conformed  to  the  body  of  his
glory.  Compare  the  description  of  our  Lord's
person  and  work  in  oh.  ii.-  6 — 8.  There  St.
Paul  tells  us  that  he  who  was  originally  in
the  form  of  God  took  upon  him  the  form  of
a  servant,  and  was  found  in  fashion  as  a
man.    Here  he  uses  the  derivatives  of  the


same  words  "form"  and  "fashion  "{fi.up<i>-^  and
(Tx^/ia),  to  describe  the  chanije  of  the  bodies
of  the  saved  at  the  resurrection.  He  hud
already  told  us  (ver.  10)  that  ihe  Christian
soul  is  being  gradually  conformed  during
life  unto  the  death  of  Christ.  He  now  tells
us  that  this  ponformity  of  tlie  Christian  unto
Christ  is  ultimately  to  extend  to  the  budy.
The  Lord  shall  change  the  outward  faishion
of  our  body ;  but  this  change  will  be  more
than  a  change  of  outward  fashion :  it  will
result  in  a  real  conformity  of  the  resurieotion-
body  of  the  believer  unto  the  glorious  body
of  the  Lord.  The  body  of  our  humiliation;
not  "vile  body."  St.  Paul  does  not  despise
the  body,  like  the  Stoics  and  Gnostics ;  the
Christian's  body  is  a  sacred  thing — it  is  the
temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  the  seed  of
the  resurrection-body  (comp.  1  Cor.  vi.  20).
According  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able
even  to  subdue  all  things  unto  himself.
According  to  the  working,  the  energy,  of
his  power  not  only  to  change  and  glorify
the  bodies  of  the  redeemed,  but  also  to
subdue  all  things,  the  whole  universe,  unto
himself.  "The  apostle  shows,"  says  Chry-
sostom,  "  greater  works  of  the  Saviour's
power,  that  thou  mightest  believe  in  these,"


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  1 — 3. — Soty  fog.    I.  The  Chbistian's   pbivilkob.     1.  It  is  in  the  Lori,

"  Eeji  ice  in  the  Lord,"  the  apostle  says.  The  Lord,  who  once  gave  himself /or  us,  give*
himself  to  us  now.  "  Behold,"  he  says,  "I  stand  at  the  door,  and  knock."  If  we  libtea
to  his  voice,  and  open  the  door  of  our  heart,  he  is  ready  to  enter,  to  bless  us  with  his
■acred  presence,  to  abide  with  us  for  ever.  In  his  presence  there  is  fulness  of  joy.  We
can  know  it  only  by  experience.

<*  The  love  of  Jesus,  what  it  is,
None  but  his  loved  ones  know."

The  unspeakable  Gift,  the  gift  of  Christ,  is  a  gift  of  abiding  joy.  2.  Bi»  one  of  th«
fruits  of  the  Spirit.  The  Holy  Spirit  of  God  is  the  pledged  possession  of  all  true  Chris-
tians ;  and  "  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  love,  joy,  peace."  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  right-
eousness and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy  (jhost.'  Then  holy  joy  is  an  evidence  of  the
indwelling  of  the  Spirit ;  it  shows  that  he  is  with  the  saints  of  God.  3.  It  is  the
earnest  of  our  inheritance ;  for  it  springs  from  the  inworking  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  pro-
mise. It  is  a  foretaste  of  the  joy  of  the  Lord,  which  is  reserved  for  the  good  and  faith-
ful servant.  It  is  of  all  forms  of  joy  the  truest,  deepest,  most  abiding ;  for  it  depends
on  no  external  cause,  it  is  not  much  affected  by  the  chances  and  changes  of  this  mortal
life.  It  supports  the  true  Christian  in  trouble,  in  sickness,  in  the  prospect  of  death.
For  it  is  in  the  Lord,  resting  on  him,  depending  on  his  presence,  flowing  from  com-
munion with  him.

II.  The  Christian's  duty.  1,  Because  it  is  eommanded.  "  Rejoice  evermore,"  is
equally  binding  with  the  parallel  commandment,  "  Pray  without  ceasing."  In  this
Epistle  especially  the  apostle  reiterates  again  and  again  with  ever-increasing  earnestness
the  exhortation  to  rejoice.  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway ;  again  I  will  say,  Rejoice."  2.
Because  it  is  enforced  hy  the  example  of  the  saints.  "  Sorrowing,  yet  always  rejoicing,"
is  the  motto  of  the  Christian  life.  St.  Paul  with  Silas  in  the  dungeon  at  Fhilippi  sang
praises  unto  God.  Now  a  prisoner  at  Rome,  he  could  say,  "  I  joy,  and  rejoice  with  you
alL"    He  was  in  bonds,  encompassed  with  many  hardships  and  afSictions,  in  daily


cH.m.  1— 21.]        THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  117

danger  of  a  violent  death.  But  his  soul  was  raised  above  his  outward  troubles  by  ths
blessed  presence  of  the  Lord  within  him.  His  heart  was  glad  ;  the  crown  of  righteous-
ness laid  up  in  heaven  for  all  who  lov6  the  appearing  of  the  Lord  was  ever  before  hig
thoughts  ;  he  could  rejoice  himself;  he  could  bid  others  rejoice  with  him.  It  is  indeed
a  great  example  of  the  power  of  faith,  an  illustration  of  the  Saviour's  words,  "  Let  not
your  heart  be  troubled ;  believe  in  God,  and  believe  in  me."  3.  Because  to  be  gloomy
and  melancholy  implies  a  want  of  gratitude.  The  Christian  who  knows  that  hii
Redeemer  liveth,  that  Christ  the  Son  of  God  died  for  his  sins  and  rose  again  for  hii
justification,  that  he  is  even  now  ioterceding  for  him  in  heaven,  ought  to  be  bright  and
cheerful.  He  has  no  right  to  give  way  to  despondent  thoughts.  The  temptation  will
come  sometimes ;  but  it  is  a  matter  of  duty  to  struggle  against  it ;  for  to  yield  is  to
dishonour  the  Lord.  "  Count  it  all  joy,"  says  St.  James,  "  when  ye  fall  into  divers
temptations."

III.  To  BE  ENFORCED  BY  CONSTANT  EXHORTATION.  1.  The  goipel  IS  ever  fresh,  ever
new.  "  It  is  not  irksome  to  write  the  same  things,  says  St.  Paul."  The  Christian  is
never  tired  of  repeating,  never  tired  of  hearing,  the  blessed  story  of  the  love  of  Jesus.
The  Athenians  "  spent  their  time  in  nothing  else,  but  either  to  tell  or  to  hear  some
new  thing."  The  Christian  is  content  with  the  old,  old  story — the  holy  life,  the
blessed  death,  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  It  is  sometimes  the  preacher's  temptation  to
strain  after  novelty ;  he  should  seek  simply  to  save  souls.  2.  /*  is  hard  to  rejoice  ever-
more ;  it  is  a  duty  to  he  frequently  pressed.  To  rejoice  in  sickness,  in  distress,  in  times
of  anxiety,  is  very  hard ;  but  It  is  our  duty  ;  we  must  enforce  it  constantly  upon  our-
selves, upon  others.  And  it  is  a  source  of  safety  ;  the  soul  that  is  learning  to  rejoice
in  the  Lord,  to  take  delight  in  communion  with  him  in  prayer  and  praise  and  holy
sacrament,  is  not  easily  separated  from  the  love  of  Christ.

IV.  Contrasts  between  the  true  Christians  and  the  Judaizebs.  1.  These  last
rejoice,  not  in  the  Lord,  but  in  outward  distinctions.  They  pride  themselves  on  their
circumcision,  but  it  is  merely  outward,  in  the  flesh.  They  may  be  clean  ceremonially,
but  they  are  unclean  in  heart ;  for  they  are  workers  of  evil.  2.  The  Christian  has  the
true  circumcision  and  the  true  worship.  The  true  circumcision  is  "  thxt  of  the  heart,
in  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the  letter."  The  true  worship,  too,  is  in  the  highest  sense  not
that  of  form  and  ceremony,  but  inward  and  spiritual.  The  Christian  worships  by  the
Spirit  of  God,  by  his  help,  by  his  teaching,  by  his  inspiration ;  all  true  prayer  is  prayer
in  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  The  Christian  glories  only  in  Christ.  "  God  forbid  that  I
should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  Christian  glories  in  the
Saviour's  love,  in  the  atonement  wrought  by  his  most  precious  blood,  in  his  prevailing
intercession,  in  the  hope  of  seeing  him  face  to  face  in  his  kingdom.  In  him  is  his  con-
fidence, not  in  any  outward  rite.

Lessons.  1.  Pray  for  the  great  gift  of  holy  joy  :  "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  have."  2.  To  win
that  joy  we  must  renounce  confidence  in  the  flesh.  3.  We  must  worship  by  the  Spirit
of  God,  with  real  heart-worship,  and  that  by  the  help  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.

Vers.  4—11. — The  example  of  St.  Paul.  I.  What  he  renounced.  All  confidence  in
the  flesh.  1.-  He  enumerates  the  privileges  of  the  Jew,  and  claims  them  os  his  own.  He
had  the  seal  of  circumcision,  the  inheritance  of  the  covenant;  he  was  brought  up  in
the  Hebrew  learning  ;  he  belonged  to  the  strictest  sect ;  he  was  zealous ;  he  had  lived
a  blameless  life.  In  outward  grounds  of  confidence  no  man  could  surpass  him.  He
had  all  the  privileges  that  could  issue  from  the  Judaism  of  the  time.  2.  He  renounces
them  all.  He  sums  them  up  together  and  renounces  them ;  more  than  that,  he
counts  them  as  loss ;  further  yet,  he  counts  all  things  as  loss  in  comparison  with  the
one  gracious  presence,  the  one  glorious  hope  which  now  fills  his  heart.

II.  What  he  sought.  1.  3%e  knowledge  of  Christ.  This  knowledge  is:  (1)  A  per-
sonal knowledge.  "  Mine  own  know  me,"  says  our  Lord,  in  John  x.  14,  Eevised  Version,
"  as  I  know  the  Father."  The  knowledge  wherewith  the  true  sheep  know  the  good
Shepherd  is  compared  by  our  Lord  himself  to  the  knowledge  with  which  the  Son  of  God
knows  the  eternal  Father.  It  is  a  knowledge  of  love,  a  knowledge  of  intimate  personal
ciimnmnion.  It  is  less  in  the  intellect  than  in  the  heart ;  it  is  gained  not  so  much  by
study,  as  by  prayer  and  holy  sacrament  and  the  daily  efibrt  of  faith  to  realize  the
Saviour's  nearness  and  to  imitate  his  holy  life.    (2)  It  is  excellent,    St.  Paul  can


118  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.        [oh.  ni.  1—21.

icarcely  find  words  to  express  its  excellency.  Compared  with  this,  all  other  things
sink  into  insignificance ;  what  was  gain  becomes  loss ;  what  was  glory  becomes  shame.
For  this  knowLdge  implies  the  presence  of  Ohrist,  "Christ  in  you,  the  Hope  of  glory."
(3)  Thus  the  Christian  who  knows  Christ,  wins  Christ  to  be  his  own,  his  own  most
loving  Saviour,  his  own  most  gracious  Friend ;  his  very  life,  for  "  he  that  hath  the  Son
hath  life."  And  (4)  he  is  found  in  Christ,  incorporated  into  him,  a  living  member  of
kis  mystical  body,  a  fruitful  branch  of  the  true  Vine.  2.  The  righteousness  which  it
through  the  faith  of  Christ-  They  that  are  found  in  Christ  have  his  righteousness.
"  Of  him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  and  riyhteousness,
and  sanctiflcation,  and  redemption  "  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  They  have  none  of  their  own  (that
is,  through  their  own  works),  for  the  righteousness  which  is  in  the  Law  is  no  true  right-
eousness, and  cannot  endure  the  all-seeing  eye  of  God.  "  All  our  righteousnesses  areas
filthy  rags."  This  righteousness  is  of  God,  not  ours ;  and  yet  in  some  sense  it  is  ours,
for  it  is  given  to  us,  given  in  the  gift  of  Christ.  "  He  that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  .  .  .
how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things?"  This  righteousness  is
through  faith ;  obtained  (that  is)  through  faith  as  the  means  or  instrument ;  and  it  is
by  (or  rather,  upon)  faith,  given  (that  is)  on  condition  of  faith.  "  Believe  on  the  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  and  thoushaltbe  saved,"  was  the  message  delivered  by  St.  Paul  in  this
very  Philippi.  "  Only  believe."  Faith  is  spiritual  sight ;  by  faith  the  saints  in  all
ages  have  endured,  "  as  seeing  him  who  is  invisible."  Faith  is  the  spiritual  vision  of
Christ;  by  faith  we  see  him  dying  for  us  upon  the  cross;  we  see  Christ  crucified,  and
recognize  him  as  our  own  Saviour  and  Redeemer.  Again,  faith  is  the  "  substance  ['  the
assurance,'  Revised  Version]  of  things  hoped  for ; "  it  is  trustfulness — trustfulness,  in
the  love  and  promises  of  Christ.  It  involves  distrust  of  self,  and  trust  only  in  Christ.
Ever  less  of  self,  ever  more  of  Christ,  is  the  law  of  spiritual  progress.  Faith  is  the
condition  of  righteousness.

III.  The  result  op  this  self-renunciation.  The  ever-deepening  knowledge  of  Christ.
St.  Paul  pr&ys  to  be  found  in  Christ,  that  he  may  know  him.  This  knowledge,  which
he  iseeks  an  earnestly,  is  an  experimental  knowledge;  it  is  an  ever-increasing  acquaint-
ance with  Christ,  a  realization  of  the  life  of  Christ  in  his  sufferings  and  in  his  exalta-
tion. We  need  to  know  :  1.  The  power  of  his  resurrection.  The  resurrection  of  Christ
is  a  spiritual  power ;  it  hath  a  power  to  lift  us  up  into  the  resurrection-life,  the  new  life
that  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  The  soul  that  was  raised  with  Christ  seeks  those
things  which  are  above,  and  that  through  the  power  of  the  Lord's  resurrection  realized
in  the  heart.  His  resurrection,  too,  is  the  pledge  and  earnest  of  our  own  resurrection,
and  so  kindles  and  stimulates  self-denying  Christian  effort.  2.  To  know  the  power  of
his  resurrection  we  must  know  the  fellowship  of  his  sufferings.  The  Christian  life  has
ioys  of  its  own ;  it  has  also  sufferings  of  its  own.  For :  (1)  Besides  the  deep  sorrow  of
contrition,  the  Christian  sorrows  for  the  griefs  of  others,  for  the  sins  of  others,  for  the
oppression  and  afflictions  of  the  Church.  And  these  sufferings  are  the  sufferings  of
Christ ;  he  suffers  in  and  with  his  members.  Hence  the  apostle  says  (Col.  1.  24),  "  I
fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  in  my  flesh  for  his  body's  sake,
which  is  the  Church."  (2)  We  have  fellowship  with  Christ's  sufferings  when  we  sym-
pathize with  his  agony,  with  his  cross ;  when  by  the  energy  of  faith  we  realize  the
Saviour's  sufferings,  and,  knowing  that  our  sins  added  to  his  burden  of  woe,  feel  with
him  and  for  him.  (3)  We  share  his  sufl'erings  when,  suffering  ourselves,  we  offer  our
sufferings  to  God  by  an  act  of  faith ;  when,  fixing  our  hearts  upon  the  sufferings  of
Christ,  we  unite  our  sufferings  with  his  by  faith  and  prayer,  casting  all  our  care  on
him.  Thus  he  bears  our  griefs  and  carries  our  sorrows ;  he  suffers  with  us  and  we
with  him.  (4)  Thus  we  become,  little  by  little,  conformed  unto  his  death.  The
Intense  contemplation  of  the  suffering  Lord  gradually  impresses  the  likeness  of  his  death
upon  the  believing  soul.  1'hat  likeness  is  not  outward  and  transient,  but  inward,  deep,
real.  It  is  formed  gradually;  it  varies  in  degree  in  different  individuals  or  in  the
different  stages  of  the  Christian  life ;  but  in  all  true  Christians  it  is  real.  It  is  a  morti-
fying, a  crucifixion  of  the  old  man  ;  like  the  Saviour's  death  upon  the  cross,  slow  and
painful.  But  at  last  the  believing  soul  struggles  itself  free  from  the  body  of  sin  and
death  into  the  new  lile,  the  life  which  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.

rV.  The  blessed  end.  1.  I'he  resurrection  of  the  holy  dead.  That  resurrection  is
the  end  of  all  our  labours  here ;  the  end  for  which  the  Christian  is  content  to  count  all


OB.  m.  1—21.]         THE  EPISTLE  tO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  lU

earthly  things  as  loss.  2.  The  spiritual  resurrection  here  is  the  earnest  of  the  glorious
resurrection  hereafter.  The  heavenly  life  begins  here ;  the  life  of  faith  is  the  bcginuiug
of  the  life  of  glory.  Both  consist  in  union  with  Christ,  who  is  oiir  Life ;  both  derive
their  joy  and  brightness  only  from  his  irradiating  presence.  They  differ  in  degree,  not
in  kind.  The  life  of  faith,  when  all  present  hindrances  are  removed,  advanced,  as  it
will  be,  to  unspeakably  higher  degrees  of  purity  and  joy  and  fellowship  with  Christ,
oulpiinates  in  the  life  of  glory,  llence  it  is  tliat  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of
Christ  issues  in  the  blessed  resurrection  of  the  holy  dead.

Lessons.  1.  St.  Paul  broke  wholly  with  his  unconverted  life;  so. must  we.  2.  He
experienced  a  complete  change  of  thought,  motive,  aim ;  it  must  be  so  with  us.  3.  It
was  the  constraining  love  of  Christ  that  drew  him  from  his  old  life ;  it  is  so  still.  4.
ITe  suffered  with  Christ,  he  felt  the  power  of  his  resurrection ;  so  may  it  be  with  us.

Vers.  12 — 16. — St.  Paul's  humility.  L  He  has  not  yet  attained  ;  he  is  kot
PERFECT.  1.  The  most  advanced  Christian  is  always  the  humhlest.  The  nearer  wo
draw  to  Christ,  the  more  we  feel  our  own  unworthiness.  The  light  of  Christ's  holiness,
manifested  in  the  hearts  of  his  saints,  brings  out  into  clearer  liaht  the  exceeding  sinful-
ness of  sin.  2.  But  he  is  striving  after  perfection.  The  Christian  knows  his  own
weakness  and  sin,  but  he  knows  also  that  he  is  really  f  )llowing  Christ.  If  we  are
doing  so,  we  must  know  it ;  we  must  be  conscious  of  real  effort  in  the  spiritual  life.  3.
Christ  is  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith.  Christ  first  laid  hold  of  St.  Paul,
therefore  St.  Paul  strives  to  lay  hold  upon  Christ;  because  he  was  apprehended,  he
hopes  to  apprehend.  "  We  love  him,  because  he  first  loved  us."  4.  This  very  sense  of
imperfection  urges  the  Christian  to  sustained  effort.  He  is  never  satisfied  with  himself,
therefore  he  always  presses  onwards.  He  does  not  dwell  with  complacency  on  his
attainments,  but  forgets  the  progress  which  he  has  made;  in  view  of  the  far  greater
height  which  remains  to  scale,  he  throws  himself  into  the  work  with  ever-increasing
energy.  5.  Therefore  he  presses  toiuard  the  mark.  The  crown  of  righteousness  is  laid
up  for  all  who  love  the  appearing  of  the  Lord.  God  is  calling  us  thither,  calling  us
upward,  to  higher  degrees  of  the  spiritual  life  now,  to  the  perfection  of  that  life  in
heaven.  The  prize  of  that  upward  calling  is  the  heavenly  glory.  It  is  the  end  for
which  the  Christinn  lives,  which  makes  life  worth  having,  worth  living.

II.  All  ADVANCED  Christians  MUST  BE  THUS  MINDED.  1.  The  love  of  Christ,  faith,
humility,  are  essentials.  All  Christians  alike  must  set  the  knowledge  of  Christ  high
above  all  other  objects  of  desire.  All  must  seek  that  righteousness  which  is  through
the  faith  of  Christ ;  all  must  strive  to  win  Christ,  to  be  found  in  Christ,  to  know  the
power  of  his  resurrection  and  the  fellowship  of  his  sufferings.  AU  must  be  humble,
dissatisfied  with  themselves ;  all  must  press  onwards  towards  ever  higher  degrees  of
the  spiritual  life.  2.  In  this  all  must  agree ;  in  smaller  matters  there  may  be  differences.
St.  Paul  seems  to  imply  that  there  will  be  differences.  "  If  in  anything  ye  be  other-
wise minded,"  he  says;  otherwise  than  is  right,  he  seems  to  mean.  There  will  be,
there  must  be,  errors.  Men  cannot  all  see  alike.  There  are  various  degrees  of  illumina-
tion, of  spiritual  knowledge.  And  men  are  differently  constituted;  their  characters,
their  early  training,  their  education,  their  surroundings,  their  associations,  differ
indefinitely ;  all  these  circumstances  act  upon  their  habits  of  thought.  Their  opinions
are  the  ultimate  outcome  of  all  these  multitudinous  influences.  Doubtless  we  are  to
a  large  extent  responsible  for  our  opinions.  It  is  our  bounden  duty  to  search  the
Scriptures,  to  think,  to  meditate,  to  pray  for  the  guidance  of  God's  Holy  Spirit.  He
will  guide  us  into  all  truth  (^all  that  is  necessary  for  our  salvation),  if  we  seek  his  htlp
with  a  single  heart,  in  earnestness,  and  in  humility.  But  he  does  not  force  all  good
men  to  thial?  alike ;  he  leaves  room  for  the  play  of  the  individual  character,  for  the
manifold  influences  of  temperament  and  training.  The  truth  is  one,  the  faith  is  one ;
but  we  look  upon  that  one  truth  from  various  points  of  view.  Hence  there  will  be
differences  even  among  those  who  sincerely  seek  the  truth.  Truth  is  of  momentous
importance.  Truth  of  ductrine  and  holiness  of  life  together  make  up  the  saintly
character ;  imperfections  in  either  so  far  mar  the  beauty  of  the  whole.  But  if  the  two
cannot  always  coexist,  holiness  is  far  closer  than  doctrine  to  our  soul's  salvation.  The
good  Samaritan  was  nearer  to  God  than  the  priest  or  the  Levite;  though  they  were
urtbodo«|  while  he  vas  »  cchiamatio.    t.  But  the  promiH  is  tkat  <«  thote  tuho  sim«tr«ly


120  THE  EPISTLE   TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.         [oh.  in.  1— 2L

teek  the  truth  Ood  will  certainly  reveal  it.  Only  let  a  man  be  like  St.  Paul  in  his
humility  and  earnest  perseverance,  never  satisfied  with  himself,  never  counting  himself
to  have  attained,  but  always  pressing  towards  the  mark,  and  God  will  reveal  the  truth
to  him,  as  he  revealed  it  to  St.  Piiul.  Thus  we  learn  that  holy  obedience  is  a  condition
of  living  spiritual  knowledge,  and  that  living  spiritual  knowledge  is  a  gift  of  God.  The
letter  of  the  Scripture  is  a  subject  for  intellectual  study,  but  the  inner  truth  of  the
Scriptures,  the  knowledge  of  Christ,  is  a  revelation  from  God.  God  hath  hidden  this
from  the  wise  and  prudent,  but  he  revealeth  it  to  babes.  God  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the
one  only  Teacher  of  this  precious  knowledge.

III.    ThBEE    MtST    BE    NO    BACKSLIDING,    NO    LOSS    OF    SPIKITUAl.    KNOWLBDOB    ONCE

OBTAINED.  It  must  be  our  most  earnest  effort  to  maintain  that  degree  of  grace  at  which
we  have  arrived.  Mark  how  the  apostle  dwells  on  the  necessity  of  perseverance.  The
life  of  very  many  professing  Christians  is  a  series  of  oscillations  between  permitted  sin
and  feeble  repentance.  Hence  there  is  no  real  progress ;  they  remain  year  after  j'ear
much  as  ihey  have  been — decent  in  their  lives,  and  well-intentioned  perhaps,  but  with-
out any  real  growth  in  holiness,  in  self-denial,  in  humility.  "The  path  of  the  just  is
as  the  shining  light,  shining  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day."  This  ought  to  be
the  record  of  our  lives;  but  this  implies  continual  perseverance,  and  perseverance
implies  constant  watchfulness  and  constant  prayer.

Lessons.  Learn  from  St.  Paul's  example :  1.  Utterly  to  shrink  from  spiritual  pride ;
it  is  a  deadly  poison ;  it  makes  men  satisfied  with  their  present  attainments ;  it  pre-
vents their  progress  in  holiness ;  it  leads  to  backsliding.  2.  Always  to  persevere.  3.
To  keep  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  before  the  thoughts.  4.  Not  to  judge  har.shly
those  who  differ  from  us.    5.  To  pray  for  a  fuller  revelation  of  the  truth  to  our  souls.

Vers.  17 — 19. — The  Christian  minister  must  set  an  example  to  his  flock.  L  The
TKDE  SHEPHERD  GOBTH  BBFOEB  HIS  SHEEP.  He  should  be  able  to  Say,  like  the  apostle,
"  Be  ye  followers  of  me,  as  I  also  am  of  Christ."  For  the  preacher's  words  have  little
influence  if  they  are  not  enforced  and  illustrated  by  his  life.  A  real  earnest  Christian
life  is  a  living  power;  its  light  shines  before  men;  it  leads  others  to  glorify  that  God
from  whom  all  true  religion  comes.  For  it  proves  the  truth  ol  God's  Word  and  promises ;
it  is  a  miracle  of  grace,  more  wonderful  than  miracles  of  power ;  it  draws  those  who  at
first  believed  not  the  Word,  to' believe  the  works.  The  work  of  God's  grace,  manifested
in  the  changed  life  of  the  believer,  draws  souls  to  God.  Hence  we  must  strive  always
to  set  a  holy  example.  But  we  must,  like  Andrew,  find  Christ  first  ourselves  if  we
would  bring  others  to  him.  Alas!  not  all  who  point  the  way  to  heaven  will  enter
there ;  not  all  who  helped  to  build  the  ark  were  saved  therein.

II.  The  Christian  must  mark  the  saints  of  God.  1.  Their  example  is  precious,
full  of  gracious  attraction.  A  true  Christian,  wherever  he  is,  in  whatever  circum-
stances, is  of  inestimable  value.  Having  himself  received  grace  from  God,  he  becomes
a  centre  of  grace  for  others;  rivers  of  living  water  flow  from  him.  2.  Such  examples
increase  our  responsibility.  St.  Paul  bids  us  mark  them.  If  we  do  not,  we  neglect  one
of  the  greatest  helps  to  a  holy  life  which  God  provides  for  us.  To  read  the  lives  of
holy  men,  still  more,  if  we  have  that  great  privilege,  to  know  them,  ought  to  excite  in
us  a  holy  ardour  and  ambition.  They  are  men  like  ourselves,  encompassed  with
infirmities ;  they  have  by  the  grace  of  God  attained  a  hijj;h  degree  of  holiness ;  we  may
do  the  like  if  we  persevere  as  they  persevered.  We  must  be  followers  together  of  such
men;  we  must  try  to  reach  the  holiness  which  they  have  gained;  their  humility,  their
self-denials,  their  charity,  their  holy  joy,  their  delight  in  prayer  and  praise,  ought  to  stir
us  up  to  a  holy  emulation.  Such  examples,  if  followed,  are  an  unspeakable  advantage ;
if  neglected,  they  must  greatly  increase  our  danger  and  (it  may  be)  our  condemnation.
3.  Christ's  saints  are  many ;  their  example  is  one.  Paul,  Timothy,  Epaphroditus,  reflect
ill  various  degrees  the  one  image  of  Christ.  All  Christians,  beholding  as  in  a  glass  the
glory  of  the  Lord,  are  changed  into  the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory.  Their
characters,  theii'  training,  their  opportunities,  differ ;  they  present  some  one  grace,  some
another,  more  conspicuously  than  others;  these  different  graces  are  so  many  different
aspects  of  the  one  image  of  Christ.  We  may  study  these  various  graces  severally  as
mixed  with  human  frail  ly  in  the  characters  of  saints ;  we  may  study  them  all  combined
in  \ibsolute  perfection  in  the  life  of  our  Biviue  Saviour.


OH.  m.  1—21.]        TUE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN&  121

III.  But  there  abb  evil  examples  in  the  Chubch.  1.  Many  who  are  called  bg
the  Name  of  Christ  mind  earthly  things.  They  will  not  take  up  their  cross  and  deny
themselves ;  they  serve  their  own  lusts.  Such  men  are  really  enemies  of  the  cross  of
Christ ;  they  hate  the  cioss,  they  shrink  from  the  cross,  and  they  grievously  check
the  progress  of  the  gospel.  The  Name  of  God  is  blasphemed  through  them.  The  end
of  such  men  is  destruction.  2.  Such  eoil  lives  cause  real  grief  to  the  true  Christian.
St.  Paul  weeps  when  he  speaks  of  them.  Pools  make  a  mock  at  sin ;  the  apostle  weeps.
He  knows  the  meaning  of  sin,  its  exceeding  sinfulness,  its  awful  danger.  It  is  a
miserable  thing  to  see  men  laugh  at  drunkenness  or  other  forms  of  vice ;  these  things
kill  the  souls  of  men,  souls  fir  whom  Christ  died.  The  apostle  reminds  us  of  the
psalmist,  "  Rivers  of  water  run  down  mine  eyes  because  men  keep  not  thy  Law."

Lessons.  Learn:  1.  To  study  the  lives  of  holy  men,  to  imitate  their  graces,  to
avoid  their  errors;  their  history  is  written  for  our  admonition.  2.  Above  all,  to  study
the  one  perfect  Example,  the  life  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  3.  To  set  a  good  example
ourselves,  remembering  the  great  influence  of  example  for  good  or  for  evil.  4.  To
shun  evil  examples,  to  mourn  over  them.

Vers.  20,  21. — The  grounds  for  following  St.  Paul  and  other  holy  men.  I.  Our
CONVERSATION  IS  IN  HEAVEN.  The  false  brethren  mind  earthly  tilings ;  follow  us.  1.
Our  commonwealth  is  in  heaven ;  we  are  citizens  of  the  heavenly  country.  Here  we
are  citizens  of  this  realm  of  England;  we  have  our  sovereign,  our  magistrates,  our
frllow-subjects,  our  duties,  our  privileges.  It  is  a  shadow  of  heavenly  things.  The
heavenly  Jerusalem,  the  city  of  tlie  living  God,  is  our  true  home,  our  continuing  city.
The  almighty  Grod,  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  is  the  centre  of  that  vast  com-
munion. The  blessed  angels,  our  guardians,  are  his  ministers,  standing  before  him,  to
do  his  will.  The  saints,  living  and  departed,  are  our  fellow-citizens,  the  general
assembly  and  Church  of  the  Firstborn  who  are  written  in  heaven,  and  the  spirits  of
just  men  made  perfect.  There  we  have  our  privileges,  the  sacraments,  the  means  of
grace,  the  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  the  hope  of  everlasting  blessedness.  There
we  have  our  duties,  all  growing  from- the  one  highest  law  of  love :  "  Thou  shalt  love  the
Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart ;  .  .  .  thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself."  2.  Our
real  home  is  there  now  (Imdpx^O-  We  are  citizens  of  the  heavenly  commonwealth  first,
then  of  our  earthly  country.  We  are  Christians  first,  then  Englishmen.  The  name
first  given  at  Antioch  is  our  highest  title;  it  pledges  us  to  unity,  to  holiness;  it
pledges  us  to  the  service  of  the  great  Master,  whose  love  passeth  knowledge,  whose  life
stands  alone  in  its  gracious  beauty,  in  its  perfect  purity.  Our  home  is  in  heaven,
where  he  is  ;  it  is  so  now.  "  Ye  are  come  to  the  city  of  tbe  living"  God ; "  "  Ye  are
fellow-citizens  of  the  saints."  Therefore  "seek  those  things  which  are  above.*"  There
must  our  treasure  be,  there  must  we  set  our  hearts.  We  should  try  by  God's  grace
to  fill  our  minds  with  the  blessed  thought  of  heaven,  to  accustom  ourselves  to  meditate
daily  upon  its  occupations,  its  never-ending  worship,  its  unclouded  contemplation  of
the  Divine  beauty.  For  there  we  hope  to  spend  the  ages  of  the  everlasting  life.  It
will  be,  we  trust,  our  last,  our  unsiieakably  most  glorious  prize ;  let  us  try  to  fill  our
thoughts  and  imaginations  with  it  now,  not  with  the  poor  prizes  of  earthly  success.
Thus  let  us  seek  to  realize  those  striking  words,  "  Our  commonwealth  is  in  heaven."

IL  Christ  is  in  heaven  now  ;  we  wait  for  his  cominu.  1.  We  are  cilizens  of  the
heavenly  country  now ;  we  have  not  yet  its  full  privileges ;  we  are  heirs  of  the  kingdom  of
heaven.  But  Christ  is  there  now ;  he  will  come  again  as  a  Saviour.  Then  he  will  make
us  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  liuht.  For  flesh  and  blood
cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God;  we  must  be  changed.  He  is  changing  our  souls
now  (if  we  abide  in  him)  by  the  power  of  his  grace.  Then  he  shall  change  our  body,
this  body  of  our  humiliation,  the  body  which  is  now  subject  to  disease  and  death,  and
siinietimes,  alas  I  to  the  defilemetit  of  sensual  sin.  He  shall  make  it  like,  in  true  and
deep  resemblance,  to  the  body  of  his  glory.  Then  shall  be  brought  to  pass  the  saying
that  is  written,  "  Death  is  swallpwed  up  in  victory."  2.  For  he  is  able  to  subdue  all
things  unto  himself.  All  power  is  given  unto  him  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  Therefore
we  may  not  doubt  his  power.  He  can  raise  these  bodies  of  ours  from  the  dust  of  the
earth,  no  longer  natural,  corruptible,  mortal;  but  spiritual,  incorruptibfe,  immortal
He  can  do  this,  for  he  can  do  greater  things  than  theso.


122  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN3.        [ch.  in.  1— 2L

Lessons.  Learn :  1.  To  regard  heaven  as  our  home.  2.  To  practise  its  employ-
ments, to  learn  the  new  song  here  on  earth.  3.  To  remember  that  the  eternal  life  begins
here.  "This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  .  .  .  God  and  Jesus  Christ."  4.  To  love  the
appearing  of  the  Lord,  to  look  earnestly  for  his  coming.  6.  To  rejoice  in  the  hops  of
rising  in  the  glorious  resurrection-body.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

•    Ver.  1. — Spiritual  Joy.    "  Finally,  brethren,  rejoice  in  the  Lord,"    The  key-note  of
the  Epistle  still  recurs.

I.  The  nature  of  jot  in  the  Lord.  It  is  to  make  him  the  object  of  our  joy :
1.  For  what  he  is  in  himself,  the  God  of  love  and  light  and  blessing.  2.  For  what  he
is  to  us :  (1)  our  Preserver  (Ps.  xlvi.  1, 2) ;  (2)  our  Redeemer  (Heb.  iii.  18 ;  Ps.  xxvii.  1) ;
(3)  our  God  (Heb.  viii.  10).  The  world  rejoices  in  creation  and  sees  no  joy  in  God,  but
the  believer  finds  the  joy  of  the  Lord  to  be  his  strength  (Neh.  viii.  10).

II.  The  duty  of  kejoicino  in  the  Lord.  1.  It  is  a  commanded  duty.  2.  Christ
■prays  for  it.  (Johti  xvii.  13.)  3.  The  Holy  Spirit  works  it  in  us.  (John  xvi.  7 ;  Gal.  v.
22.)  4.  It  is  necessary  to  the  fulness  of  our  Christian  experience,  (1)  As  lessening
our  love  of  the  world  and  of  sinful  pleasures  (Ps;  iv.  7 ;  Ixxxiv.  10).  (2)  As  making
us  more  active  in  the  Lord's  .service  (Deut.  xxviii.  47 ;  Neh.  viii.  10).  (3)  As
supporting  us  under  the  weight  of  troubles  (1  Pet.  i.  7,  8).

in.  How  WB  ought  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord.  1.  We  ougJit  to  live  above  the  world.
(2  Cor.  iv.  18.)  2.  We  ought  to  avoid  everything  inconsistent  with  this  joy.  (1)  Gross
sina  (2  Cor.  i.  12).  (2)  Unbelieving  thoughts.  3.  We  ought  to  cherish  a  constant  trust
in  the  Lord.    (Heb.  xiii.  6 ;  Isa.  Iv.  7 ;  xlix.  13, 14.     See  hints  on  ch.  iv.  1.) — T,  C.

Vers.  2, 3. — Serious  ivarning  against  errorists.  The  apostle,  after  counselling  the  Phi-
lippians  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  somewhat  abruptly  recalls  the  case  of  errorists  of  the
Judaistic  type,  who,  though  not  at  Philippi,  were  not  far  from  its  boundaries.  He
deems  it  "  safe"  to  give  timely  warning:  "  Beware  of  the  dogs,  of  the  evil-workers,  ot
the  concision."

I.  The  characteristics  of  the  Judaist  errorists.  1.  TJiey  were  "  dogs  "  in  the  Jewish
sense,  that  is,  impure  and  cmtichristian  enemies  of  the  truth.  It  would  be  a  surprise
for  Jews  to  be  described  by  the  epithet  they  themselves  always  applied  so  scornfully  to
Gentiles.  2.  Ihey  were  "  evil-workers."  There  was  no  want  of  religious  activity  among
them,  but  it  had  a  selfish  and  evil  root.  The  apostle  elsewhere  speaks  of  "false
apostles,  deceitful  workers"  (2  Cor.  xi.  13).  The  Pharisees  "compassed  sea  and  land
to  make  one  proselyte"  (Matt,  xxiii.  15).  But  their  zeal  was  essentially  evil.  3.  They
were  "  the  concision  " — the  mutilation — who  rejoiced  in  a  mere  manual,  outward  muti-
lation of  the  flesh,  forgetful  of  the  significance  of  the  true  circumcision.

II.  Fundamental  distinction  between  such  errorists  and  the  true  circum-
cision. "  For  we  are  the  circumcision,  who  worship  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  glory
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh."  There  are  three  characteristic
points  involved  in  the  circumcision  of  heart  which  belongs  to  all  true  believers,  whether
Jews  or  Gentiles.  1.  Their  worship  is  essentially  spiritual.  They  "  worship  by  the
Spirit  of  God."  It  was  not  a  worship  by  mere  external  rites,  as  if  all  its  merit  consisted
in  rigid  ritualistic  conformities,  but  the  true  worship  of  God,  which  is  only  possible
through  the  influence  of  his  Holy  Spirit  (John  iv.  23 ;  Rom.  viii.  26),  who  "  helps  our
infirmities"  of  supplication.  It  is  the  characteristic  of  saints  that  they  "pray  in  the
Holy  Ghost"  (Jude  20).  2.  Their  entire  dependence  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  "  Who  glory
in  Christ  Jesus."  This  is  the  essential  distinction  of  the  Christian.  "  Let  him  that
glorieth  glory  in  the  Lord  "  (1  Cor.  i.  31).  He  does  not  glory  in  rites  or  ordinances,  but
in  a  personal  Redeemer,  who  saves  him  from  his  sjaa.  3.  They  have  no  confidence  in
mere  external  privileges.  "  And  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh."  The  primary  allusion
] lere  may  be  to  circumcision,  but  the  clause  points  to  the  merely  outward  and  earthly  la
religious  form.  The  Judaists  gloried  in  the  flesh,  "  Seeing  that  many  glory  irfter  the
fleah,  1  wiU  glory  alao  "  (8  Cor.  xi.  lb  j  GaL  li.  13, 14).— T.  Q.


OH.ni.  1—21.]        THE  EPISTLE  TO    THE  PHILIPPIANS.  123

Vers.  4 — 7. — The  apostle's  estimate  of  hh  high  privileges  as  a  Jew.  The  Judaists
arrogated  to  themselves  high  privileges  by  virtue  of  their  descent.  The  apostle  shows
that  they  can  claim  no  superiority  of  privilege  above  himself,  though  he  finds  in  these
very  privileges  a  quite  insufficient  ground  of  religions  confidence.

I.  He  repudiates  sacramental  efficacy.  "  Circumcised  the  eighth  day."  He
was  thus  distinguished  alike  irom  the  proselyte,  who  was  circumcised  on  his  conversion,
and  from  the  Ishmaelite,  who  was  circumcised  in  his  thirteenth  year.  He  was  a  pure  Jew.

II.  Hb  repudiates  the  kelioioub  import  of  an  honoured  parentage.  1.  "  0/
the  stock  of  Israel."  For  he  was  no  proselyte,  but  directly  descended  from  Israel.  2.
He  was  a  member  of  the  illustrious  "  tribe  of  Benjamin,"  which  gave  the  first  Isins;  to
Israel,  and  had  a  foremost  place  among  its  armies.  He  did  not,  therefore,  l^elong  to  any
mere  renegade  tribe.  3.  He  was  "  a  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews."  Not  only  oif  pure  blood,
but  untinged  by  Hellenistic  tendencies.

III.  He  repudiates  religious  authority.  "  As  touching  the  Law,  a  Pharisee ; "
a  member  of  the  strictest  and  most  authoritative  sect  of  the  Jews.

IV.  He  repudiates  intense  earnestness.  "As  touching  zeal,  persecuting  the
Church."

V.  He  repudiates  the  worth  of  ceremonial  blamelessnbss.  "  As  touching  the
righteousness  which  is  in  the  Law,  showing  myself  blameless ; "  that  is,  the  vi<;hteousness
of  formal  precept  as  contrasted  with  the  righteousness  which  is  by  faith  (ver.  9).  All
these  characteristics  and  prerogatives,  which  "  were  gains  to  me,"  because  I  set  them
down  to  my  credit  religiously,  my  conversion  changed  into  loss  "  for  Christ's  sake,"
because  their  repudiation  was  necessary  "  that  I  might  gain  Christ." — T.  C.

Ver.  8. — Tlie  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  "  I  count  all  things  to  be  loss  for
the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord."

i.  The  knowledge  of  Christ.  1.  It  implies  a  knowledge  of  the  way  of  salvation,
the  Word  of  Ood  being  our  guide.  (Eom.  x.  17.)  Eternal  life  hinges  upon  it.  "  This
13  life  eternal,  to  know  thee  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ,  whom  thou  hast
sent "  (John  xvii.  3).  It  is  by  this  knowledge  we  are  justified.  "  By  his  knowledge
shall  my  righteous  Servant  justify  many"  (Isa.  liii.  11).  2.  It  implies  an  experi-
mental acquaintance  with  him.  It  is  he  himself  who  gives  us  the  knowledge  of  himself.
"  He  halth  given  us  an  understanding  that  we  may  know  him  who  is  true  "  (1  John  v.
20).     We  thus  realize  Christ  in  pardoning  mercy,  in  subduing  grnce,  in  abiding  peace.

II.  The  excellency  of  this  knowledge.  This  may  be  set  forth  either  positively
by  the  nature  and  effects  of  the  knowledge  in  question,  or  by  contrasting  it  with  all
the  things  the  apostle  classes  among  "  loss."  1.  Positively.  (1)  The  experience  of  all
God's  people  attests  its  excellence.  (2)  The  Word  of  God  proclaims  its  excellence  (Jer.
ix.  24).  (3)  It  is  through  this  knowledge  we  become  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature
(2  Pet.  i.  3).  (4)  It  is  by  it  we  are  enabled  to  escape  the  corruptions  of  the  world
(2  Pet.  ii.  20).  2.  By  contrast  with  all  things  classed  as  loss.  "  I  count  all  things  to  be
loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord."  He  had  already
included  in  this  class  all  the  distinguishing  privileges  and  prerogatives  of  his  Jewish
descent,  as  well  as  three  points  in  his  personal  character  which,  as  a  Jew,  he  had  made
the  subject  of  boasting.  But  he  now  expands  the  language  so  as  to  include  all  things
whatsoever,  conceivable  or  inconceivable,  as  lying  under  the  category  of  loss.  Every-
thing was  valueless  under  the  sun  when  weighed  against  thejjnowledge  of  Christ.

III.  The  apostle's  consciousness  of  his  possessing  Christ.  "  Christ  Jesus  my
Lord."    This  is  the  happy  language  of  assurance.

IV.  His  present  and  abiding  sense  of  the  excellency  of  this  knowledge.  He
spoke  before  in  the  past  tense,  "  I  counted  these  things  loss  for  Christ."  He  now  gives
us  his  present  judgment  respecting  the  whole  momentous  concern,  "  I  do  count  them
but  loss  and  dung." — T.  C.

Vers.  8 — 11. — The  trite  ground  of  a  sinner's  hope.  The  apostle  then  sets  forth,  in
veiy  impressive  terms,  the  familiar  way  of  salvation :  "  That  I  rnay  gain  Christ,  and  be
found  in  him,  not  having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  Law,  but  that  which
is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  of  God  by  faith."    Consider —

t  Christ  the  peksbnt  Gain  and  thb  present  Shbltbr  oi  the  sihnkr.    Th*


124  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.        [oh.  m.  1—21.

subject  is  presented  under  two  aspects.  1.  Christ  the  present  Gain  of  the  sinner.
"  That  I  may  gain  Christ."  Consider :  (1)  The  person,  to  he  gained.  "  Christ."  The
Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  who  has  all  treasures  of  happiness  in  his  keeping,  who  is  the
supreme  object  of  angelic  worship  and  saintly  adoration.  It  is  the  Lord,  not  man,
even  the  highest  man  on  earth,  whose  favour  can  prosper  or  save  us.  (2)  Sow  is  Christ
to  be  gained f  (a)  Not  by  tears;  (6)  nor  by  confession  to  a  priest;  (c)  not  by  good
works;  (d)  nor  even  by  our  "suifering  the  loss  of  all  things."  We  gain  Christ  simply
in  the  act  of  our  believing ;  but,  in  accepting  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him  by  faith,
we  throw  overboard  all  our  righteousness  and  aU  our  unrighteousness,  just  as  the  ship-
wrecked sailor,  to  save  his  life  and  his  ship,  throws  his  precious  cargo  into  the  sea.  (3)
'f/ie  peculiar  characteristics  of  this  gain,  (a)  A  man  may  gain  much  in  this  life  and
yet  lose  it  again.  This  cannot  be  the  case  of  the  siimer  who  gains  Christ.  (5)  A  man
may  gain  much  and  be  disappointed  after  all.  The  world  is  full  of  such  disillusion-
ments.  But  the  sinner  who  gains  Christ  obtains  bliss  without  end.  (c)  If  a  sinner
does  not  gain  Christ  he  loses  his  immortal  soul.  Christ  is  the  one  star  of  hope  in  the
sky  of  Leaven.  2.  Christ  the  present  Shelter  of  the  sinner.  "  And  be  found  in  him,  not
having  mine  own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  Law,  but  that  which  is  through  the
faith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  of  God  by  faith."  (1)  The  apostle  repudiates  ail
dependence  on  his  own  personal  righteousness,  even  upon  tlutt  righteousness  which  is  of
the  Law,  touching  which  he  considered  himself  "blameless"  from  the  Pharisaic  stand-
point, (a)  It  is  in  keeping  with  his  doctrine  everywhere  (Rom.  iii.  20 ;  Gal.  ii.  16).
(b)  Human  experience  confirms  the  statement  of  the  prophet  that  "  all  our  righteous-
nesses are  as  filthy  rags  "  (Isa.  Ixiv.  6).  (c)  Salvation  is  everywhere  in  Scripture  repre-
sented, not  as  of  debt,  but  as  of  free  grace  (Itom.  iv.  4,  5).  (2)  Eis  entire  dependence
is  on  anotlher's  righteousness,  which  is  described  in  two  forms,  (a)  "  That  which  is
through  the  faith  of  Christ;"  that  is,  a  righteousness  which  becomes  ours  through  our
believing  in  Christ,  faith  being  in  this  case  merely  the  receptive  organ  or  instrumental
cause.  (5)  "  The  righteousness  of  God  by  faith ;"  that  is,  the  righteousness  which  God
provides  lor  man's  salvation  as  received  by  faith.  The  whole  phraseology  is  thoroughly
Pauline  (see  homiletioal  hints  on  Gal.  ii.  16).

II.  The  knowlbdob  of  Christ  as  connected  with  the  power  of  his  reshb-
BECTioN  AND  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  HIS  BUFFERINGS.  "  That  I  may  know  him,  and  the
power  of  his  resurrection,  and  the  fellowship  of  his  sufferings,  being  made  conformable
unto  his  death."  The  saving  knowledge  of  Christ  must  take  in  the  fact  of  his  resurrec-
tion as  well  as  the  fact  of  his  death,  because  his  resurrection  was  but  the  seal  and  crown
of  his  redeeming  sacrifice.  Therefore  the  believer's  aspiration  is  always  to  know  Christ  in
the  power  of  his  resurrection.  1.  "  The  power  of  his  resurrection."  (1)  There  is  a  polemic
aspect  of  this  power ;  for  he  is  declared  to  be  "  the  Son  of  God  with  power  by  the
resurrection  from  the  dead  "  (Rom.  i.  3,  4).  (2)  There  is  an  apologetic  aspect  of  it,  as
attesting  his  Divine  mission  (1  Cor.  xv.  15).  (3)  There  is  a  dogmatic  aspect  of  it,  as
indicating  the  acceptance  of  his  sacrifice,  and  as  it  is  the  pledge  of  our  justification
(Rom.  iv.  24,  25).  (4)  There  is  an  ethical  aspect  of  it,  presented  by  its  relation  to  our
pursuit  of  holiness,  (a)  It  is  the  resurrection-power  of  Christ  which  gives  the  new
life.  "  Because  I  live  ye  shall  live  also  "  (John  xiv.  19).  (6)  It  is  by  virtue  of  the
resurrection  that  the  Holy  Ghost  comes  to  abide  in  the  Church,  as  a  Spirit  of  truth,
grace,  and  consolation,  (c)  It  is  by  the  same  power  we  are  enabled  to  subdue  sin
(Bph.  L  19,  20 ;  Eom.  vi. ;  Gal.  ii.  20).  (d)  It  is  the  same  power  which  inspires  hope
(1  Pet.  i.  3 ;  1  Cor.  XT. ;  Col.  i.  5).  (5)  It  has  a  prophetic  aspect ;  for  it  is  the  pledge
of  our  future  resurrection  (Rom.  viii.  11 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  14 ;  2  Cor.  iv,  14).  2.  "  The  fellow-
whip  of  his  sufferings,  being  made  conformable  unto  his  death,"  We  are  to  share  in  the
Bufferings  he  suffered,  and  to  drink  of  the  cup  which  he  drank,  not  in  relation  merely
to  the  suffering  of  persecution,  but  all  suffering  that  arises  out  of  our  conflict  with  sin.
We  can  thus  understand  such  passages  as  2  Cor.  i.  5 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  13 ;  Eom.  vi.  5 ;  viii.
17 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  11, 12.

IIL  The  ultimate  object  contemplated  by  the  apostle.  "  If  by  any  means  I
might  attain  unto  the  resurrection  from  the  dead."  1.  What  he  desired  in  the  future.
(1)  Not  a  part  .in  the  general  resurrection.  (2)  Not  spiritual  resurrection,  for  that  was
already  past.  (3)  But  a  part  in  the  resurrection  of  the  just  (Luke  xx.  35 ;  Acts  iv.  2 ;
1  Fet.  i.  3).    It  is  the  resurrectiou  of  life.    2.  Why  he  desired  it.    (1)  It  would  bt  •


<m  in.  1—21.]        THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  126

final  escape  from  evil.  (2)  It  would  be  the  occasion  of  his  final  and  blessed  recognition
by  his  Saviour-Judge.  (3)  It  would  be  a  pledge  of  his  eternal  happiness  in  heaven.
8.  What  his  desire  implies.  (1)  A  high  appreciation  of  the  value  of  this  resurrection
from  the  dead.  (2)  A  sense  of  its  difficulty,  as  regarded  from  the  human  side.  (3)
The  persuasion  of  it  may  be  attained  in  various  degrees.  There  is  a  touch  of  hypo-
thetic humility  in  his  language.  (4)  A  disposition  to  submit  to  all  providential
arrangements  that  lead  to  it. — ^T.  0.

Vers.  12 — 14. — The  apostle's  confession  of  Ms  imperfection  and  his  method  of  Christian
progress.    There  is  a  touching  an^l  instructive  humility  in  the  language  of  these  verses.

I.  His  confession  of  imperfection.  "  Not  as  though  I  had  already  attained  or  have
been  made  perfect; "  and  again, "  I  count  not  my  sel  f  to  have  apprehended."  1.  This  language
argues  a  high  estimate  of  a  Christian's  duty.  There  is  no  inconsistency  in  the  conscious-
ness of  hidden  imperfection  and  the  thought  of  a  lofty  ideal.  We  must  ever  Iteop  Christ
himself  before  us  as  the  only  ideal  to  be  copied  and  followed  after  through  .life.  2.  If
argues  a  humble  estimate  of  himself.  It  is  a  remarkable  confession  from  such  a  man.
He  had  done  and  suffered  much  for  Christ,  yet  he  says,  "I  have  not  been  made  perfect."
Such  an  experience  ought  to  rebuke  the  lofty  pretensions  of  perfectionists  of  every
class.  3.  Tet  this  humble  estimate  of  himself,  as  well  as  his  aspiration  for  higher  holi-
ness, is  sure  evidence  that  he  had  made  some  progress.  A  writer  says,  "  That  which  is
best  in  you  is  your  appreciation  of  what  is  better  in  others."

II.  His  method  of  Cheistian  pbogrbss.  This  is  expressed  in  two  separate  and
significant  sentences.  1.  "  I  follow  after,  if  that  I  may  apprehend  that  for  which  I  also
was  apprehended  by  Christ  Jesus."  (1)  This  language  evidently  points  to  the  scene
on  the  road  to  Damascus,  when  the  Lord  "  apprehended  "  him  and  changed  the  whole
bent  of  his  life.  Conversion  is,  indeed,  an  apprehension,  a  laying  hold  upon  a  heart
under  the  sway  of  worldliness  and  sin,  and  bringing  it  under  the  sway  of  all-conqnering
grace.  Nothing  but  the  ariesting  hand  of  the  Lord  can  stop  any  of  us  on  our  down-
ward course,  or  break  the  dominion  of  the  world  over  us,  or  destroy  the  power  of  sin  in
the  heart.  (2)  This  language  implies  that  the  loving  hand  of  the  Saviour  is  never
lilted  off  any  heart  thus  arrested  till  all  that  is  implied  in  the  gracious  contact  has  been
accomplished.  There  are  two  apprehensions.  The  believer  has  only,  in  the  one  case,
to  receive  the  gift  of  God,  but,  in  the  other  case,  the  salvation  which  has  become  ours
through  that  act  is  to  be  wrought  out  in  a  continuous,  faithful  reception  of  all  that  is
involved  in  it.  2.  "  This  one  thing  I  do,  forgetting  the  things  that  are  past,  and
reaching  forth  to  the  things  that  are  before,  I  press  towards  the  mark  for  the  prize  of
the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus." ,  (1)  There  is  here  the  oblivion  of  the  past,  not
that  we  are  to  forget  past  errors  or  sins,  or  are  not  to  repent  of  past  mistakes  which  must
always  be  subject  of  penitential  thought,  but  we  are  not  to  allow  a  rueful  temper  to  kill

.  out  heart  and  hope.  We  are  to  regard  the  past  as  so  much  really  gained  or  accomplished
that  is  to  exercise  no  dragging  or  injurious  eflect  upon  our  forward  progress.  (2)
There  is  here  the  concentration  of  all  energies.  "  This  one  thing  I  do."  A  dispersion  of
energies  is  fatal  to  success  in  any  work.  The  great  heroes  of  the  Church  and  of  the
world  have  been  men  of  one  idea,  and  concentrated  all  thought  and  effort  in  carrying  it
out.  So  the  apostle  had  but  one  idea  always  before  him,  and  made  everything  in
providence  and  nature  and  grace  contributory  to  the  great  work  of  his  Christian  sancti-
fication.  (3)  Untiring  activity.  "  I  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize  of  the  high
calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus."  (o)  The  mark  is  perfect  holiness.  (5)  The  prize  is
perfect  blessedness,  (c)  All  his  activity  in  this  Divine  race  is  sustained  by  the  thought
that  he  stands  in  the  "  high  calling  "  of  God  and  is  supported  by  the  grace  of  Chri.-t
JesuSj  It  is  a  high  calling,  high  as  heaven,  and  seemingly  inaccessible  to  men  of  such
passions  and  infirmities  as  ours,  but  then  it  is  the  high  calling  of  God  in  Christ
Jesus.     This  is  our  hope  and  our  consolation. — T.  0.

Vers.  15, 16. — Practical  exhortation  to  unity  in  religious  life.  The  apostle  gatheri
np  the  conclusion  to  bo  drawn  from  the  preceding  verses.  "Therefore  let  us,  as  many
>s  be  perfect,  mind  the  same  thing."

I,    CONSIDEB   THE  BUTT  OF  BRLIBVBE8  TO  WALK   IN  THK   FULNESS  OF  PRESENT  TBUTH.

The  saints,  who  are  here  described  as  perfect,  including  that  very  apostle  who  had  just


126  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.    '    [ch.  m.  1— 2L

Baid  he  was  not  perfect,  are  to  be  regarded  as  perfect  in  the  sense  of  adultness  of  under-
standing. They  were  not  "  babes  in  Christ ; "  they  had  put  away  childish  things ;  they
had  assumed  the  apostle's  position  concerning  the  Law.  But  on  this  very  ground  they
were  to  stand  strongly  consistent  in  all  moral  and  spiritual  development.  They  were
to  be  like  the  apostle,  forgetting  the  past  and  pressing  onward  to  the  mark  for  the
heavenly  prize.

IL  Believers  mat  not  see  eye  to  bye,  but  are  encouraged  to  look  to  the
Lord  for  fuller  knowledge.  "  And  if  in  anything  ye  be  otherwise  minded,  God
will  reveal  even  this  to  you."  The  principle  is  ever  true.  "  If  any  man  will  do  his
will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be  of  God."  If  a  believer  is  rooted  in
the  faith  of  Christ,  the  Lord  will  help  him  to  see  the  truth  respecting  minor  matters.

III.   So  FAR   AS   BELIEVERS  AGREE,   THEY  OUGHT   TO   SUOW  A  VISIBLE   CONFORMITY  OF

LIFE  AND  OPINION.  "  But  let  US  Walk  according  to  that  we  have  attained."  Thus  (1)
God  is  glorifled ;  (2)  believers  are  maintained  in  a  peaceful  fellowship ;  (3)  the  world
is  impressed  and  won  by  the  exhibition  of  Christian  unity. — T.  0.

Ver.  17. — The  imitation  of  good  mem.  "Brethren,  be  ye  imitators  together  of  me,
and  mark  them  who  walk  so  as  ye  have  us  for  an  ensample."

I.  The  DUTY  OF  following  good  examples.  1.  We  -are  commanded  to  do  so.
(1  Cor.  xi.  1.)  2.  TTie  lives  of  many  saints  are  expressly  recorded  for  our  imitation.
(Jas.  V.  10,  11, 17 ;  Phil.  iv.  9.)  3.  The  imitntion  is  limited  by  several  circumstances.
(1)  By  the  example  of  Christ:  "Be  ye  followers  of  me,  even  as  I  also  am  of  Christ"
(1  Cor.  xi.  1).  (2)  We  are  not  to  imitate  such  actions  of  good  men  as  are  to  be
condemned,  nor  even  all  such  as  are  not  condemned  (Gen.  xix.  8 ;  xlii.  15,  16 ;  xxvii.
25 — 27).  (3)  The  Word  of  God  is  to  decide  the  rightness  or  the  wrongness  of  the
actions  of  good  men.

II.  The  USES  of  such  imitation.  1.  It  stimulates  to  higher  and  letter  living.
We  are  therefore  to  imitate  good  men  in  the  graces  for  which  they  are  most  distin-
guished (Numb.  xii.  3 ;  1  Sam.  iii.  18;  Job  i.  21 ;  Acts  v.  41).  2.  It  is  afresh  reconv
mendation  of  the  gospd.  (Matt.  v.  16.)  3.  It  gives  greater  glory  to  God.  (Bom.
vii.  4.)— T.  C.

Vera.  18, 19. — The  walk  of  mere  worldly  professors.  "  For  many  walk,  of  whom  I  told
you  often,  and  now  tell  you  even  weeping,  that  they  are  the  enemies  of  the  cross  ot
Christ."  The  allusion  is  not  to  errorists  merely,  but  to  the  antinomian  formalists  in
the  visible  communion  of  the  Church.

I.  Many  persons  are  found  in  the  communion  op  the  Church  who  are  the
enemies  OF  THE  CROSS  OF  Christ.  They  were  there  even  in  apostolic  days,  in  spite
of  gifts  of  discernment  and  the  power  of  discipline.  It  is  an  altogether  chimerical
idea  to  think  of  a  perfectly  pure  Church.  There  was  no  such  Cburch  in  the  days  of"
Christ  or  the  apostles.  The  persons  here  described  appear  to  be  of  the  same  class
as  those  referred  to  elsewhere  as  "  they  who  serve  not  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but
their  own  belly"  (Bom.  xvi.  18);  persons  who  caused  " divisions  and  offences,"  whose
life  was  a  practical  denial  of  the  principle  that  they  who  are  Christ's  "  have  crucified
the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts  "  (Gtal.  v.  24).

II.  Moral  characteristics  of  these  formalists  and  the  doom  that  awaits
THEM.  1,  The  real  object  of  their  worship.  "  Whose  god  is  their  belly."  Like  those
referred  to  at  Eome,  they  "  served  not  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but  their  own  belly  "
(Rom.  xvi.  18).  They  were  sensual  and  self-indulgent,  forgetting  that  "  the  kingdom
of  God  is  not  eating  and  drinking  "  (Rom.  xiv.  17).  2.  The  gross  perversion  of  their
moral  judgments.  "  Whose  glory  is  in  their  shame."  They  gloried,  under  the  name
of  liberty,  in  what  ought  to  have  inspired  feelings  of  shame,  so  as  to  bring  upon  them
the  retribution,  "  I  will  turn  their  glory  into  shame  "  (Hos.  iv.  7).  3.  The  earthly  cast
of  their  Ife.  *'  Who  mind  earthly  things."  (1)  The  apostle  does  not  encourage  the
neglect  of  earthly  things,  much  less  cast  any  discredit  on  those  natural  feelings  which
liuk  us  to  the  realities  of  earthly  life.  (2)  But  he  censures  the  living  for  this  present
visible  world  to  the  neglect  of  the  invisible  kingdom  by  which  we  are  surrounded.  The
earthly  things  may  be  pleasures,  riches,  honours,  power,  place.  "  Seekest  thou  great
things  for  thyself  ?  seek  them  not "  (Jer.  xlv.  6).    To  mind  them  is  (a)  to  deiire  them


OH.  ni.  1—21.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  127

(Col.  iii.  2 ;  Pa.  Ixxiii.  25) ;  (6)  to  admire  them  (Luke  xii.  5,  6) ;  (c)  to  labour  after
them  (John  vi.  27 ;  Matt.  vi.  33) ;  (d)  to  concentrate  thought  and  interest  upon  them.
(3)  Reasons  for  not  minding  earthly  things,  (o)  Tliey  are  beneath  the  consideraiion
of  Christians;  (6)  we  have  hi;jher  things  to  mind  (Pliil.  iii.  20);  (c)  the  minding  of
heaven  and  earth  is  an  inconsistent  service  (Matt.  vi.  24)  ;  (d)  earthly  thinj<s  are  essen-
tially uncertain,  unsatisfying,  inconstant,  and  momentary  (Eccles.  i.  8 ;  Prov.  xxiii.  5 ;
Luke  xii.  20).  4.  The  doom  of  these  formalists.  "  Wliose  end  is  destruotiuD."  Not-
withstanding their  high  professions  and  their  ecclesiastical  privileges,  their  end  is
eternal  death.  There  is  but  one  end  of  such  a  life :  "  The  end  of  those  things  is  death  "
(Eom.  vi.  21);  "Whose  end  is  to  be  burned"  (Heb.  vi.  8);  "Whose  end  shall  be
according  to  their  works  "  (2  Cor.  xi.  15).

III.  The  emotion  op  the  apostle  at  the  contemplation  op  such  a  class  of
SINNERS.  "  I  tell  you  even  weeping."  He  wept  at  their  wickedness  as  much  as  at  the
thought  of  their  deserved  doom.

IV.  The   necessity  op  EEPEATBD   WABNINOg  AGAINST   EVIL   IN  THE   ChuROH.     "Of

whom  I  told  you  often,  and  now  tell  you  even  weeping."  It  was  needful  that  the
apostle  should  lift  the  voice  of  warning  against  a  tendency  as  fatal  in  its  ultimate  results
as  the  deadliest  heresy. — T.  0.

Vers.  20,  21. — The  heavenly  citizenship  and  its  blessed  expectations.  The  apostle
seems  to  say  that  these  souls,  with  their  earthly  instincts,  can  have  no  fellowship  with
us;  for  we  are  citizens  of  a  heavenly  state.  "For  our  citizenship  is  even  now  in
heaven."

L  The  heavenly  citizenship.  1.  Consider  its  source.  It  comes,  not  by  birth  or
manumission,  but  by  the  ransom-price  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  in  Christ  we  become
"fellow-citizens  of  the  saints  and  of  the  household  of  God"  (Eph.  ii.  19).  2.  Consider
the  duties  this  citizenship  involves.  We  are  to  obey  its  laws  and  watch  over  the  interests
of  Christ's  kingdom.  3.  Consider  its  privilege*.  We  receive  protection,  guidance,  and
comfort.

II.  Its  blessed  expectations.  "  Prom  whence  also  we  wait  for  a  Saviour,  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ."  1.  Believers  are  always  looking  for  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord
to  Judgment.  (Titus  H.  13 ;  Acts  xxiv.  15 ;  xxvi.  6,  7 ;  1  Thess.  i.  10.)  It  is  the
"blessed  hope  "of  the  saints  (Titus  ii.  13).  2.  There  is  the  expectation  of  a  trans-
figuration of  our  hodies  hy  Christ's  power.  "  Who  shall  fashion  anew  our  vile  body,  that
It  may  be  conformed  to  his  glorious  body,  according  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able
even  to  subdue  all  things  to  himself."  This  allusion  to  the  glorious  destiny  of  our  bodies
may  have  been  due  to  the  thought  of  the  sensuality  of  the  formaUsts  just  condemned.
(1)  Consider  the  vileness  of  our  bodies.  Though  fearfully  and  wonderluUy  made,  and
though  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  case  of  all  saints,  our  bodies  are  vile  (a)  as  to  the
materials  of  which  they  are  composed — we  are  mere  dust  and  ashes;  (J)  as  to  the
diseases  and  infirmities  that  often  darken  the  soul's  life ;  (c)  as  to  sinful  desiies  which
find  their  principal  seat  or  instigation  in  the  body.  (2)  Consider  the  transformation
of  our  bodies.  They  are  to  be  fashioned  according  to  the  likeness  of  Christ's  glorious
body.  The  change  will  be  (a)  necessary,  that  the  body  may  be  a  fitting  dwelling-place
for  the  glorified  soul;  (6)  amazing,  for  we  cannot  imagine  its  nature  or  extent;
(o)  Divine,  for  it  is  to  be  conformed  to  Christ's  glorious  body.  (3)  Consider  the  power
which  effects  the  change.  "  According  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able  even  to  sub-
due all  things  to  himself."  (o)  It  is  not  according  to  his  power  merely,  but  by  its
exercise,  that  the  translbrmation  will  come,  (i)  He  who  is  able  to  subdue  all  things,
even  death  itself  (1  Cor.  xv.  26),  will  subdue  our  bodies  into  their  finally  glorified
condition. — T.  C.

Vers.  1 — S.—I^ritual  Judaism.  Having  called  upon  the  Philippians  for  public
spirit,  he  now  speaks,  as  if  about  to  close  the  Epistle,  about  joy  in  the  Lord.  Inasmuch,
however,  as  the  Judaizers  were  abroad,  he  deems  it  best  to  insert  a  parenthesis,  which
the  world  could  ill  spare,  about  the  true  people  of  God  and  the  progress  towards  the
"  citizenship  "  of  heaven.  This  third  chapter  is  a  magnificent  parenthesis,  in  which  the
spiritual  life  is  laid  bare  from  its  inception  to  its  glorious  close.  lu  tha  verses  now
before  ua  we  have  false  and  true  Judaism  contrasted.


128  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.        [ch.  m.  1—21.

L  Consider  the  Jews  falsely  bo  called.  (Ver.  2.)  The  custom  of  the  Jews,
In  their  pride,  was  to  regard  themselves  as  children  at  God's  tahle  and  all  others  as  only
"  dogs "  helow  it  (Matt.  xv.  26).  Paul  reverses  the  figure,  and  has  no  hesitation  in
saying  that  the  ritualists  of  his  day,  that  is,  the  Jews  who  were  preaching  salvation  by
ceremonies,  were  only  the  "dogs"  below  the  table,  while  believers  in  Jesus  were  the
children  at  the  feast.  Moreover,  as  the  dogs  in  the  East  are  often  captious  scavengers,
the  Jews  he  here  calls  dogs  were  to  be  avoided  by  the  Philippian  converts  just  as  one
would  avoid  dangerous  dogs.  That  he  is  not  too  severe  in  this  judgment  he  shows  by
asserting  that  they  have  been  "  evil-workers."  What  had  the  history  of  the  Judaizers
been  but  that  of  "  marplots  "  ?  They  had  done  evil  instead  of  good  all  through  the
infant  Churches,  turning  the  young  converts  away  from  the  simplicity  that  was  in
Christ.  Not  only  so,  but  the  circumcision  which  they  practised  and  sought  to  enforce
was  only  "  concision  "  (/caToTo/i»f ),  i.e.  mere  mutilation.  For  once  a  man  assigns  a  false
value  to  a  bloody  rite  like  circumcision,  and  fancies  he  can  contribute  to  his  salvation
by  subjecting  himself  to  the  knife,  he  is  merely  mutilating  the  body  and  not  benefiting
the  soul.  These  are  not  "the  people  of  God,"  therefore,  they  are  "Jews"  only  in
name,  who  go  about  substituting  ceremony-keeiang  for  the  faith  as  it  is  in  Christ.

II.  CoNSiDEB  WHO  ABE  THE  TRUE  Jews.  (Ver.  3.)  Paul  states  very  succinctly  the
characteristics  of  the  true  people  of  God.  Those  are  truly  circumcised  (nepiro/i^)  who
have  been  so  circumcised  in  heart  as  to  worship  God  in  the  spirit,  rejoice  in  Christ
Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh.  Let  us  take  these  up  in  the  reverse  order.
1.  The  true  people  of  God  have  given  up  confidence  in  (he  flesh.  They  have  seen  that
no  incision  in  the  flesh  can  render  them  acceptable  to  the  Supreme ;  that  no  physical
breeding  can  secure  a  prize  in  the  great  day  of  judgment;  that  nothing  that  they  are
or  can  be  or  do  can  win  acceptance  before  God.  Self  has  ceased  to  be  the  ground
of  confldence.  2.  The  true  people  of  God  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus — rejoice  in  him  as
their  Lord.  (Vers.  1,  3.)  Self  hiving  ceased  to  be  a  ground  of  confidence  or  source
of  joy,  Jesus  has  became  the  true  Source.  Pardon  and  acceptance  are  seen  to  be
secured  in  him,  and  in  his  fellowship  there  is  an  unfailing  fountain  of  delights.  Out
of  the  invisible  comes  a  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  We  rejoice  in  him  as  all
our  Salvation  and  all  our  Desire.  3.  The  true  people  of  God  worship  the  Father  in
Spirit.  This  differentiates  them  from  the  formalists,  whose  delight  and  hope  are  in
ceremonies.  The  Father,  as  an  infinite  spirit,  can,  we  come  to  see,  be  approached
acceptably  only  by  our  spirits.  The  bodily  genuflexions,  which  go  to  make  up  the
foinialities,  cannot  be  accounted  worship.  Unless  the  spirit  moves  reverentially  within,
all  the  formality  is  vain.  The  spirit,  moreover,  as  we  have  just  seen,  realizes  that  it
cannot  be  accepted  by  the  Supreme  on  account  of  any  supposed  personal  merit,  but
solely  on  account  of  the  merit  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  worship  which  pleases  the
Father  is  the  joyful  worship  which  has  its  source  in  his  Son.  The  outcome  of  felt
obligation  unto  Jesus,  it  becomes  fragrant  in  the  nostrils  of  the  Most  High.  Thus  the
spiritual  Jews  are  made  manifest.  They  gather  spiritually  minded  around  the  feet
of  the  great  Father  and  adore  him. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  4 — 7. — Pride  of  Jnrth  and  breeding.  Having  touched  on  the  subject  of  self-
confidence,  Paul  can  quote  his  own  experience  on  the  poiat.  For  many  years  he
thought  he  might  plume  himself  even  more  than  other  men  on  his  pedigree  and  his
personal  power.  He  had  lived  in  the  haze  of  self-satisfaction,  and  could  quote  a
genealogy  and  personal  record  second  to  none.  It  becomes  amusing  in  a  Pharisee  of
the  first  century,  and  yet  we  have  people  who  are  just  as  ridiculous  in  their  pride
of  birth  and  of  breeding  in  the  nineteenth  century.  It  is  surely  worth  a  moment's
analysis.

I.    No   MATTER   HOW   WELL  BOBN  OB   BBED   A   MAN   MAY   BE,  IT  CONSTITUTES   NOT  HIS

MERIT,  BUT  HIS  OBLIGATION.  Paul  was  a  thorough-bred  Jew,  and  fancied  this  fact
should  save  him.  But  whatever  good  we  receive  through  inheritance  is  not  our  merit ;
it  simply  increases  our  obligation.  It  is  a  confusion  of  thought,  therefore,  to  suppose
that  the  Supreme  will  save  any  man  because  of  the  accident  of  his  birth  or  his  breed-
ing. We  shall  be  called  to  account  for  these  advantages,  and  they  should  minister  to
humility  and  fear  rather  than  to  pride.
XL  Exertions  to  secubb  a  beputation,  instead  of  to  olobift  God,  enobeabi


OH.  m.  1—21.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  129

ODB  BEIiFISHNESS    INSTEAD  Or  EBTABLISHINa  ANT  OIiAIU  TO  SALVATION.       Paol's  Mtl

was  undoubted  in  persecuting  the  Christians.  He  was  the  first  persecutor  of  his  time ;
so  that,  in  addition  to  his  pride  of  birth  and  breeding,  he  could  plume  himself  upon  a
religious  reputation  without  a  parallel  among  his  people.  He  thou^^ht  that  no  one  had
■uch  a  claim  upon  the  tribal  God,  the  God  of  the  Jews,  as  he.  K  8eIf-righteou!>nens
could  be  established  by  mortal  man,  Paul  believed  he  had  accomplished  it.  He  forgot
(hat  the  establishment  of  reputations  is  a  selfish  motive  at  the  best,  and  can  have
nothing  but  condemnation  from  a  holy  God.  In  analyzing  our  motives,  consequently,
we  must  be  most  careful.  Unless  we  are  on  our  guard,  we  shall  find  ourselves  living
the  selSsh  life,  manufacturing  reputations  rather  than  strictly  regarding  usefulness  and
God's  glory.

III.  Both  oub  fedigrke  and  ottb  zkal  abb  losses  to  us  if  tbet  detain  us
FROM  Christ.  Paul  had  spent  long  years  in  thinking  how  well-bred  and  reputable
a  Jew  he  was.  Occupied  with  self,  he  had  never  turned  his  eyes  to  the  radiant  Christ,
who  alone  is  worthy  of  such  constant  contemplation.  His  fancied  merits  had  thug
kept  him  for  years  from  the  profitable  study  of  the  person  and  character  of  Christ.  As
soon  as,  on  the  way  to  Damascus,  he  became  acquainted  with  Christ,  the  loss  of  the  self-
righteous  years  pressed  itself  painfully  upon  him.  He  wondered  that  he  had  so  long
neglected  such  a  Saviour.  He  saw  in  him  a  subject  worthy  of  eternal  study,  and  he
regretted  that  he  had  been  so  tardy  in  entering  upon  it.  We  are  surely  taught  hew
that  anything  which  shuts  out  Christ  from  us,  it  matters  not  what  it  may  be,  is  a
distinct  loss  to  us.  He  is  the  only  object  worth  absorbing  our  attention.  When
other  objects — self  in  any  of  its  forms — eclipse  him,  we  are  losers  and  not  gainers  by
the  distraction.  Things  good  in  themselves  even,  such  as  birth  and  breeding  and
activity,  prove  serious  losses  to  us  if  they  withdraw  our  souls  from  the  contemplation
of  the  Saviour. — R.  M.  B.

Vers.  8 — 11. — The  enthusiait.  Paul  now  exhibits  himself  to  ns  in  the  light  of  an
enthusiast  in  whose  eyes  the  excellent  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  is  all  and  in  all.  He
regrets  that  so  many  fruitless  years  were  spent  away  from  Christ,  and  now  he  shows
us  all  he  hopes  from  him.  He  has  surrendered  everything  for  the  sake  of  his  Lord
•nd  Master.  He  has  put  away  the  thought  of  what  he  might  have  been  had  he
remained  a  Jewish  partisan.  There  was  nothing  beyond  the  ambition  of  Saul  the
persecutor  had  he  remained  true  to  the  Jewish  tradition.  But  he  had  cheerfully
sacrificed  every  worldly  prospect,  he  had  cheerfully  accepted  a  life  of  privation  and
contempt,  he  had  learned  to  count  such  worldly  udvantages  as  but  "  the  refuse  of  the
table"  when  compared  with  the  excellent  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  such
enthusiasm  that  makes  men  of  us  1    Let  us  now  look  at  the  gain  got  from  Christ.

I.  Acceptance  in  his  righteousness.  (Ver.  9.)  We  have  seen  how  self-righte(nu«
ness  died  within  Paul.  The  sight  of  Christ  on  the  way  to  Damascus  cured  him  of  all
his  self-satisfaction.  Henceforth  his  religious  reputation  seemed  but  "filthy  rags,"
utterly  insufficient  to  clothe  his  spirit  before  the  all-searching  King,  But  instead  of
self-righteousness,  he  found  provided  by  Christ  a  perfect  righteousness,  whose  protection
before  God  he  could  rejoice  in.  The  idea  of  merit  being  transferred  and  imputed,
though'  ridiculed  by  some  superficial  tl  linkers,  is  an  everyday  experience  in  life.  The
whole  department  of  personal  influence  for  the  benefit  of  another  is  an  illustration  of  it.
We  all  benefit  by  the  character  and  influence  of  others.  We  are  glorified  by  their
merits.  The  person  from  whom  we  want  the  favour  knows  the  value  and  honour
of  our  friend,  and  he  considers  us  favourably  because  of  him.  In  the  very  same  way,
then,  God  the  Father  regards  sinners  with  favour  because  of  the  merit  and  righteous-
ness of  his  Son,  in  whom  poor  sinners  are  asked  to  trust.  Christ's  glory  is  sufBcient
to  encircle  with  radiance  all  the  world.  '

II,  Acquaintanceship.  (Ver.  10.)  The  difference  between  "  knowing  a  person "
and  "  knowing  about  a  person  "  must  never  be  forgotten.  We  may  know  a  great  deal
about  a  person  whose  acquaintanceship  we  never  acquire.  We  may  in  the  same  way
know  a  great  deal  about  Christ;  we  may  be  erudite  theologians;  and  yet  if  we  die
not  "  know  him  "  as  our  incomparable  acquaintance,  our  Saviour,  our  best  Friend,  all
wiU  be  vain,  Paul  got  acquainted  with  Christ  on  the  way  to  Damascus,  and  that
acquaintanceship  he  cultivated  ever  after  by  prayer,  meditation,  co-opeiation  in  Christ's

rHILIPFIANS.  K


130  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.         Lch.  m.  1— 25.

work,  and  every  means  in  his  power.  It  is  tlie  essence  of  religion  and  of  eternal  life.
"  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  [i.e.  to  be  acquainted  with]  thee,  the  only  true  God,  and
Jesus  Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent"  (John  xvii.  3).  Let  no  man  be  content  with
anythino;  short  of  this  acquaintancesliip  with  Jesus.

III.  The  powee  of  his  kbsubrection.  (Ver.  10.)  This  is  a  present  experience.
Our  hearts  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  as  Christ's  body  lay  dead  in  Joseph's  tomb.
But  the  Spirit  who  quickened  his  dead  body  by  a  similar  act  quickens  our  dead  souls,
so  that  we  experience  in  our  spirits  the  power  of  our  Lord's  resurrection.  Paul  had
passed  through  this  experience.  He  had  entered  into  "  newness  of  life."  He  had  risen
out  of  the  corruption  of  sin  and  spiritual  death  into  the  power  of  a  new  and  spiritual
life.  The  thrill  of  resurrection  is  first  felt  in  this  life.  The  dead  soul  hears  the  voice
of  the  Son  of  God  and  starts  into  new  life  (John  v.  25).  Well  may  we  say  of  this  resur-
rection, "  Blessed  and  holy  is  he  that  hath  part  in  this  first  resurrection ;  on  such  the
second  death  can  have  no  power."

IV.  Fellowship  in  stjffeeino.  (Ver  10.)  It  seems  strange  that  Paul  should
reckon  pain  among  the  advantages  obtained  from  Christ.  But  we  must  remember  that
as  Christ's  sufferings  were  vicarious,  so  the  sufferings  he  sends  upon  his  servants  are  so
far  vicarious  also  as  to  be  for  the  good  of  others.  Of  course,  in  atonement  we  can  have
no  fellowship  with  Christ.  He  was  alone  therein.  But  outside  the  atoning  quality
of  Christ's  suffering  there  is  an  element  in  which  we  can  all  share.  Paul  had  serious
suffering,  but  as  he  felt  it  was  to  make  him  a  better  workman,  and  so  for  the  good
of  others,  he  was  content  to  share  it  with  his  Lord.  And  here  we  must  observe  that
sympathy  is  the  closest  fellowship  between  souls.  What  is  sympathy?  It  ia  fellowship
in  suffering  It  is  in  distress,  in  fiery  trial,  that  hearts  come  nearest  to  one  another.
The  Hebrew  children  never  knew  such  fellowship  in  Babylon  before  as  the  Son  of  God
gave  them  in  the  fiery  furnace.  It  is  here  that  the  reason  of  our  fiery  trials  lies.  They
are  to  bring  us  nearer  the  heart  of  Jesus.  His  sympathy  is  cheaply  purchased  by  any
pain.  Paul's  suffering  life  lay  closer  than  other  lives  to  the  heart  of  Christ.  How  this
should  reconcile  believers  to  trial !  We  may  well "  count  it  all  joy  when  V)  SiU  into
divers  temptations"  (Jas.  i.  2).

V.  CoNFOEMiTT  TO  Cheist's  DEATH.  (Ver.  10.)  To  be  reconciled  to  death  is  a  great
experience.  It  was  this  which  Jesus  experienced  on  the  cross.  The  amazement  of
Gethsemane  and  its  sinless  shrinking  from  the  experience  of  death  gave  place  to
radiant  welcome  as  the  last  hour  came.  "  Father,  into  thine  hands  I  commend  my
spirit,"  was  the  utterance  of  a  Son  I'uUy  satisfied  with  the  Father's  will  in  the  matter
of  his  death.  Now,  this  brave  spirit  is  within  our  reach.  We,  too,  may  look  without
blanching  into  the  eye  of  the  king  of  terrors.  The  sufferings  and  discipline  of  life  are
meant  to  bring  us  to  this  sweet  conformity.

VI.  Eesdekection  of  the  dead.  (Ver.  11.)  This  is  the  crowning  experience
which  Jesus  is  to  give  to  Paul  and  all  the  faithful  departed.  The  attainment  of  the
resurrection  is  the  climax  of  a  spiritual  process.  We  have  risen  spiritually  mto  new-
ness of  life  ;  we  have  been  advancing  steadily  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ's  loind  ind
heart,  and  largely  through  life's  trials;  and  physical  resurrection  will  be  the  top-stone
of  the  great  experience.  The  notion  is  broached  that  resurrection  is  an  immediate
experience  at  death,  so  that  we  practically  bid  our  bodies  good-bye  for  evermore  when
we  depart.  This  doctrine  of  Hymeneus  and  Philetus,  however,  will  not  stand  investi-
gation. We  must  believe  in  a  bodily  resurrection  at  the  last  day.  Then  shall  our
full  spiritual  experience  be  reached  and  Christ's  last  great  gift  be  ours. — B.  M.  £.

Vers.  12 — 16. — The  river  of  forget/ulness.  Paul  has  sketched  in  the  preceding
verses  what  we  may  call  his  spiritual  programme.  Much  of  the  attainment  lies  before
him  still,  so  much,  in  fact,  that  he  lives  in  the  future  instead  of  in  the  past.  His  life
is  a  race  towards  a  goal.  Now,  just  as  in  a  race  the  runner  forgets  the  ground  gone
over  in  his  occupation  with  the  remainder  and  the  goal,  so,  in  the  spiritual  life,  there
is  a  forgetfulness  essential  to  progress.  There  is  a  river  of  Lethe  in  the  city  of  God,
which  the  prize-winners  must  drink  if  they  are  to  run  as  giants  refreshed.  Let  ua
•t«dy  for  a  moment  or  two  this  river  of  forgetfulness.

I.  The  mbmoby  or  past  siks  ahd  failuebs  mat  only  bepboduoe  them.  (Vers.
12,  13.)    Memory  Is  a  precious  gift ;  without  it  progress  would  be  impossible.     It  ia


OH.  m.  1—21.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  181

memory  which  enables  m  to  carry  on  the  adyantageB  of  past  ages  to  the  coming  time.
But  the  misery  is  that  we  burden  memory  with  thoughts  and  feelings  which  cannot
help,  but  hinder  our  future  development.  It  is  these  thoughts  and  feelings  which  we
must  learn  to  forget.  We  content  ourselves  with  mentioning  here  two.  1.  Bins.
Brooding  over  sin  is  a  very  unhealthy  process.  It  is  tiot  the  self-examination  God
recommends.  It  only  reproduces  and  increases  sin.  Repentance  is  a  grace  which
sorrows  over  sins  as  offences  against  God  which  must  not  be  repeated.  We  must  not
allow  repentance,  therefore,  to  be  turned  into  repining.  But  can  we  safely  forget  past
(ins  ?  Yes ;  if  we  come  to  the  blood  of  Jesus  and  get  washed  therein,  we  may  with
safety  forget  our  past  sins,  so  far  as  the  remembrance  of  them  would  detain  us  from
a  better  record  in  time  to  come.  2.  Failures.  These,  too,  may  be  remembered  so  as
to  quench.all  hope  of  improvement.  We  may  regulate  our  hope  by  the  probabilities  of
the  past,  like  calculations  based  upon  statistics.  But  there  is  one  factor  in  the  spiritual
life,  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  can  put  all  past  experience  to  shame  and  silence.  Hence
we  are  encouraged  not  to  regulate  our  hope  by  the  failures  of  the  past,  but  by  Lethean
grace  to  face  the  future  as  if  we  had  a  successful  record  behind  us.  To  translate  a
paragraph  from  a  modern  French  author :  "  Feeble  natures  live  in  griefs  instead  of
changing  them  into  the  apophthegms  of  experience.  They  saturate  themselves  with
them  and  use  them  to  retrace  their  steps  daily  into  past  misfortune*.  To  forget  is  the
grand  secret  of  strong  and  creative  natures — to  forget  as  Nature  does,  who  never  regards
herself  as  ^asse,  but  recommences  every  hour  the  mysteries  of  her  indefatigable  births
^en/antements)."

II.  The  memory  of  past   BUCOESSEg   and  attainments  may  detain  us  rBOM  MORE

SPLENDID  TRIUMPHS.  (Vers.  12 — 14.)  The  temptation  is  to  make  the  past, the  standard
and  so  to  cut  down  the  possibilities  of  the  present  and  the  future.  But,  as  it  has  been
well  said,  "  It  would  be  better  to  forget  our  whole  life,  sins  and  all,  than  to  look  back
with  a  sense  of  satisfaction."  Contentment  with  the  past  is  fatal  to  all  progress.
Christianity  never  meant  us  to  dote  upon  a  golden  age  behind  us,  but  to  expect  a
golden  age  to  come.  Hence  we  must  forget  past  attainments  and  successes  and  forge
ahead.  It  is  the  looking  back  that  endangers  the  climber  who  is  passing  upwards.
His  one  hope  of  reaching  the  summit  is  by  forgetting  the  things  behind  him  and
"grinding"  on.

III.  By    this    POWER    OP    FOKGETPDLNBSS    we    SEOnRK    PROPER    CONCENTRATIOH    OF

Christian  purpose.  (Ver.  13.)  For  it  is  essential  to  enthusiasm  to  have  our  natara
unified  into  a  single  glorious  purpose.  Hence  Paul  could  say,  "This  one  thing  I  do."
He  would  not  allow  the  past  to  distract  him  from  proper  concentration.  One  purpose
of  perfection  dominated  his  whole  life  and  conduct.  Hence  his  draughts  of  the  Lethean
river  fitted  him  for  the  sublime  and  single  purpose  of  attaining  the  ideal  of  Christ.
Th*  soul  who  refuses  to  be  distracted  by  the  past,  and  sets  himself  steadily  to  fulfil  the
mission  God  has  given  him,  will  find  in  his  concentration  the  secret  of  power.

IV.  When  Church  .members  pollow  up  this  principle  of  FOnaETTiNO  the  past,
THEY  comb  TO  SEE  EYE  TO  EYE  IN  THE  END.  (Vers.  15,  16.)  Paul  advises  the  Philip-
pians  to  b«  "  thus  minded,"  that  is,  to  unite  in  forgetting  the  past,  and  if  in  othi  r
things  they  do  not  see  eye  to  eye  as  yet,  they  will  come  to  unity  at  last.  It  is  •  most
important  principle  to  follow.  When  individuals  fall  out,  we  advise  them  to  "let
bygones  be  bygones,"  and  begin  again.  This  is  exactly  Paul's  idea.  There  seems  to
have  been  some  dissension  in  Philippi,  as  ver.  2  of  next  chapter  shows.  Here  is
Paul's  recommendation :  "  Forget  the  things  behind."  It  is  upon  the  past  our
squabbles  are  built.  Take  away  the  memory  and  then  we  can  begin  afresh,  it  would
thus  seem  that  the  city  of  God  could  ill  spare  this  river  of  forgetfulness.  Indeed,  it  is
only  in  the  city  of  God  that  it  flows  in  crystal  purity  and  can  be  drunk  without
danger.  There  are  muddy  streams  which  ingenuity  provides,  intoxicants  which  rob
mankind  through  the  senses  of  their  memory;;  but  the  waking-time  comes,  and  the
furies  are  afoot  once  more.  In  the  Lethe  of  God,  on  the  contrary,  we  may  drink  and
forget  a  painful,  imperfect  past,  so  far  as  this  would  keep  us  from  a  nobler  future,
"  God,"  says  Vinet,  "  in  the  ineffable  power  of  his  Spirit,  makes  us  date  from  where  he
pleases.  He  separates  us  from  that  which  was  ourselves.  He  creates  a  new  man,  to
which  the  old  one  is  a  stranger..  For  him  there  is  no  crime  that  cannot  be  blotted
out,  nor  any  restitution  impossihle ;  for  him  there  is  no  time  flown  on  without  i«ca!l.


132  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  m.  1—21


no  destruction,  nor  any  manner  of  drath.  The  past  can  swallow  nothing  up."  Let  us,
then,  judiciously  cultivate  this  forgetfulness,  and  make  the  past  the  subordinate  thing
Christian  progress  requires  it  to  be. — R.  M.  K

Yen.  17— 21.— Celestial  citizenahip.  Paul,  having  urged  the  duty  of  forgetting  the
things  behind,  now  speaks  of  his  own  example  still  more  pointedly.  He  has  been
minding  this  rule  and  walking  before  men  as  an  illustration  of  its  power.  And  in
this  occupation  with  the  future  his  idea  has  been  that  he  is  a  citizen  of  heaven,  and
18  conducting  himself  daily  as  one  who  belongs  to  that  better  country.  But,  while
advancing  to  the  statement  of  this  celestial  citizi'uship,  he  pauses  parenthetically  over
the  state  of  those  whose  citizenship  is  of  the  earth  and  earthly.  The  contrast  of  this
paragraph  is  between  the  citizens  of  the  tuorld  and  the  citizens  of  heave/a.  We  shall
look  at  them  in  the  order  presented  by  the  apostle.

I.  The  citizens  op  the  wobld.  (Vers.  18,  19.)  And  here  we  have  several
things  to  notice.  1.  The  object  of  their  adoration  is  the  "  belly-god."  In  heathenism
the  aim  of  life  is  for  the  most  part  to  gratify  the  flesh.  Appetite  is  master.  The
mind  and  heart  are  simply  the  slaves  of  appetite.  Now,  it  is  clear  that,  as  a  worshipper
can  never  rise  above  the  object  of  adoration,  the  man  who  worships  appetite  sinks
into  a  mere  quivering  mass  of  appetite.  Lust  calls  for  satisfaction.  Bating,  drinking,
and  the  gratification  of  the  fleshly  lusts  become  the  sum  total  of  life.  The  meaning  of
this  devotion  is  the  degradation  of  the  man  below  the  level  of  the  beast.  2.  Their
glory  is  in  their  shame.  That  is  to  say,  instead  of  being  ashamed  of  their  lustful
courses,  they  actually  glory  in  them.  They  parade  their  degradations.  It  is  a  terrible
descent  when  men  lose  the  sense  of  shame  and  brazen  it  out.  3.  They  mind  earthly
things.  That  is,  they  look  no  further  for  their  rest.  They  settle  down  in  this  plague-
stricken  land.  They  allow  their  notions  to  be  bounded  by  the  horizon  of  the  seen  and
the  temporal.  They  take  no  broader  view  than  this  life  affords  them.  4.  They  are
consequently  enemies  of  Chrisfs  cross,  over  which  the  holy  are  compelled  to  weep.  For
the  cross  is  the  great  foe  of  worldly  mindedness.  It  opposes  the  lusts  of  the  flesh;  it
opposes  the  adoration  of  the  appetites ;  it  opposes  self-indulgence  in  every  sinful
form ;  and  consequently  th^  citizens  of  this  world  are  its  foes.  But  do  we  weep  over
these  misguided  men  with  the  pathos  of  a  Paul?  Do  we  shed  over  them  the  tears  of
compassion,  of  zeal,  of  charity  ?  We  ought  not  to  be  content  until  the  world's  state
evokes  our  tears.

II.  The  citizens  op  hbaten.  (Vers.  20,  21.)  Paul  declares  here  that  "our
citizenship  (Troxfrcw/ia)  is  in  heaven."  Now,  this  idea  suggests :  1.  That  we  ought  to
feel  as  "  strangers  and  pilgrims  here."  Just  as  citizens  of  a  foreign  country  do  not
feel  at  home,  so  heavenly  citizens  cannot  feel  at  home  on  earth.  They  will  recognize
a  certain  strangeness  in  their  environment,  and  be  evermore  looking  away  from  earth
and  things  seen  to  their  "  fatherland  "  (warplSa  of  Heb.  xi.  14).  But :  2.  Our  hope  should
centre  in  the  heavenly  city.  Earth  cannot  satiu-tfy  our  longings ;  our  hope  flits  away
from  earth  to  heaven.  "  We  look  for  a  city  which  hath  foundations,  whose  Builder
and  Maker  is  God."  Heaven  is  regarded  as  our  home,  and  we  leel  drawn  as  by  a
home-sickness  towards  the  celestial  world.  We  have  "  a  desire  to  depart  and  be  with
Christ,  which  is  far  better."  3.  We  expect  the  advent  of  the  Saviour  and  the  trans-
formation  of  the  body.  The  Lord  Jesus  has  his  home  in  heaven  and  is  seated  in  the
focus  of  power.  His  energy  {ivipytia)  is  such  that  he  can  subdue  all  things  unto  him-
self. And  he  is  to  appear  for  the  special  purpose  of  transforming  our  bodies  of  humilia-
tion that  they  may  be  conformed  "  to  the  bo>ly  of  his  glory"  (Revised  Version).  His
glorious  body  in  the  vigour  of  immortal  youth  is  the  type  to  which  our  changed  bodies
shall  be  coniormed.  Hence  we  hope  for  physical  adaptation  to  an  immortal  career.
And  these  gifts  we  expect  from  heaven  and  through  the  advent  of  our  Saviour.
"  Able-bodied  citizens "  we  are  yet  to  be.  We  are  to  lay  down  these  tenements  of
clay  and  to  be  clothed  with  temples  which  wiU  stand  the  wear  and  tear  of  an  eternal
existence.  In  these  magnificent  bodies  we  hope  to  serve  God  ceaselessly.  As  citizens
of  heaven,  we  shall  need  no  respite  from  active  service;  there  shall  be  no  night  and  no
repose  in  heaven ;  unwearying  work  shall  prove  lile's  lasting  benediction. — B.  M.  K

Teni  1—16. — The  true  circimeision.    Contemplated  close  qf  the  Epistle.   <*  Finally


OH.  m.  1—21.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  133

my  brethren,  rejoice  in  tlie  Lord."  It  would  seem  that,  at  this  point,  the  apostle  con-
templated bringing  the  Epistle  to  a  close.  He  intimates  that,  in  addition  to  what  he  baa
already  said,  he  has  only  this  further  to  say.  He  falls  back  on  what  has  already  been
noticed  as  the  key-note  of  the  Epistle.  Addressing  them  as  his  brethren,  he  calls  upon
them  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord.  He  recognized  no  joy  but  what  was  in  the  Lord.  We  are
to  rejoice  in  our  earthly  blessings,  as  having  them  in  the  Lord.  We  are  to  rejoice  even
In  our  afSictions,  as  having  them  in  the  Lord.  We  are  to  rejoice  in  any  success
attending  our  efforts  to  bless  others,  as  having  it  in  the  Lord.  We  are  to  rejoice
especially  in  privileges  of  adoption,  as  having  them  in  the  Lord.  "  Howbeit  in  this
rejoice  not,  that  the  spirits  are  subject  unto  you ;  but  rejoice  that  your  names  are
written  in  heaven,"  New  start  in  the  Epistle.  "  To  write  the  same  things  to  you,  to  ma
indeed  is  not  irksome,  but  for  you  it  is  safe."  The  apostle  would  not  have  concluded
the  Epistle  without  recording  Ms  thanks  for  the  contribution  and  sending  salutations.
But  at  this  point  he  seems  to  have  been  interrufited,  and  meantime  to  have  had  his
attention  called  to  some  fresh  manifestation  of  Jiidaistic  zeal.  When  he  takes  up  his
pen  it  is  with  this  in  his  mind.  And,  before  writing  the  words  with  which  he  had
intended  to  close,  he  must  sound  the  note  of  alarm.  He  deems  it  necessary,  however,
to  give  his  reason  for  introducing  the  old  theme.  He  had  written  as  well  as  spoken
much  on  the  subject  of  Judaism ;  but  it  was  not  irksome  to  him  to  repeat  what  he
had  said.  He  had  written  as  well  as  spoken  so  much  on  the  subject  to  the  Philippians
that  he  feared  it  might  be  irksome  to  them  to  have  a  repetition.  The  reference  would
seem  to  be  to  a  lost  Epistle  or  lost  Epistles.  To  this  there  is  a  manifest  allusion  in
the  Epistle  of  Polycarp.  Writing  to  these  same  Philippians,  about  the  beginning  of
the  second.century,  he  says,  "Neither,  I  nor  another  like  me  can  attain  to  the  wisdom
of  the  blessed  and  glorious  Paul,  who,  coming  among  you,  taught  the  word  of  truth
accurately  and  surely  before  the  men  of  that  day  j  who  also,  when  absent,  wrote  letters
to  you,  into  which,  if  ye  search,  ye  can  be  builded  up  unto  the  faith  given  to  you."
It  did  not  lie  within  the  design  of  the  Spirit  of  inspiration  to  preserve  aU  the  words
that  Paul  wrote  to  the  Churches,  any  more  than  to  preserve  all  the  words  that  Christ
spake  in  the  course  of  his  public  ministry.  What  Patil  had  previously  written  during
the  ten  years  to  the  Church  of  Philippi  alone  on  the  one  subject  of  Judaism  was  so
extensive  that  he  was  afraid  it  might  be  irksome  to  them  to  have  the  same  things
repeated.  But,  whether  irksome  to  them  or  not,  he  was  assured  that  it  would  be  safe.
And  on  that  ground  he  does  not  hesitate  to  repeat.

I.  He  warns  against  the  Judaizbbs.  What  he  had  before  given  at  length  ho  now
gives  in  few,  but  expressive  words.  1.  Dogs.  "  Beware  of  the  dogs."  As  Jesus  called
Herod  a  fox,  so  Paul  calls  the  Judaizers  dogs.  We  have  laid  hold  more  on  the  fidelity
of  the  dog ;  the  Greeks  laid  hold  more  on  its  bad  habit  of  snarling ;  the  Jews  laid  hold
mure  on  its  want  of  niceness,  in  eating  all  manner  of  meats.  Prowling  about  the  city
and  living  especially  on  the  offal  and  refuse,  it  seemed  to  the  Jews  to  picture  the
Gentiles,  who,  making  no  distinction  of  meats,  were  ceremonially  unclean.  By  means
of  this  appellation  of  the  Gentiles,  Christ  made  trial  of  the  Canaanitish  woman.  And
when  John  says,  "  Without  are  the  dogs,"  he  seems  to  refer  generally  to  exclusion  on
the  ground  of  moral  impurity.  In  calling  the  Judaizers  dogs,  Paul  is  to  be  understood
as  throwing  back  on  them  their  own  term  of  reproach.  They  called  the  Gentile
Christiana  dogs,  because  they  made  no  distinction  of  meats,  did  not  observe  the  wash-
ing of  cups  and  platters.  1'hey,  says  Paul,  were  really  the  dogs,  who,  instead  of  the
rich  gospel  provision,  had  only  the  "  garbage  of  carnal  ordinances."  2.  Evil-workers.
"  Beware  of  the  evil-workers."  They  are  characterized  in  another  place  as  deceitful
workers.  Here  they  are  characterized  as  evil  workers,  i.e.  where  others  were  sowing
the  good  seed  they  came  and  sowed  the  tares;  where  others  were  doing  good  work  they
came  and  tried  to  have  it  undone.  And  that  was  really  their  character ;  they  did  not
seek  fields  of  their  own,  but  fields  where  the  seed  of  the  gospel  had  already  been  sown.
They  were  especially  workers  against  Christ,  and  all  who  preached  Christ  as  the  sole
ground  of  the  sinner's  justification.  3.  Concision.  "  Beware  of  the  concision."  As
pope  said  of  antipope,  that  he  was  not  consecrated  but  execrated,  and  as  Coleridgs
said  of  the  French  philosophy,  that  it  was  psilosophy,  or  the  bare  kind  of  philosophy ;
BO  Paul  refuses  to  say  of  the  Jud  lists  that  they  were  the  circumcision,  he  will  only  .say
of  them  that  they  were  the  concision,  ije.  they  cut  the  body  to  no  purposej  ^ere  was


134  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.         [cm.  in.  1— 2J.

no  real  symbolism  connected  with  it,  as  when  the  Mosaic  economy  had  Divine  sanction.
They  were  cutters  of  the  body,  as  the  priests  of  Baal  in  Elijah's  time,  who,  with  loud
crying,  out  themselves  after  their  manner  with  knives  and  lancets,  till  the  blood  gushed
out  upon  them.  They  had  no  more  reason  for  continuing  the  cutting  of  the  body  from
Mosaism  than  the  heathen  had  for  cuttings  in  connection  with  their  religion.  There-
fore he  will  not  allow  them  to  be  the  circumcision,  but  only  the  concision,  or  mutilators
of  the  body.

II.  Hb  describes  the  true  circumcision.  "  For  we  are  the  circumcision."
Whether  circumcised  in  body  or  not,  simply  as  Christians  they  answered  to  the  idea,
bore  the  character  of  the  circumcision.  1.  Spiritual  worshippers.  "  Who  worship  by
the  Spirit  of  God."  If  he  had  characterized  them  by  their  outward  mark,  he  would
have  said  "  the  baptized ; "  but  he  prefers  to  point  to  the  inward  reality.  The  meaning
of  the  mark  of  circumcision  on  the  Jew  was  that  he  was  set  apart  as  a  worshipper  of
God  i  in  his  own  home  and  when  he  went  up  to  the  temple,  he  was  to  acknowledge
God  according  to  the  appointed  forms.  As  answering  to  the  circumcision  we  also  are
set  apart  a«  worshippers  of  God,  and  the  catholic  element  in  our  worship  is  that  it  is
by  the  dynamic  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God  that  we  worship.  There  is  a  power  of
the  Spirit  exerted  over  our  carnality  by  which  we  are  enabled  to  render  an  inward  and
a  coi^ial  worship.  "  The  hour  cometh,  and  now  is,"  said  Christ,  "  when  the  true
worshippers  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  truth :  for  such  doth  the  Father
seek  to  he  his  worshippers.  God  is  a  Spirit :  and  they  that  worship  him  must  worship
in  spirit  and  truth."  2.  Who  have  Christ  as  High  Pried  toghry  in.  "  And  glory  in
Christ  Jeaus."  As  worshippers  we  cannot  approach  God  without  having  the  services
of  a  high  priest.  And  Jesus  is  the  High  Priest  of  «ur  confession.  We  glory  in  him
because  he  has  made  real  and  fully  satisfying  atonement  for  sin.  We  glory  in  him
as  still  making  intercession  for  us.  With  such  a  High  Priest  we  can  have  hope  under
the  consciousness  of  sin,  which  is  our  daUy  experience.  "  My  little  children,  these
things  write  I  unto  you,  that  ye  may  not  sin.  And,  if  any  man  sin,  we  have  an
Advocate  with  tiie  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous  :  and  he  is  the  Proiiiliation  for
our  sins,  and  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  the  whole  world."  3.  And  have  renounced
tiie  flesh.  "And  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh."  Glorying  in  what  is  outside  of  us,
in  Christ  and  his  work,  excludes  having  confidence  in  the  flesh.  Even  under  the
Jewish  theocracy  outward  eaithly  marks  were  not  to  be  trusted  in.  One  might  have
a  special  theocratic  mark  on  him,  and  yet  be  untrue  to  the  theocracy  like  Saul  the  King
of  Israel.  If  natural  descent  from  Abraham  had  been  sufficient  to  constitute  a  child  of
Abraham,  then  God  of  the  very  stones  could  have  raised  up  children  unto  Abraham.
Only  on  Christ,  ou  no  fleshly  marks,  must  we  place  our  dependence  for  justification
and  adoption.

III.  He  thinks  of  HtMSIXF  AS  nr  A   BETTER  POSITION   FOR   HAVINS  CONFrDKNCB  IN

THE  FLESH  THAN  ANT  OF  THE  JuDAiZERB.  "  Though  I  myself  mij^ht  havc  ciinfidence
even  in  the  flesh :  if  any  other  man  thinketh  to  have  confidence  in  the  flesh,  I  yet
more."  He  singles  himself  out  from  the  "  we "  of  the  \  re\  iuus  verse.  He  had,  in
fact,  renounced  confidence  in  the  flesh;  but,  for  the  moment,  taking  up  the  same
ground  with  the  Judaizers,  he  challenges  comparison  with  them.  He  claims  to  he  in
a  better  position  for  cuufiding  in  the  flesh  than  any  of  them.  1,  Four  marks  connected
with  inherited  privilege.  (1)  Circv/mcision.  "Circumcised  the  eighth  day."  The
heathen  were  xmcircumcised.  Proselytes  from  heathenism  were  circumcised,  but  uot
the  eighth  day.  The  rite  of  circumcision  was  duly  performed  on  him.  He  thus  could
claim  to  belong  to  a  circle  withia  the  circle  of  the  circumcised.  (2)  Race.  "  Of  the
stock  of  Israel."  There  were  some  who  were  circumcised  the  eighth  day  who  wore
not  of  pure  Israelitish  extraction.  They  were  descendi  d  frum  meiiibers  of  an  alien
race  who  had  been  grafted  into  the  stock  of  Israel.  There  had  been  no  grafting  in  of
any  of  Paul's  ancestors ;  he  was  of  the  original  stock.  He  could  thus  claim  within  the
narrower  circle,  to  belong  to  a  narrower  still.  (3)  Tribe.  "  Of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin."
He  also  mentions  his  tribe  in  writing  to  the  Eomans.  His  original  name,  Saul,  pointed
to  his  being  of  the  same  tribe  with  the  first  king  of  Israel.  The  renegade  tribes  were
represented  among  the  Je\*s,  He  was  not  a  Jew  of  pure  extraction  belonging  to  any
of  the  ten  tribes,  but  he  belonged  to  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  which  alone  had  remained
faithful  to  Judalt  when  the  kingdom  was  rent.    (4)  Languayt  and  custom*.    "A


CH.  nLl— 21.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  185

Hebrew  of  Hebrews."  Among  the  many  Jews  who  were  scattered  abroad  there  were
not  a  few  who,  while  conforming  to  the  Jewish  religion,  did  not  conform  to  the  Hebrew
language  and  customs.  These  were  properly  Hellenists.  He  was  born  at  Tarsus,  but
he  had  been  as  strictly  brought  up  as  if  he  had  been  born  in  Judjea.  He  belonged  to
a  family  strict  among  Jewish  families  beyond  the  Holy  Land,  in  which  the  Hebrew
language  was  spoken  and  Hebrew  customs  retained.  2.  Three  marks  involving  personal
choice.  (1)  Lavo.  "  As  touching  the  Law,  a  Pharisee."  In  a  sense  he  inherited
Pharisaism,  for  he  tells  us  in  another  place  that  he  was  not  only  a  Pharisee,  but  the
son  of  a  Pharisee.  To  inherited  Pharisaism,  when  he  came  to  the  years  of  reflection,
he  gave  his  full  assent,  especially  as  against  Sadducecism.  "  The  Pharisees  stood  iu
the  closest  and  strictest  relation  to  the  Law,  as  they  with  their  traditions  were  regarded
as  the  most  orthodox  expositors,  defenders,  and  observers  of  it."  Paul  could  thus  say,
"  After  the  straitest  sect  of  our  religion,  I  lived  a  Pharisee."  (2)  Zeal.  "  As  touching
zeal,  persecuting  the  Church."  He  was  not  only  a  strict  Pharisee,  but  a  Pharisee  of
the  greatest  fervour.  He  rightly  gauged  the  strength  of  the  Christian  Church.  He
saw  that,  with  its  doctrine  of  a  crucified  and  risen  Saviour,  it  had  a  peculiar  power  to
enchant  men's  minds.  It  seemed  to  him  to  threaten  the  extinction  of  his  loved  Law-
religion.  And  so  he  put  himself  forward  as  champion  of  the  Law,  and  distiaguished
himself  as  persecutor  of  the  Church.  And  that  he  now  strangely  puts  into  the  scale
as  against  the  Jewish  zealots.  Begarding  it  as  though  it  still  belonged  to  him,  and  not
as  in  Gral.  i.  23  as  what  once  belonged  to  him,  he  claiais  to  be  a  better  persecutor  than
any  of  them.  (3)  Biyhteousness.  "  As  touching  tiie  righteousness  which  is  in  the
Law,  found  blameless."  Saul  the  Pharisee  was  one  of  those  who  went  about  to
establish  a  righteousness  of  their  own.  In  his  youthful  enthusiasm  he  felt  equal  to
the  task,  and  so  successfully  did  he  apply  himself  to  it  that,  in  the  judgment  of  men,
he  was  blameless.  There  was  not  the  minutest  particular  in  which  he  did  not  meet
the  Law's  requirement.  And,  when  the  limitation  is  made  to  the  judgment  of  men,
we  are  not  to  understand  that,  in  his  thought  at  the  time,  which  he  now  enters  into
to  turn  the  scale  against  the  zealots,  he  excluded,  but  rather  that  he  took  to  himself
justifying  merit  before  God.

IV,  He  is  in  the  spirit  of  thk  tkuk  oieoumcision.  1.  Eii  past  reckoning  to
which  he  adheres.  "Howbeit  what  things  were  gain  [gains]  to  me,  these  have  I
counted  loss  for  Christ."  The  reference  is  to  actual  things  in  his  pre-Christian  position.
Those  which  he  has  mentioned  and  others  which  he  has  not  mentioned,  were  gains  to
him.  The  plural,  which  is  not  brought  out  in  the  translation,  indicates  that  they  were
separate  items  by  which  he  profited.  They  were  not  gains  meiely  in  his  own  judgment
or  expectation,  but  they  were  actually  gams.  "  By  means  of  them  he  was,  within  the
old  theocracy,  put  upon  a  path  which  had  already  brought  him  repute  and  influence,
and  promised  to  him  yet  far  greater  honours,  power,  and  wealth  in  the  future ;  o  career
rich  in  gain  was  opened  up  to  him."  But  he  was  led  to  form  an  altered  jmlgment
regarding  these  things.  This  was  not  due  to  fickleness  ofjudgnnent.  This  new  judg-
ment was  characterized  by  wisdom  It  was  because  there  was  discovered  to  him  a
greater  gain  in  Christ.  As  interfering  with  this  newly  discovered  gain,  it  seemed  to
him  that  he  should  sit  down  and  write  them  under  one  category  as  loss.  The  use  of
the  perfect  brings  down  his  past  judgment  to  the  present  moment.  2.  His  reckoning
in  view  of  the  present.  "  Yea  verily,  and  I  count  all  things  to  be  loss  for  the  excel-
lency of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord."  "  Yea  verily,  and"  prepares  for  an
outbidding  of  what  he  has  said.  He  goes  beyond  the  actual  things  by  which  he  profited
in  his  past  position.  He  takes  things  by  which  there  may  be  profit  in  their  utmost
universality.  And  his  present  reckoning  regarding  the  wide  range  of  things  is  that
they  also  are  to  be  written  down  under  the  category  of  loss.  The  greater  gain  by
which  be  is  attracted  in  this  case  is  not  Christ,  but  rather  the  knowledge  of  Christ  as
the  greatest  Gain.  If  he  is  actually  the  greatest  Gain,  then  it  behoves  us  to  have  an
experimental  knowledge  of  him  according  to  what  he  ia.  We  are  especially  to  have
the  knowledge  of  him  as  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  i.e.  as  the  Anointed  of  the  Father  to  be
Saviour,  to  whom,  as  having  accomplished  siilvation,  we  owe  deepest  submission.  To
this  saving  knowledge  there  belongs  a  supereminence,  a  surpassingness.  It  would  be
of  no  avail  that,  beyond  all  that  science  has  reached,  we  knew  all  the  s  ocrets  of  nature,
that  we  knew  the  whole  constitution  of  the  human  mind,  if  we  did  not  know  Christ


18S  TEE3  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHTL1PPIAN8.         [ch.  m.  1— 2L

for  salvation.  3.  Eis  past  action  passing  into  his  present  reckoning.  "  For  wliom  1
suffered  the  loss  of  all  things,  and  do  count  them  hut  dung,  that  I  may  gain  Christ."
The  reference  is  to  the  great  crisis  of  his  life.  It  showed  him  to  he  no  mere  theorist.
He  carried  bis  judgment  out  into  practice,  though  it  entailed  the  loss  of  all  things.
Ha  renounced  the  profit  they  had  been  to  him  at  the  time.  And,  thinking  of  them  as
what  might  still  have  heen  a  profit  to  him,  he  is  in  no  mood  to  retract.  He  adheres
to  his  former  renunciation  in  the  strongest  terms.  His  lanjiuage  now  is,  "  I  do  count
them  but  dung,  that  I  may  gain  Christ."  This  will  he  considered  too  depreciatory  a
view  of  thiii<rs.  It  will  be  considered  too  high  doctrine  by  not  a  few  who  profess  faith
in  Christ.  What  an  incongruity  would  be  caused  by  some  professed  Christians  adopt-
ing this  language  1  Is  it  not  evident  that  they  count  many  things  as  all-important
to  their  existence,  other  than  Christ?  It  must  be  admitted,  too,  that  some  whose
Christian  experience,  though  real,  is  not  clear  enough,  will  find  difficulty  here,  and  it
is  possible  that,  in  the  desire  to  be  true  to  Christ,  they  may  take  to  some  perversion
of  Christianity.  But  there  is  no  exaggeration  in  the  apostle's  language.  (1)  All  things
are  but  as  dung  compared  with  Christ.  There  are  certainly  good  tilings  in  the  world.
Our  ingratitude  makes  us  wonder  that  there  are  so  many,  and  that  our  path  is  not
strewed  thick  with  ills.  And,  of  things  which  are  good,  some  are  more  de.-.irable  than
others.  We  can  compare  them  with  one  another,  as  good  and  better  and  best.  But
what  can  we  compare  with  Christ  ?  Shall  we  merely  call  him  the  best  of  all  things,
the  highest  good,  allowing  other  things  to  be  good  alonjfside  of  him  ?  No ;  he  is  the
incomparable  good,  and,  if  other  things  are  to  be  thought  of  at  all  in  comparison  with
him,  they  are  dross,  refuse ;  while  he  alone  is  entitled  to  be  called  good.  Excellent  it
may  be  in  comparison  with  many  other  things ;  in  comparison  with  him  they  have  no
positive  value,  but  fall  below  the  point  of  good.  He  is  inqomparable  in  his  moral
excellence.  Challenged  to  say  what  our  Beloved  is  more  than  another  beloved,  after
exhausting  all  comparisons,  we  may  well  say,  "  Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely."  He  is
the  bright,  full  manifestation  of  the  beauty  of  God.  He  is  incomparable,  in  the
blessing  be  has  procured  for  us.  What  are  all  earthly  blessings  in  comparison  with
the  salvation  of  the  soul  ?  If  they  are  to  be  compared  at  all,  are  they  not  to  be  put
down  as  dross,  perishable,  worthless,  while  the  salvation  of  the  soul  alone  stands  the
eternal  tests ?  (2)  All  things  are  to  be  pursued  only  for  Christ.  He  alone  is  to  be
Bought  as  our  supreme  End.  On  him  alone  we  are  to  set  our  hearts  in  the  lull  compass
of  their  affection.  Christ  begins  by  saying,  "  Loveat  thou  me  more  than  these  ?  "  and,
after  putting  others  out  of  comparison,  he  still  continues  to  press  the  que&tion,  "  Lovest
thou  me?"  and  again,  "Lovest  thou  me?" — that  our  affection  may  more  and  more
be  drawn  up  toward  him.  Hear  him  again  saying,  "  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother
more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me :  and  he  that  loveth  son  or  daughter  more  than  me,
is  not  worthy  of  me."  That  is  to  say,  our  love  to  father,  to  mother,  to  child,  is  to  be
subordinated  to  our  love  to  Christ.  Hear  him  again  using  startling  language,  "  If  any
man  cometh  unto  me  and  hateth  not  his  own  father,  and  mother,  and  wife,  and
children,  and  brethren,  and  sisters,  yea,  and  his  own  life  also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple."
That  is  to  say,  we  are  to  be  so  independent  of  them  as  even  to  hate  them  as  coming
between  us  and  our  supreme  End.  All  things  are  to  be  as  dross  when  it  is  a  question
of  duty  to  Christ.  We  are  to  be  willing  to  part  with  earthly  emoluments  and  expecta-
tions, as  though  they  were  utterly  worthless,  when  it  is  necessary  to  our  obtaining
Christ  as  our  Saviour,  or  to  our  proving  our  faithfulness  to  him.  We  are  to  be  willing
even  to  part  with  our  dearest  friends,  as  having  no  absolute  claim  to  them,  at  the  call
of  Christ.  Only  there  is  to  be  noticed,  for  our  comfort,  that,  when  we  pursue  our
earthly  calling  and  love  our  earthly  friends  for  the  sake  of  Christ,  esteeming  them  as
dross  in  themselves  and  to  he  paited  with  as  dross  at  the  call  of  Christ,  then  it  is  true
that  they  are  redeemed  from  their  worthlessness  and  are  made  to  partake  of  the
worthiness  of  Christ.  The  true  wisdom,  then,  is  to  use  all  things,  even  our  friends,  as
means,  to  make  Christ  alone  the  Knd.

V.  Thb  gain  that  Christ  is.  "  And  be  found  in  him."  The  apostle  desired  to  be
regarded  by  Gtod,  and  by  man  too,  as  within  Christ  as  the  sphere  and  element  of  his
life.  Thus  it  is  that  Christ  becomes  gain.  1.  Beginning.  "  Not  having  a  righteousness
of  mine  own.  even  that  which  is  of  the  Law,  but  that  which  is  through  faith  in  Christ,
the  righteousnesa  which  is  of  God  by  faith-"    His  former  thought  was  to  have  a


oH.in.  1— 21.]        THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS..  137

righteousness  of  his  own,  t.e.  a  righteousness  wrought  out  from  his  own  resources,  of
which  ho  was  the  efficient  cause,  and  to  which,  therefore,  he  could  lay  meritorious  claim,
of  which  he  could  hoast.  In  another  aspect  it  was  a  righteousness  which  was  of  the
Law,  i.e.  which  proceeded  from  its  commands  heing  followed.  And  so  completely  was
he  considered  to  have  succeeded  that,  as  he  says  in  the  sixth  verse,  he  was  found
hlameless.  But  a  now  light  was  thrown  in  upon  this  righteousness,  which  showed  it
to  be  utterly  worthless.  And  he  was  led  to  abandon  it  for  the  sake  of  another  righteous-
ness which  was  to  be  found  within  Christ.  This  righteousness  he  laid  hold  of  by  faith.
The  object  of  his  faith  was  Christ,  i.e.  as  having  wrought  out  a  righteousness  infinitely
worthy  and  well-pleasing  to  God,  in  the  possession  of  which  he  was  at  once  and  fully
justified,  obtaining  eternal  covenant  standing  before  God.  This  is  a  righteousness
which  is  of  God,  «.«.  of  which  God  is  the  efficient  cause,  of  which,  therefore,  he  has
all  the  glory.  It  is  only  ours  by  faith,  or,  as  it  should  be  translated,  upon  faith,  t".e.  aa
made  over  to  us  it  rests  upon  a  basis  of  faith.  2.  Olance  forward  to  the  end.  "  That
I  may  know  him,  ami  the  power  of  his  resurrection."  The  object  of  our  justification
is  that  we  may  know  Christ  especially  in  connection  with  his  resurrection.  The  resur-
rection was  the  crowning  point  of  his  life.  It  showed  him  to  be  completely  victorious
over  sin  and  death.  It  was  the  Fatho<'s  seal  upon  his  woil;  on  earth.  The  power  of
his  resurrection  is  most  naturally  regarded  as  the  power  which  it  has  to  make  ua
personally  victorious  over  sin  and  death.  The  "knowing  "  seems  to  belong  to  the  present
state,  inasmuch  as  it  is  followed  by  suffering  and  dying.  We  know  the  power  of  his
resurrection  in  our  being  quickened  together  with  him ;  but  this  not  by  itself.  We
know  it  rather  as  the  earnest  of  a  power  that  will  make  us  completely  victorious  over
sin  and  death.  We  think  of  the  resurrection  of  Christ  as  a  power  exercised  from  the
future.  It  is  that  by  which  we  are  being  moulded,  up  to  which  we  are  being  drawn.
3.  The/act  noted  that  we  must  suffer  and  die  he/ore  coming  to  the  resurrection  from  th»
dead.  "  And  the  fellowship  of  his  sufferings,  becoming  conformed  unto  his  death ;  if
by  any  means  I  may  attain  unto  the  resurrection  from  the  dead."  The  mere  fact  of  our
Buffering  does  not  bring  us  jnto  fellowship  with  Christ  in  his  sufferings.  Our  sufferings
must  have  a  Christian  character.  There  was  a  specialty  in  the  apostle's  sufferings.
He  was  notably  a  sufferer  for  the  cause  of  Christ,  a  sufferer  in  place  of  others,  in  some
such  way  as  Christ  was  a  sufferer  in  place  of  others.  It  is  this  element  of  vicariousness
that  prominence  is  given  to  in  his  remarkable  language  to  the  Colossians,  "  I  rejoice  in
my  sufferings  for  your  sake,  and  fill  up  on  my  part  that  which  is  lacking  of  the  affiic-
tiona  of  Christ  in  my  flesh,  for  his  body's  sake  which  is  the  Church."  But  the  language
is  not  to  be  restricted  to  vicarious  sufferings.  Inasmuch  as  our  ordinary  sufferings  are
appointed  by  Christ,  inasmuch  as  they  are  to  be  endured  in  the  spirit  in  which  Christ
endured,  inasmuch  as  Christ  is  to  be  magnified  in  them,  we  also  may  have  fellowship
with  Christ  in  his  sufferings.  We  may  aspire  to  drink  of  the  cup  that  he  drank  of,  to
be  baptized  with  the  baptism  wherewith  he  was  baptized.  The  apostle  thinks  of  hia
Bufferings  as  having  their  consummation  in  his  death.  His  sufferings  made  him  look
forward  to  death ;  and  the  kind  of  sufferings  made  him  look  forward  to  martyrdom.
And  how  did  he  contemplate  his  martyrdom?  As  a  being  conformed  unto  Christ's
death.  His  ambition  was  that  his  death,  whenever  it  happened,  should  bear  the  stamp
of  Christ's  death.  The  process  of  conformation  was  already  begun.  He  was  becoming
conformed  unto  Christ's  death.  In  another  place  he  refers  to  himself  as  "  bearing  about
in  his  body  the  dying  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  He  protested  that  he  was  dying  daily.  In
his  Bufferings,  in  the  uncertainty  as  to  his  life,  he  was  becoming  accustomed  to  die.
And  he  was  taking  that  form  which  was  to  be  completed  in  his  martyrdom.  Our
circumstances  do  not  point  to  our  needing  to  die  a  martyr's  death.  But  inasmuch  as
it  is  Christ  who  appoiijts  our  dying,  inasmuch  as  we  are  called  to  die  in  the  spirit
in  which  Christ  died,  inasmuch  as  we  are  called  to  magnify  Christ  in  our  dying,  we
also  may  cherish  the  ambition  of  our  having  the  stamp  of  Christ's  death  on  ours.
And  in  our  present  sufferings,  in  the  constant  uncertainty  of  life,  we  should  already
be  receiving  its  form.  The  apostle  wished  to  be  in  the  closest  accord  with  Christ  in
his  Bufferings  and  death,  if  by  any  means  he  should  attain  unto  the  resurrection  from
the  dead.  He  founds  upon  our  Lord's  language,  "  But  they  that  are  accounted  worthy
to  attain  to  that  world,  and  the  resurrection  from  the  dead."  This  is  what  is  called  th«
fint  nsurrectiou.    "  Bl^-ssed  and  holy  is  he  that  bath  part  ia  the  first  resurrection."


188  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANa         [ch.  ra.  1— 21

This  points  us  to  the  full  manifestation  of  the  power  of  Christ's  resurrection.  It
marks  the  obtaining  of  the  conHition,  viz.  the  reunion  of  soul  and  body,  upon  whiob
our  perfected  exi^ter]ce  depends.  It  is  putting  the  crown,  once  and  for  ever,  upon  our
life.  The  apostle  feels  that  the  object  is  difficult  of  attainment.  He  will  try  all  means
of  attaining  to  it.  He  will  even  drink  of  the  cup  of  Christ's  suffering;  he  will  have
the  stamp  of  Christ's  death  on  his,  if  that  will  secure  its  attainment.

VL  Two  ELEMENTS  IN  HIS  BTBiviNO.  1.  Stated.  (1)  He  is  humhle.  "Not  that  I
have  already  obtained,  or  am  already  made  perfect."  At  the  root  of  his  striving  there
was  the  consciousness  that  he  had  not  already  obtained,  i.e.  the  resurrection  from  the
dead,  or  was  already  made  perfect,  t.e.  in  the  disposition  which  was  necassary  for
obtaining  the  resurrection  from  the  dead.  (2)  He  is  intent  on  his  aim.  "  But  I  press
on,  if  so  be  that  I  may  apprehend  that  for  which  also  I  was  apprehended  by  Christ
Jesus."  The  apostle  had  been  apprehended  by  Christ  Jesus  at  his  coiiversiun.  The
power  of  a  Stronger  than  he  had  been  laid  upon  him,  arresting  him  in  his  sinful  career.
This  was  with  a  view  to  his  obtaining  the  resurrection  from  the  dead.  In  sympathy
with  Christ  in  this  aim  he  had  made  it  his  own  aim,  and  was  now  pressing  on  that  he
might  without  fail  apprehend  it,  have  it  safely  within  his  grasp.  2.  Illustrated.  The
illustration  of  the  racer,  already  suggested,  is  now  distinctly  brought  out.  (1)  He  it
humble.  "  Brethren,  I  count  not  myself  yet  to  have  apprehended."  There  is  no  greater
obstacle  to  success  than  self-esteem.  The  runner  who,  iu  his  preparation  or  at  any
point  in  the  race  (which  is  principally  to  be  thought  of),  counts  that  he  has  appre-
hended, i.e.  makes  himself  sure  of  gaining  the  prize,  calculates  that  he  has  safely
distanced  all  competitors,  is  likely  in  the  end  to  be  unsuccessful.  Paul  was  a  runner
in  the  Christian  race.  And  he  had  made  great  progress  from  the  starting-point  toward
the  goal.  He  was  a  very  different  man  in  Christian  experience,  in  power  of  service,
from  what  he  was  when  apprehended  on  the  road  to  Damascus.  But  he  would  have
the  Philippian  brethren  know,  for  their  benefit,  seeing  their  danger  was  self-esteem,
that  he  did  not  count  himself  to  have  apprehended,  i.e.  did  not  make  himself  sure  of
having  all  that  was  needed  for  grasping  the  prize.  The. inevitable  effect  of  such  a
disposition  would  have  been  the  relaxation  of  his  energies,  which  would  have  made  him
a  loser  of  the  glorious  prize  within  his  reach.  (2)  He  is  intent  on  his  aim.  "  But  one
thing  I  do,  forgetting  the  things  which  are  behind,  and  stretching  forward  to  the  things
which  are  before,  I  press  on  toward  the  goal  unto  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God
in  Christ  Jesus."  Of  the  man  intent  on  his  aim  there  is  no  better  illustration  than  the
runner  in  the  race.  This  one  thing  he  does.  For  this  he  has  girt  up  his  loins,  gathered
his  scattered  energies  into  a  unity.  He  does  not  self-contentedly  occupy  himself  with
the  things  which  are  behind,  i.e.  the  part  of  the  course  that  has  been  traversed.  That>
would  be  to  distract  his  attention  and  to  give  away  an  advantage.  Upon  the  traversed
course  his  back  is  turned,  his  eye  does  not  wander  back  over  it  and  measure  its  extent,
it  is  even  banished  wholly  from  his  memory,  there  is  room  in  his  mind  for  only  one
thing.  He  stretches  forward  to  the  things  which  are  before,  i.e.  the  part  of  the  course
that  is  yet  to  be  traversed.  His  eye  stretches  away  over  it,  and,  as  Bengel  puts  it,  the
eye  reaching  before  draws  on  the  hand,  and  the  hand  reaching  before  draws  on  the  foot.
See  how  his  energies  are  on  the  stretch  and  are  bent  toward  their  aim.  Mark  where
he  is  at  present,  and  see  him-  again  how  he  is  steadily,  unweariedly,  pressing  on.  His
thought  is  to  be  the  first  to  grasp  that  pole  which  is  the  goal — the  first  to  grasp  it,
then  he  shall  be  called  forward  by  the  president  of  the  games  to  obtain  the  prize,  to  be
crowned  with  the  laurel.  Such  a  runner  was  Paul.  One  thing  he  did.  He  had  a
singular  unity  of  purpose,  even  when  he  was  mistaken  in  his  end.  As  a  Cliristian
runner  he  girt  up  the  loins  of  his  mind,  gathered  his  scattered  energies  into  a  unity,
brought  them  to  his  one  purpose.  He  did  not  please  himself  by  dwelling  on  the  past,
telling  the  Fhilippians  and  others  what  he  had  accomplished.  No;  his  thought  was
what  was  yet  to  be  accomplished.  What  was  there  yet  possible  to  him  of  Christian
experience,  of  Christian  usefulness?  It  was  over  this  that  his  eye  was  stretched.  It
was  toward  this  as  an  earnest  runner  that  his  energies  were  bent.  See  him  when
he  is  writing  one  Epistle,  how  earnest  he  is !  See  him  again  when  there  is  taken  up
another  production  of  his  pen,  how  he  is  still  pressing  on!  As  he  comes  nearer  the
goal,  with  associations  of  martyrdom,  how  he  increases  in  eagerness  1  His  thought  is
to  grasp  what  God  had  appointed  him  in  his  earthly  career  of  Christian  perfection.


CH.  m.  1— 21.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIASS.  139

And,  grasping  that,  then  he  knew  that  the  great  President  of  the  games,  seated  high  in
iTeayen,  would,  in  God's  Name,  call  him  forth  to  receive  the  immortal  prize,  to  crown
him  with  the  unfading  laurel.

VII.  Threefold  exhortation.  1.  Let  us  aspire  after  higher  attainment  in  the
ftUwrt.  "  Let  us  therefore,  as  many  as  he  perfect,  be  thus  minded."  There  is  a  dis-
tinction to  be  made  between  those  who  are  perfect  and  those  who  are  made  perfect.
Th«  perfect  (as  the  Greek  word  suggests)  are  those  who  are  in  symjjathy  with  the  end
and  in  the  right  course,  although  they  haye  not  yet  come  to  the  end  or  are  made
perfect.  There  may  thus  be  a  kmd  of  perfection  from  the  beginniag.  But  especially
are  those  perfect  who,  when  opportunity  has  been  given,  have  gone  on  from  the  state
of  babes  or  mere  starters  in  the  race  to  a  certain  maturity  of  Christian  experience.
Opportunity  being  given,  we  should  be  numbered  amongst  the  perfect,  those  wlio  have
attained  to  a  certain  skill  in  running.  "  Let  us  therefore,  as  many  as  be  perfect,  be  thus
minded."  Let  us  not  be  satisfied  with  present  attainment.  Let  us  feel  the  attraction
of  the  goal  of  Christian  perfection.  Let  our  eye  stretch  forward  as  over  the  inter-
vening space  up  to  this  goal.  Let  our  energies  be  bent  as  toward  that  which  is  difficult
of  attainment,  toward  that  which  will  require  all  our  singleness  and  intensity.  And,
for  our  own  encouragement,  let  us  also  feel  the  attraction  of  the  prize.  Let  us  feel  the
attraction  of  the  moment  when,  for  faithfulness  to  him  and  to  his  end  in  apprehending
us,  the  righteous  Judge  shall  call  us  forward  to  receive  the  crown  of  righteousness.
2.  Let  us  pray  against  present  error.  "  And  if  in  anything  ye  are  otherwise  minded,
even  this  shall  God  reveal  unto  you."  It  is  a  case  which  is  very  likely  to  occur.  We
may  be  earnest  in  the  main,  and  yet  there  may  be  some  particular  thing  in  regard  to
which  we  are  self-satisfied,  about  which  we  are  not  sufficiently  enli^ihtcned,  and  so  we
wander  from  the  right  course.  Who  can  understand  his  errors?  Under  the  conscious-
ness of  o«r  own  inability  to  understand,  let  us  have  recourse  to  God.  The  promise  here
is  that  he  will  discover  every  particular  mistake  to  us.  Let  us  look  to  God  to  show  us
wherein  we  are  in  error.  "  Seaich  me,  0  God,  and  know  my  heart ;  try  me,  and  know
my  thoughts ;  and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  me,  and  lead  me  in  the  way  ever-
lasting." 3.  Let  us  learn  from  past  attainment.  "  Only,  whereunto  we  have  already
attaine<i,  by  that  same  rule  let  us  walk."  We  may  not  go  to  past  attainment  for  self-
contentment,  but  we  may  go  for  lessons  to  be  learnt.  If  we  have  attained  to  any  skill
in  the  Christian  race,  it  is  because  we  have  followed  the  Bible  as  our  rule.  It  has
prescribed  to  us  our  course.  Let  us  hold  fast  that  which  we  have  proved  to  be  good.
Let  us  act  on  the  same  principles  on  which  we  have  hitherto  acted  in  any  attainment
we  have  made.  Let  there  he  "  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  repentance  unto  life,  with  the
diligent  use  of  all  the  outward  means  whereby  Christ  commanicateth  unto  us  the
blessiugs  of  redemption."  Following  the  rules  w«  shall  unfailingly  advance  up  to
tiie  gold  and  receive  the  prize, — B.  F.

Vers.  17— 21. — Contrasted  characters  and  destiniet.  I.  Whom  to  look  to.  "Brethren,
he  ye  imitators  together  of  me,  and  mark  them  which  so  walk  even  as  ye  have  us  for  an
eniample."  There  was  no  assumption  in  Paul  putting  himself  before  the  Philippians
for  their  imitation.  He  was  simply  proceeding  on  what  belonged  to  the  relation  sub-
sisting between  them.  It  devolved  on  Timothy  to  be  an  example  to  believers  in  the
various  places  where  he  laboured  in  word,  in  manner  of  life,  in  love,  in  faith,  in  purity.
So  it  devolved  on  Paul,  as  having  the  care  of  the  Gentile  Churches,  to  walk  before  them
so  that  they  might  be  directed  in  their  walk.  And,  although  he  did  not  count  himself
perfect,  yet  he  had  earnestly  endeavoured  to  come  up  to  this  idea  of  his  duty.  He  had
carried  his  faithfulness  to  Christ  to  the  extent  of  suffering  imprisonment  for  him  for  a
long  period.  In  a  brotherly  manner,  then,  he  asked  them  to  imitate  him.  Let  them
hold  to  Christ  under  all  circumstances.  Let  them  not  refuse  the  hardships  to  be
endured  in  his  service.  Others  were  imitators  of  him  and  were  proving  themselves
valiant  for  Christ  and  against  persecution.  Let  them  also  be  numbered  among  his
imitators.  He  did  not  set  himself  exclusively  forward  for  their  imitation.  He  leaves
the  singular  for  the  plural.  "  As  ye  have  us  for  an  example."  He  could  join  with
himself  other  Christian  teachers  known  to  the  Philippians.  There  was  one  type
according  to  which  they  walked.  Mark  them  among  them  who  followed  this  type,
"Mark  the  perfect  man,"  says  tue  psalmist.    The  Kew  Testament  form  given  U>  it


140  THE  EPISTLE-  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.         [oh.  m.  1—21.

by  Paul  IB  that  we  are  to  mark  those  who  hare,  in  their  walk,  the  common  Christian
features.

IL  Whom  to  take  warning  fbom.  There  were  others  who  walked  differently.  We
are  apparently  to  think  of  tliem  as  nominal  Christians — owning  the  cross  of  Christ  in
their  profession,  disowning  it  in  their  pi  actice.  1.  Feelings  with  which  the  apostle  ceUlt
attention  to  them.  "  For  many  walk,  of  whom  I  told  you  often,  and  now  tell  you  even
weeping."  In  ttiis  Paul  echoes  the  words  of  the  psalmist,  "  Rivers  of  waters  run  down
mine  eyes,  because  they  keep  not  thy  Law."  He  echoes  the  words  of  the  weeping
prophet,  "  Hear  ye,  and  give  ear ;  be  not  proud :  for  the  Lord  hath  spi  ikon.  Give  glory
to  the  Lord  your  God  before  he  cause  darkness,  and  before  your  feet  stumble  upon  the
dark  mountains,  and  while  ye  look  for  light  he  turn  it  into  the  shadow  of  death,  and
make  it  gross  darkness.  But  if  ye  will  not  hear  it,  my  soul  shall  weep  in  secret  places
for  your  pride :  and  mine  eye  shall  weep  sore  and  run  dowu  with  tears."  Chrysostom
says  here,  "  Paul  weeps  for  those  over  whom  other  men  laugh  and  are  uproarious."  It
is  an  aggravating  circumstance  when  men  dishonour  the  Christian  circle  with  which
they  are  connected.  But  there  is  this,  that  Christ  needed  to  weep  over  us  when  we
were  sinners,  and  still  needs  to  weep  over  us  for  the  sin  which  doth  so  easily  beset  us.
And  the  more  that  others  are  in  a  state  of  sin,  there  is  only  the  more  need  for  our
weeping  over  them  and  desiring  their  emancipation  from  their  unhappy  thraldcn.
Another  circumstance  which  led  to  the  tears  of  the  apostle  was  their  number.  There
were  many  who  had  disgraced  their  Christian  profession.  It  was  like  a  catastrophe
involving  the  loss  of  many  lives.  But  why  did  the  apostle  tell  this  to  the  Phllippians  ?
Why  had  he  not  been  content  with  telling  them  once?  Why  had  he  continued  telling
them  in  his  addresses  when  with  them  and  in  his  messages  when  absent?  Why,  as
he  now  thinks  of  it,  with  the  pen  in  his  hand  or  dictating  to  his  amanuensis,  do  the
tears  begin  to  flow?  It  was  because,  being  many,  there  was  danger  of  this  class
appearing  also  in  the  Church  of  Philippi.  Persistently,  tearfully  would  he  endeavour
to  stave  off,  to  prevent,  such  a  catastrophe.  2.  Described  generally .  (1 )  Character.
"  That  tlit-y  are  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ."  It  is  said  of  the  heathen  that  they
refused  to  have  Gud  in  their  knowledge.  It  is  said  of  the  Colossians  in  their  heathen
stHte  that  they  were  enemies  in  their  mind  in  their  evil  works.  It  is  in  darker  colours
that  the  persons  liefore  us  are  painted.  They  are  enemies  of  GoH,  not  in  his  unity  or
spiritnality,  but  in  the  brightest  exhibition  of  his  moral  excellence.  The  cross  of
Cliiist  is  a  great  fact,  of  which  the  great  expression  is  this,  "God  so  Iqved  the  world,
that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  on  him  should  not  )  erish,
but  have  eternal  life."  The  cross  of  Christ  is  God  approaching  men  in  greatest  kind-
ness— kindness  displayed  to  his  foes,  kindness  fitted  to  subdue  the  most  hostile.  It
is  the  condemnation  of  the  persons  before  us  that,  having  had  the  cross  of  Christ
presented  to  them  so  that  they  could  not  refuse  to  acknowledge  the  justice  of  its
claims,  they  yet  did  not  in  reality  yield  to  its  claims,  but  opposed  their  will  to  the
Divine  benignity.  (2)  End.  "  Whose  end  is  perdition."  It  is  an  oppressive  thought,
that  this  should  be  the  end  of  any  who  have  been  created  for  God's  glory.  But  it  is
the  inevitable  consequence  of  opposing  the  cross  of  Christ.  As  the  Foundation-stone
of  the  Church,  when  not  used  as  Foundation,  is  to  become  the  Stone  of  vengeance,
BO  the  cross  of  Christ,  when  not  used  as  the  instrument  of  salvation,  is  to  become  the
instrument  of  perdition.  It  is  as  though  a  beautiful  work  of  art,  on  which  much
loving  labour  has  been  expended,  were  taken  and  broken  into  a  thousand  fragments.
So  is  every  one  the  object  of  perdition  in  his  spiritual  nature,  lost  to  beauty  and  useful-
ness and  happiness,  who  does  not  submit  to  the  saving  power  of  Christ.  3.  Described
more  particularly.  (1)  Indulgent  of  appetite.  "  Whose  god  is  the  belly,  and  whose
glory  is  in  their  shame."  The  apostle  writes  to  the  Koraan  Christians  of  those  who
seived  not  our  Lord  Christ,  but  their  own  belly.  They  are  described  in  more  startling
language  here,  as  making  a  god  of  their  belly.  That  is  to  say,  the  place  belonging  to
God  is  usurped  by  the  very  lowest  part  of  their  nature.  We  are  to  eat  and  drink  in
order  that  we  may  do  the  great  business  of  life ;  these  make  it  the  great  business  of
life  to  eat  and  drink.  Their  supreme  concern  is,  "  What  shall  we  eat,  and  what  shall
we  drink  ?  "  To  this  object,  as  devotees,  they  consecrate  their  thoughts,  their  energies.
As  professed  Christians,  they  should  glory  in  the  cross  of  Christ ;  their  real  antagonism
to  the  cross  comes  out  in  their  glorying  in  what  is  fitted  to  pamper  appetite.    It  it


OH.  m.  1-21.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  141

glorying  in  their  shame.  It  is  unworthy  of  rational  men,  it  is  especially  nnworthy  of
men  who  profess  to  be  Christians,  that  they  should  be  taken  up  with  their  eating  and
drinking.  It  is  taking  the  glory  which  belongs  to  them  as  made  for  God,  as  intended
for  a  Christian  immortality,  and  giving  it  to  their  animal  nature.  It  is  in  gluttony,
and  also  in  drunkenness,  stupefying  themselves,  obscuring  their  vision  of  God,  unfitting
themselves  for  his  service.  And  those  deserve  to  be  covered  with  shame  who  so  walk.
(2)  Class  to  which  they  are  referred.  "  Who  mind  earthly  things."  They  belong  to
the  earthly  order  of  things;  within  it  their  thoughts  and  interests  ai'e  conKned.  One
characteristic  of  the  earthly  is  its  perishahleness.  Such  Epicureans  as  are  here  referred
to  make  this  even  a  reason  for  their  indulgence  of  appetite,  "  Let  us  eat  and  drink,  for
to-morrow  we  die."  But  what  a  skeleton  does  this  introduce  into  their  feasts  I
"Meats  for  the  belly,  and  the  belly  for  meats;  but  God  shall  bring  to  nought  both  it
and  them."  Without  being  Epicureans  and  taken  up  with  our  eating  and  drinking,  we
may  mind  earthly  things.  If  our  minds  do  not  rise  above  our  earthly  business,  then
we  are  living  within  the  eartiily  order  of  things,  that  which  is  lower  kud  which  is
doomed  to  perish.

"  The  cloud-capt  towers,  the  gorgeous  palacei,
Tlie  solemn  temples,  the  great  globe  itself
Yea,  all  which  it  inherits  shall  dissolve.
And,  like  the  insubstantial  pageant  faded.
Leave  not  a  rack  beliind."

in.  The  Chbtstian  commonwealth.  1.  Its  teat.  "For  our  citizenship  is  in
heaven."  More  exactly  it  is  the  state  in  connection  with  which  we  have  citizenship.
We  properly  belong  to  a  heavenly  order  of  things.  And  this  points  to  the  possession
of  higher  privileges.  (1)  Bight  of  access  to  the  sovereign.  This  is  very  rarely  taken
advantage  of  under  an  earthly  polity.  We  cannot  weary  our  heavenly  Sovereign  by
our  frequeiit  approaches  to  him,  if  only  we  are  sincere.  In  Christ  we  have  an  established
place  before  him.  And  our  present  mode  of  access  to  him  by  prayer  will  be  turned
into  an  eternal  abiding  with  him.  (2)  Bight  of  protection.  If  a  British  citizen  is
within  the  law  in  travelling  or  trading  within  the  bounds  of  a  foreign  state,  he  may
rely  upon  the  British  power  for  his  protection.  Earth  is  like  a  foreign  state  to
Christians ;  we  may  rely  upon  Christ  meantime  defending  us  from  all  our  enemies.
And  ultimately  he  will  withdraw  us  from  the  presence  of  enemies,  to  dwell  entirely
imder  tlie  shadow  of  the  Almighty.  (3)  Sight  of  education.  It  is  right  that  a  state
should  make  provision  for  the  education  of  all  who  are  to  be  its  citizens.  The  British
state,  to  a  certain  extent,  acts  upon  this  principle.  As  Christian  citizens,  there  is  pro-
vision for  our  education,  in  the  Bible  and  the  ordinance  of  the  ministry.  And  ulti-
mately we  shall  be  directly  taught  of  God,  (4)  Right  of  maintenance.  The  new-made
citizen  of  a  town  has  the  right  of  trading  within  its  boundaries  for  the  purpose  of
maintenance.  As  citizens  standing  in  a  right  relation  to  our  liege  Lord,  he  undertakes
our  maintenance  in  this  world.  And  ultimately  he  will  call  us  to  sit  at  his  own  table.
2.  Obtaining  the  condition  necessary  for  thefiM  enjoyment  of  privileges.  (1)  He  who
obtains  the  condition.  "From  whence  also  we  wait  for  a  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesua
Christ."  The  seat  of  the  polity  to  which  we  belong  being  in  the  heavens,  it  is  fitting
that  our  aspiration  should  be  heavenward.  Our  great  Hope  in  that  world  is  Christ,
who  has  taken  possession  in  our  name.  We  wait  for  bim  to  come,  with  his  saving
power,  to  us  on  earth,  j.e.  to  bring  us  out  of  present  disabilities,  and  to  bring  us  into
the  full  enjoyment  of  privileges.  (2)  The  condition  to  be  obtained.  "  Who  shall
fashion  anew  the  body  of  our  humiliation,  that  it  may  be  conformed  to  the  body  of
his  glory."  (a)  Transformation  from  a  psychical  body  to  a  spiritual  body.  Our
present  body  is  psychical — so  it  is  called  in  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  1  Corinthians — i.e.  it
answers  to  our  lower  or  animal  nature.  It  has  a  certain  material  grossness  about  it ;
and  it  is  very  much  hemmed  in  by  material  surroundings.  Christ  at  his  resurrection
exchanged  the  psychical  body  which  he  shared  with  us  for  a  spiritual  body — ^so  it  is
mimed,  i.e.  it  is  a  body  answering  to  our  hi>^her  or  spiritual  nature,  as  the  present  body
answers  to  our  lower  or  animal  nature.  As  seen  in  him,  it  was  a  body  to  which
matter  was  no  barrier.  He  appeared  in  the  midst  of  his  disciplea  when  the  doors  were
shut.    It  was  a  body  to  which  distance  was  completely  conquered.    With  it,  wImu


143  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAKS.         [cm.  in.  1—21.

the  time  came,  he  could,  at  once  and  of  his  own  accord,  go  vp  into  heaven,  only  lingering
in  viejv  for  the  sake  of  those  whom  he  left  behind.  And  his  spiritual  body  is  to  ruk
the  foim  of  ours.  (5)  Transformation  from  the  state  of  the  Fall  to  the  state  of  redemp-
tion. Our  present  body  is  called  the  body  of  humiliation.  It  is  so  in  the  aspect  we
have  already  considered.  It  is  especially  so  in  that  the  Fall  has  left  its  mark  upon  it
as  well  as  upon  the  soul.  It  ia  a  body  that  is  subject  to  weakness  and  disease  termi-
nating in  death  and  corruption.  Humiliation  reaches  its  depth  when  this  body
becomes  the  prey  of  worms.  Christ,  in  the  body  of  his  flesh,  was  subjected  to  the
humiliation  of  weakness  and  suffering.  He  was  also  subjected  to  the  humiliation  of
death.  And,  in  addition,  he  was  subjected  to  the  humiliation  of  burial.  At  his
resurrection  the  body  of  bis  humiliation,  which  had  not  seen  corruption,  was  exchanged
for  the  body  of  his  glory,  of  which  we  can  form  some  conception  from  the  description
of  him  as  he  appeared  on  the  Mount  of  Transfiguration,  and  also  as  he  was  seen  by  tjie
prisoner  of  Patmos  in  heaven.  It  was  a  body  which-bore  a  certain  relation  to  previous
humiliation ;  for  there  were  the  marks  of  the  wounds  in  hia  hands  and  in  his  side.
"We  are  to  think  of  it  as  a  body  which  has  received  immortal  power  and  beauty.  And
that  gloriously  transformed  body  of  Christ  is  to  ride  the  form  of  ours.  (3)  Ouarantee
for  the  condition  being  obtained.  "  According  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able  even
to  subject  all  things  unto  himself."  Following  upon  his  resurrection  was  his  b*Wig
invested  with  universal  power.  "  AH  authority  hath  been  given  unto  me  in  heawn
and  on  earth."  The  final  adjustment  will  bear  witness  to  his  being  able  to  subdue  all
things  unto  himself,  i.e.  unto  his  thought,  his  way  of  adjusting  things.  We  may,  there-
fore, feel,  assured,  seeing  that  is  his  thought,  that  he  will  subdue  the  present  material
fallen  body  to  the  spiritual  glorious  type,  which  he  has  asserted  in  his  own  resurrection-
body.  This  condition  being  obtained  we  shall  be  admitted  as  Christian  citizens  to  full
privileges. — E.  F.

Vers.  1 — 3. — Eej'oicing,  etcheioing,  and  imitating.  "  Finally,  my  brethren,  rejoice
in  the  Lord,"  etc.  These  verses  present  three  subjects  for  reflection — the  Being  to  rejoice
in,  the  men  to  avoid,  the  worship  to  imitate.-

I.  The  Being  to  kbjoice  in.  "  Finally,  my  brethren,  rejoice  in  the  Lord."  "  The
Lord"  means  undoubtedly  Jesus  Christ,  the  Saviour  of  all  men.  But  why  rejoice  in
him?  1.  Because  of  his jpeerfesseacerterace.  He  is  the  morally  beautifuL  Every  moral
virtue  is  united,  harmonized,  and  corruscates  in  his  character.  Nothing  inspires  the
heart  with  higher  and  purer  joy  than  beauty.  Admiration  is  happiness  of  a  high  type.
The  admiration  of  art  is  a  joy,  the  admiration  of  nature  a  greater  joy,  the  admiration
of  moral  excellence  is  the  highest  joy  of  all.  "  Eejoioe  in  the  Lord."  2.  Because  of  his
vital  relationship.  He  is  our  dearest  Friend,  our  elder  Brother,  our  all-merciful,  and
almighty  Redeemer.  Well  might  we  rejoice  in  such  a  relationship.  "  My  Beloved  is
mine,  and  I  am  his."  3.  Because  of  his  benevolent  enterprise.  What  philanthropic
heart  does  not  rejoice  in  the  enterprise  of  any  man  to  mitigate  the  woes  and  increase
the  happiness  of  his  species  ?  But  what  an  enterprise  is  the  enterprise  of  Christ !  It  is
to  break  every  fetter,  unlock  every  prison  door,  dispel  every  cloud  of  ignorance  and
sorrow ;  it  is  to  tread  all  human  evils  in  the  dust,  hush  all  sorrows,  wipe  away  all
tears  from  off  all  faces.  Well  might  the  apostle  enjoin  the  Philippians  to  "  rejoice  in
the  Lord."  !-'ad  that  such  an  injunction  should  be  required,  for  it  might  well  have
been  supposed  that  all  who  knew  the  Lord  would  "  rejoice  "  in  him.  This  is  a  command,
as  truly  a  command  as  the  command  to  believe,  repent,  not  to  steal,  not  to  murder;
and  to  break  this  com  maud  is  as  great  a  sin  as  to  break  any  command  in  the  Decalogue.
To  be  happy  in  the  Lord — and  there  is  happiness  nowhere  else — is  a  moral  obligation.

II.  The  men  to  avoid.  "  To  write  the  same  things  to  you,  to  me  indeed  is  not
grievous  [irksome],  but  for  you  it  is  safei"  What  things  does  the  apostle  mean  ?
Manifestly  the  warning  which  follows,  "Beware  of  dogs,  beware  of  evil-workers."  The
apostle  here  characterizes  a  class  of  men  as  "  dogs."  In  Rev.  ixii.  15  this  class — there
also  called  dogs — are  described  as  excluded  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Christ  to  the
Syro-phoenician  woman  spoke  of  the  Gentiles  as  dogs  (Matt.  xv.  26).  He  did  this,
however,  in  accordance  with  the  usage  of  his  countrymen.  Elsewhere  the  heayenly
Teacher  speaks  of  some  men  as  "  swine."  The  temperaments,  dispositicm,  and  eharac-
ters  of  men  are  widely  different.    "  All  flesh  is  not  the  same  flesh."    The  men  against


OH.  m.  1—21.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS,  143

whom  the  apostle  warns  the  Philippians  here  were :  1.  Men  of  a  canine  t}iiMt.  Ill-
tempered  men,  snarling  at  all  who  differed  from  them.  Who  does  not  know  men  of
the  dog  spirit  ?  The  querulous  tone,  the  curl  of  scorn  on  the  lip,  the  sardonic  grin,
reveal  their  canine  nature.  2.  Men  of  a  canine  spirit,  who  were  in  connection  with
the  Ghurch.  "  Beware  of  evil-workers,  heware  of  the  concision."  They  were  Judaizing
teachers,  who  endeavoured  to  turn  away  men  from  the  simplicity  of  the  gospel  by  pro-
moting Jewish  rites  and  ceremonies,  and  thus  they  were  evil-doers.  Show  me  the
man  whose  religion  is  sensuous,  ritualistic,  and  technical,  and  you  will  show  me  the
man  who  in  all  probability  displays  this  canine  spirit.  "A  more  ill-natured  class  of  men
I  have  never  known  than  members  of  Calviaistic,  Antinomian,  and  Ritualistic  Churches ;
and  they  reveal  more  of  the  dog  than  of  the  angel.  Now,  Paul  says  avoid  such,  do  not
argue  with  them,  do  not  "  cast  pearls  before  swine,"  do  not  put  yourself  in  their  power,
utand  aloof  from  them,  heed  neither  their  hark  nor  their  grin.

III.  The  worship  to  imitate.  "  For  we  are  the  circumcision,  which  worship  God
in  the  spirit,  and  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh."  The
worship  here  is  marked  by  three  things.  1.  By  spirituality.  "  Worship  God  in  the
Spirit."  2.  By  joyomnesa.  "  Eejoice  in  Christ  Jesus."  There  is  no  worship  without
happiness ;  true  worship  is  happiness.  3.  By  Divine  confidence.  "  Have  no  confidence
in  the  flesh."— D.  T,

Vers.  4 — 8. — The  cost  and  the  value  of  personal  Chrittianitj/,    "  Though  I  might

also  have  confidence  in  the  flesh,"  etc.    Notice —

I.  The  cost  which  the  apostle  paid  fob  his  Cheistianitt.  Metaphorically  he
sold  a  property  that  he  at  one  time  valued  beyond  all  price,  and  that  his  countrymen
'egarded  as  the  wealthiest  inheritance.  Here  he  gives  a  summary  of  the  distinguished
f'ivileges  which  belonged  to  him.  1.  Se  refers  to  his  Ghurch  status.  "Circumcised
the  eighth  day."  Theiefure  not  a  proselyte,  but  a  Jew.  By  this  rite  he  became  a
member  of  the  great  Jewish  commonwealth,  or,  as  some  call  it,  the  Jewish  Church.

2.  He  refers  to  his  illustrious  ancestry.  "Of  the  stock  of  Israel."  A  true  scion
of  the  royal  race.  "  Of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin."  The  tribe  from  whence  came
many  of  their  distinguished  monarchs,  and  the  tribe  to  whom  belonged  the  holy  city,

3.  Ee  refers  to  his  religious  persuasion.  "  An  Hebrew  of  the  Hebrews."  Elsewhere
he  says,  "  I  truly  am  a  Jew,  bom  in  Tarsus,  a  city  in  Cilicia,  yet  brought  up  in
this  city  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  and  taught  according  to  the  perfect  manner  of
the  Law  of  the  fathers,  and  was  zealous  before  God "  (Acts  xxu.  3,  4).  A  thorough
Hebrew.  Paul  had  something  to  boast  of  here.  In  his  veins  ran  the  blood  which  had
quivered  amid  Egyptian  plagues  and  rushed  to  the  hearts  of  those  that  heard  the  voice
of  Siuai's  trumpet.  4.  He  refers  to  his  zealous  devotednes*.  "Concerning  zeal, perse-
cuting the  Church."  He  carried  out  his  religious  convictions  with  such  zeal  that  he
persecuted  all  who  differed  from  him.  Which  is  the  worse — enthusiasm  in  a  bad  cause
or  lazy  profession  in  a  good  one  ?  5.  He  refers  to  his  ceremonial  righteousness.  "Touch-
ing the  righteousness  which  is  in  the  Law,  blameless."  All  the  commandments  he  kept
"  from  his  youth  up."  Such  were  the  privileges  that  Paul  enjoyed,  and  to  him,  as  well
as  to  his  countrymen,  they  were  beyond  all  price.

II.  The  value  which  the  apostlb  attached  to  his  Cheistiamty.  He  gave
up  Judaism  with  its  gorgeous  ritual  and  mighty  memories  and  matchless  histories,
and  does  this  for  Christianity.  Does  he  regret  the  loss,  deplore  the  costly  sacrifice  ?
No.  "  What  things  were  gain  to  me,  those  I  counted  loss  for  Christ."  When  he  prac-
tically accepted  the  religion  of  Jesus,  all  that  he  once  gloried  in  became  contemptible.
"  Yea  doubtless,  and  I  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of
Christ  Jesus."  Christianity  is  the  science  of  sciences.  Three  remarks  will  iUustrale
the  incalculable  value  of  this  science.  1.  It  accord*  with  all  true  sciences.  2.  It
encourages  all  true  sciences.  3.  It  transcends  all  true  science*.  Chiysostom  says,
"  When  the  sun  doth  appear  it  is  loss  to  sit  by  a  candle." — ^D.  T.

Vers.  8 — 11. — Pliases  of  Christ.  "  I  have  suffered  the  loss  of  all  things,  and  docount
them  but  dung,  that  I  may  win  Christ."    Paul  presents  Christ  in  four  aspects.

L  As  A  Pkizb.  "  That  I  may  win  Christ."  What  is  it  to  win  Christ  ?  It  is  some-
thing more  than  to  become  acquainted  with  his  biography,  something  more  than  to


14*  THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  in.  1—21.

nnderstand  the  doctrines  he  taught' or  the  theory  of  bis  life  and  mission.  To  gala  him
is  to  gain  his  moral  spirit.  His  moral  spirit  is  himself — that  which  marked  him  off
from  all  other  men  that  have  lived — that  is  the  Christ.  "  If  any  man  have  not  the
Spirit  of  Chrisf,  he  is  none  of  his."

IF.  As  A  P.EST.  "  Pound  in  him."  For  the  soul  to  be  found  in  Christ  is  to  be  fonnd
in  his  character.  We  are  all  living  in  the  characters  of  others.  The  unregenerate  world
lives  in  the  fallen  character  of  Adam.  The  regenerate  world  lives  in  Christ,  in  the  cha-
racter of  Christ.  Besting  in  his  character  as  the  branch  rests  in  the  trunk  of  the  tree,
deriving  from  it  its  life,  its  form,  its  hue,  its  fruit.  Oh  to  live  in  his  character,  in  his
spotless  purity,  in  his  immeasurable  love,  in  his  matchless  excellence !  Those  who  do  so
will  not  have  their  "own  righteousness,  which  is  of  the  Law,"  etc.,  but  his  moral  rectitude,

III.  As  A  Themk.  "  That  I  may  know  him."  The  knowledge  here  does  not  mean
intellectual  knowledge,  but  heart-knowledge,  experimental  knowledge.  1.  Know  him
by  experience  personally.  Before  you  can  know  a  person  you  must  have  the  spirit
that  animates  him.  Love  alone  can  interpret  love,  etc.  2.  Enow  by  experience  the
power  of  his  resurrection.  All  the  spiritual  significance  and  benefits  of  his  resurrection
from  the  dead.  3,  Enow  by  experience  his  sufferingi.  "  Have  fellowship  with  his
sufferings."  There  are  three  kinds  of  suffering:  (1)  those  in  which  Christ  could  have
no  fellowship;  (2)  those  which  he  experienced,  and  in  which  men  could  have  no
fellowship ;'  and  (3)  those  in  which  men  are  bound  to  have  fellowship  with  Christ.  We
are  commanded  to  be  partakers  of  some  of  his  suffi  rings.  (1)  We  should  have  fellow-
ship with  the  intense  regret  which  he  felt  on  account  of  the  existence  of  moral  eviL
The  fact  of  evil  sat  as  a  moimtain  of  agony  on  the  heart  of  Christ.  Sin  was  a  horrible
thino;  to  him,  the  "  abominable  thiag  "  which  he  hated.  (2)  We  should  have  fellowship
with  the  sorrowful  sympathies  which  he  had  for  the  sufferirjgs  of  men.  His  tears  over
Jerusalem,  etc.  (3)  We  should  have  fellowship  with  those  sutferings  which  he  endured
on  account  of  the  dishonour  sin  does  to  the  infinite  Father.

IV.  As  A  Model.  "  Conformable  unto  his  death."  What  does  this  mean  ?  To  die
m  the  manner  which  he  died  on  the  cross  ?  No.  But  to  live  and  die  in  the  mood  he
did,  which  was  self-sacrifice.  He  died,  not  for  himself,  but  for  others.  "  He  gave  him-
self a  ransom  for  many."  Self-sacrificing  love  ia  the  essence  of  personal  Christianity,
and  nothing  else. — D.  T.

Vers.  12 — 14. — Moral  onwardness.  The  Grecian  racecourse  was  well  known  to  Paul
and  to  all  his  readers,  and  hence  he  often  uses  it  as  a  figure  to  illustrate  the  Christian  life.
The  subject  is  spiritual  advancement,  onwardness  in  Divine  excellence.  The  words
suggest  that  this  progress  implies  three  things.

I.  A  CONSCIOUS  DISSATISFACTION  WITH  THE  PEE8BNT.  By  this  I  mean,  not  dissatis-
faction with  the  events  and  cii^cumstances  of  life — Divine  providences — this  would  be
foolish  and  impious,  but  with  present  moral  attainments,  for  he  says,  "Not  as  though
1  had  already  attained,  either  were  already  perfect."  He  was  not  satisfied  with  his
present  assimilation  to  Christ.  He  painfully  felt  the  discrepancy.  This  dissatisfac-
tion is  ever  the  first  step  in  60ul-pro;jress  and  the  impelling  motive  afterwards.
Indeed,  dissatisfaction  with  present  attainments  is  the  spring  of  all  advancement  in
eveiything  in  life.  Dissatisfied  with  huts,  men  build  houses ;  with  the  loose  skin  of
leasts  for  their  covering,  they  manufacture  garments ;  with  caligraphy,  they  invent  the
printing-press;  with  waggons,  they  construct  steam-engines.  He  who  feels  satisfied  with
what  he  has,  whether  it  be  material,  mental,  or  spiritual,  will  never  seek  to  lay  hold
of  something  yet  unattained.

n.  A  COMPARATIVE  OBLivionsNESs  TO  THE  PAST.  "  Forgetting  those  things  which
are  behind."  The  Olympic  racer  did  not  look  behind  him  on  the  course,  but  on  to
the  goal  until  he  reached  and  grasped  .the  pole.  In  soul-onwardness  there  must  be  a
comparative  obliviousness.  We  say  cornparative.  Of  course  there  must  be  and  ought
to  he  remembrances  of  past  mercies  to  inspire  our  gratitude,  of  past  sins  to  humble  us
before  God.  But  attention  to  the  past  should  be  as  nothing  to  that  which  we  give  to
the  future.  Let  the  past  go :  it  is  irreparable  and  unavailing ;  the  grand  future  must
loom  before  us  and  absorb  the  soul.  Look  not  behind  you.  Eeep  your  eyes  right
onward  upon  the  enchanting  scenes  that  are  spread  out  on  the  sunny  heights.

III.  A  ooNOENTEATBD  sTBUGQLE  FOB  THE  FCTUBK.    "  I  press  toward  the  maik  for


OH.  in.  1—21.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  146

the  prize  of  the  hi^h  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  prize  of  the  Grecian  racer
was  a  garland  of  olive,  or  laurel,  or  pine,  or  apple.  What  is  the  moral  prize  ?  Moral
perfection.  To  this  all  men  are  divinely  called  in  Christ.  In  the  true  moral  race  men
are  to  reach  forth,  not  after  happiness  as  an  end,  but  .after  holiness;  not  after  Paradise,
but  after  perftiction.  This  requires  concentration.  There  must  be  no  haU-heartedness,
no  divided  faculties;  it  must  be  the  one  thing;  the  whole  soul  must  be  set  upon  it.
Concentration  is  essential  to  success  in  almost  every  department  of  life.  Noah  built
his  ark  because  he  concentrated  his  being  on  the  work.  Abraham  lived  a  pilgrim
life  because  he  set  his  heart  on  a  city  that  had  a  foundation.  Napoleon  became
nearly  the  master  of  Europe  because  he  had  set  his  heart  on  the  infernal  work.
Demosthenes  became  one  of  the  greatest  orators  of  the  world  because  oratory  was  the
work  on  which  he  set  his  heart.  So  in  all  things.  The  attainment  of  holiness  must
be  the  "one  thing"  in  life.  Learning,  literature, business,  recreation,  must  be  rendered
subservient,  to  this  "  one  thing." — ^D.  T.

Vers.  15—17. — Moral  perfection.  "  Let  us  therefore,  as  many  as  be  perfect,  be  thus
minded :  and  if  in  anything  ye  be  otherwise  minded,  God  shall  reveal  even  this  unto
you.  Nevertheless,  whereto  we  have  already  attained,  let  us  walk  by  the  same  rule,
let  us  mind  the  same  thing.  Brethren,  be  followers  together  of  me,  and  mark  them
which  walk  so  as  ye  have  us  for  an  ensample."  Three  thoughts  are  suggested  here
concerning  moral  perfection.

L  That  moral  perfection  is  attainable  in  this  lipe.  "Let  us  therefore,  as
many  as  be  perfect."  What  is  the  perfection?  No  being  is  absolutely  perfect  but
God;  fallibility  belongs  to  all  rational  creatureship.  The  perfection  consists  in  the
ruling  principle  of  action,  and  that  is  supreme  sympathy  with  the  supremely  Good.
This  is  a  thing  perfect  in  itself ;  it  can  be  strengthened,  but  is  incapable  of  any  modi-
fication. The  perfection  is,  therefore,  that  of  the  embryo  of  character.  The  acorn  is
perfect  as  an  acorn,  not  as  an  oak  ;  the  babe  is  perfect  as  a  babe,  not  as  a  man ;  the
dawn  is  perfect  as  a  dawn,  not  as  a  noon.  There  is  incompletion  in  development,
but  completion  in  the  rudimentaJ,  element.  All  Christians  have  this  or  they  are  not
Christians.

II.  That  the  moral  pbrpection  attainable  in  this  life  is  essentially  pro-
GRESsrvB.  Henee  Paul  speaks  of  "  pressing  towards  the  mark,"  of  "  walking  by  the
same  rule."  The  germinal  principle  is  essentially  growable.  All  life  struggles  for
advancement.  The  acorn  struggles  to  rise  into  majestic  forests,  infants  into  men,  the
unfledged  eagle  to  soar  into  the  heavens  and  to  bask  itself  in  sunny  azure.  Life  not
only  creates  its  own  organization,  but  goes  on  strengthening  and  enlarging  it.  There
is  the  blade,  the  ear,  the  full  corn  in  the  ear.

III.  That  progress  in  moral  perfection  is  an  urgent  obligation.  "  Neverthe-
less, whereto  we  have  already  attained,  let  us  walk  by  the  same  rule,  let  us  mind  the
same  thing."  Like  all  life,  it  has  not  only  an  instinct  and  a  capacity  for  growth,  but  it
has  a  moral  obligation  to  grow.  There  is  no  obligation  on  plantal  or  irrational  life  to
grow,  but  on  moral  life  it  presses  with  all  the  force  of  the  Divine  will.  The  progress
is  here  indicated  by  four  things.  1.  By  a  walk.  "  Let  us  walk."  Walking  implies
life,  deliberation,  and  ouwardness.  2.  By  a  walk  in  loving  union  with  others.  "  Let
us  walk  by  the  same  rule,  let  us  mind  the  same  thing."  We  are  so  constituted  that
social  intercourse  is  essential  to  the  quickening,  the  development,  and  the  satisfying  of
our  natures.  The  society  that  is  required  for  this  is  the  society  who  attend  "  the  same
rule,  mind  the  same  thing,"  one  in  supreme  aim  and  purpose.  Thus  walking,  the  soul
advances,  gets  not  only  new  energy  for  the  old  faculties,  but  new  faculties  developed.
3.  By  following  the  lest  examples.  All  life  has  its  archetypes  or  ideals.  The  growth
of  true  mora}  life  requires  this;  hence  Paul  says,  "Be  followers  together  of  me,  and
mark  them  which  walk  so  as  ye  have  us  for  an  ensample."  He  does  not  say,  I  am  a
perfect  example.  But,  on  the  contrary,  he  says,  elsewhere,  "  Be  ye  followers  of  me,
even  as  I  am  a  follower  of  Cbrist."    Be  followers  of  me  so  far  as  I  follow  Christ.

Conclusion.  Perseverance  in  goodness,  tiien,  is  not  to  be  preached  as  a  doctrine, bat
propounded  as  a  law  and  urged  as  a  duty. — ^D.  T.

Vers.  18,  19. — OonventioncU  Christians  as  viewed  by  genuine.    "  For  many  walk,  e{
FHilippianb.  l


146  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.         [oh.  in.  1— 2L

whom  I  have  told  you  often,  and  now  tell  yon  even  weeping,  that  they  are  the  enemiea
of  the  cross  of  Cluist:  whose  end  is  distructiun,  whose  gud  is  their  helly,  and  whosa
glory  is  in  their  shame,  who  mind  earthly  things."  The  apostle  here  relers  to  those
who  had  joined  the  Christian  Church,  but  whose  hearts  were  unchanged  and  whose
theology  was  antinomian.  In  sooth  they  were  mere  nominal  Christians,  having  a  name
to  live,  but  were  dead.     Observe —

I.  That  the  conduct  of  mere  professoes  of  Cheistianity  is  vest  bad  in  the
EYES  OP  GENUINE  Cheistians.  To  the  eye  of  Paul,  who  was  Christly  in  spiiit,  idoa,
and  aim,  the  conduct  of  these  men  was  revolting  and  lamentable.  It  aj-peared  to  him  :
1.  As  anti-Christian.  "  They  are  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ."  Enemies  not
to  the  mere  fact  of  the  cross.  To  this,  perhaps,  they  would  have  no  hostility,  but
otherwise.  But  to  the  spirit  of  the  cross,  which  was  self-sacrificing  love,  they  were
practically  opposed ;  they  did  not  "  take  up  the  cross  "  and  deny  themselves.  T/>eo-
retically  they  believed  in  it,  practically  they  denied  it.  For  some  reasons  the  greatest
"  enemies  of  the  cross  "  are  mere  conventional  Christians ;  they  practically  deny  that
which  they  profess  theoretically  to  believe.  All  selfish,  carnal,  formalistic,  ritualistic
men  are  "  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ,"  and  they  are  "  many."  2.  As  ruinous.
"  Whose  end  is  destruction."  The  conduct  of  the  genuine  Christian  is  restorative ;
that  of  the  spurious  or  conventional,  ruinous.  Sin,  the  principle  of  death,  is  in  it.
"  When  lust  hath  conceived,  it  bringeth  forth  sin  :  and  sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth
forth  df^ath."  3.  As  sensual.  Their  sensuality  is  here  indicated :  (1)  By  a  pai  ticular
carnal  indulgence.  "  Whose  god  is  their  belly."  They  ate  and  drank,  not  merely  to
allay  the  cravings  of  appetite  and  to  sustain  their  frame,  but  in  order  to  gratify  theii
gastric  tastes  and  sensibilities.  The  table  to  them  was  greater  than  science,  literature,
the  universe;  it  was  their  "god."  (2)  By  a  general  habit  of  mind.  "Who  mind
earthly  things."  No  man  should  disparage  "  earthly  things."  The  earth  is  the  pro-
duction, the  revelation,  and  the  minister  of  God,  and  to  appreciate  it  as  a  school  of
instruction,  a  templi'  of  worship,  and  a  means  of  subsistence  is  what  all  should  do.
But  to  "  mind  eaithly  things,"  to  live  entirely  in  them  and  fcer  them,  this  is  the
wrong  ;  and  conventional  Chiistians  as  well  as  heathens  and  worldlings  do  this.  They
"  set  their  affections  on  them,"  seek  their  glory  from  them,  and  look  for  their  happiness
in  them.     They  are  practical  materialists,  though  theoretic  spiritualists.

II.  That  the  conduct  of  meee  peofessors  of  Christianity  is  veby  heart-dis-
TKESSiNG  to  GENUINE  Cheistians.  "  Of  whom  I  tell  you  even  weeping."  The  sight  ot
a  genuine  tear  has  an  electric  force;  no  eloquence  so  mighty.  Such  a  tear  streaming
from  the  eye  of  a  weak  woman  is  powerful,  from  a  strong  man  more  powerful,  from  a
man  of  transcendent  greatness  it  is  the  most  mighty  moral  force.  Such  a  man  was
Paul,  and  a  greater  than  Paul  never  lived ;  and  here  he  is  in  tears.  "  Of  whom  I  tell
you  even  weeping."  Such  a  man  must  have  had  a  strong  reason  for  such  tears.  Why
did  he  weep  ?  1.  Because  the  cuniUict  of  such  mere  conventional  Chri.stians  was  a  mal-
representation  of  Christ,  the  chief  object  of  his  love.  Nominal  Christians  are  the  great
slanderers  and  calumniators  of  the  world's  Redeemer.  That  man  who  ignores  Christ  is
a  saint  compared  to  him  who  calumniates  him.  Such  is  the  mere  nominal  Christian.
All  genuine  Christians  may  well  weep  at  the  conduct  of  conventional  Christians,  who
constitute  the  vast  majority  of  our  population,  and  are  the  reignmg  "  principalities"
in  Church  and  state.  2.  Because  the  conduct  of  such  mere  conventional  Christians
obstiucts  the  progress  of  spiritual  Christianity  in  the  world.  As  obstructives  to  the
flowing  river  of  spiritual  Christianity  in  the  world,  the  Bradlaughs,  as 'compared  to  the.
hireling  preachers  and  the  uu-Christly  members  of  Churches,  are  but  as  small  pebbles
to  huge  boulders.  The  waters  roll  comparatively  smoothly  over  the  former,  but  are
chafed  and  blocked  by  the  latter.

Conclusion.  It  is  time,  brothers,  for  us  to  estimate  truly  and  to  feel  deeply  the
awful  incongruity  between  the  spirit  of  modern  Churches  and  the  spirit  of  Christianity.
Talk  about  converting  the  world,  the  first  thing  to  be  done  is  to  convert  the  Church  j
-D.T.

Vers.  20,  21. — Tfte  hletsedness  of  the  ChriMy.  "  For  oar  conversation  [citizenship]
is  in  heaven;  from  whence  also  we  look  for  the  [a]  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ:
who  shall  change  our  vile  body,  that  it  may  be  fashioned  like  unto  his  glorious  body,


CH.  m.  1— 21.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  147

[who  shall  fashion  anew  the  hody  of  our  humiliation  that  it  may  be  conformerl  to  the
body  of  his  glory]  according  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able  even  to  sul  due  [sub-
ject] all  things  unto  himself."  The  word  iroklreviM,  which  occurs  nowliere  else  in  the
New  Testament,  does  not  mean  " speech " or  " conduct,"  but  "citizenship."  The  word
"is"  is  emphatic,  signifying  "actually  exists."  If  wears  Christly  o\a  citizenship  is
not  something  to  be,  but  is  now.  The  passage,  therefore,  reveals  to  us  glorious  facts
connected  with  the  life  of  a  Christly  man.

I.  He  IB  A  CITIZEN  OP  THE  HIGHEST  STATE.  He  is  "  in  heaveQ " — heaven  the
glorioiis  metropolis  of  God's  spiritual  empire.  But  how  can  this  be  ?  Is  not  heaven
millions  of  leagues  away,  far  beyond  the  reach  or  ken  of  men  ?  Suppose  it  so,  citizeti-
ship  is  not  dependent  on  distance.  Are  not  those  at  the  antipodes  citizens  of  the  same
commonwealth  as  ourselves  ?  Two  things  make  us  citizens  of  a  state.  1.  That  we  be
governed  hy  its  laws.  What  are  the  laws  of  heaven  ?  The  laws  of  love.  In  the  New
Testament  these  laws  are  sometimes  called  "  the  law  of  life,"  the  "  law  of  liberty,"  etc.
Love  is  the  supreme  law  of  heaven,  and  every  genuine  Christian  is  governed  by  this
law.  2.  That  we  he  invested  with,  its  rights.  What  are  the  rights  which  a  good
government  secures  to  its  citizens?  Protection,  liberty,  freedom,  facilities  for  advance-
ment. Heaven  secures  all  these  to  its  citizens,  wherever  they  are,  on  this  planet  or  on
any  other.  A  Christly  man  enjoys  perfect  guardianship,  glorious  liberty,  and  facilities
for  everlasting  progress.

II.  He  IB  A  SUBJECT  OF  THE  HIGHEST  HOPES.  Not  Only  is  a  Chrfstly  man  a  citizen
of  heaven  now,  enjoying  all  its  rights,  but  he  is  looking  for,  or  waiting  for,  sonu'tliing
glorious  in  the  future.  1.  The  advent  of  a  Saviour.  "  Prom  whence  also  we  look  for
the  Saviour."  Waiting  for  the  return  of  him  who  is  the  supreme  Object  of  his  love.
This  attitude  of  mind  implies  four  things.  (1)  A  belief  that  his  Saviour  is  somewhere
in  existence.  (2)  A  conviction  that  there  is  a  period  when  he  will  appear.  (3)  A
consciousness  of  fitness  to  meet  him.  (4)  An  assurance  that  his  advent  is  desirable.
2.  A  glorious  transformation.  "  Who  shall  change  our  vile  body  "— "  body  of  humilia-
tion." The  body  is  not  norrruilly  "  vile ;  "  not  vile,  either,  in  its  organization  or  func-
tions. As  an  organism  it  is  exquisitely  perfect — "  fearful ly  and  wonderfully  made  ; "
but  iu  its  abnormal  state  it  is  "  vile''  by  reason  of  the  diseases  to  which  it  is  subject,
the  uses  to  which  it  is  put,  and  the  undue  influence  which  its  pampered  appetites  have
obtained  over  the  intellect,  conscience,  soul.  But  a  glorious  transformation  awaits  it.
(1)  The  model.  "  His  glorious  body."  How  glorious  was  his  resurrection-body  as  he
ascended  to  the  heavens !  How  glorious  will  it  appear  as  he  comes  on  a  great  white
throne  to  judge  the  world !  The  transformation  to  be  wrought  in  this  body  is  liesci  ibed
in  1  Cor.  XV.  42 — 54.  Observe :  (2)  The  agency.  "According  to  the  working  "  That
is,  in  virtue  of  the  effectual  working  of  his  power  to  subject  all  things  to  himself.  His
power  is  not  a  dormant  element,  but  an  active  force,  a  force  working  towards  glorious
results  on  behalf  of  his  genuine  disciples. — D.  T.

Ver.  1. — Sameness.  I.  Itb  necessity.  In  ordinary  life  there  must  be  much  ot
sameness.  The  same  duties,  occupations,  interests,  events,  occur  from  day  to  day.
The  same  temptations  have  to  be  met  by  the  same  s]  iritual  weapons.  This  is  very
clearly  seen  when  our  duties  are  concerned  with  the  training  and  teaching  of  others.
The  same  faults  must  be  rebuked,  the  same  advice  given,  the  same  disappointments
experienced.  >

II.  Its  tbdiousnbss.  Many  feel  this  keenly  and  long  for  a  greater  variety  and  a  life
full  of  excitement  and  change.

III.  Its  safety.  1.  For  ourselves.  Excitement  ends  in  revulsion  and  exhaustion.
Sameness  builds  up  a  regulated  life.  Our  characters  are  formed  by  the  repetition  of
ideas  rather  than  by  experiencing  a  succession  of  startling  events.  2.  For  others.  In
dealing  with  them  it  is  most  important  that  we  should  be  always  the  same.  There  is
need  of  justice,  self-control,  an  even  temper,  and  an  absence  of  caprice  ai  d  partiality.

IV.  Its  Divine  character.  God  is  ever  the  same  and  works  by  his  own  divinely
arranged  laws.  Our  moods  and  our  circumstances  change,  but  our  Lord  is  the  saniu
yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  Where  would  be  our  conhdence  if  he  were  to  change  ?
Bles.sed  to  have  an  unchanging  Friend  and  an  unchanging  home,  where  there  i«  tc»1
amidst  all  the  changes  of  our  external  lives, — V.  W.  H.


U8  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.        [oh.  m.  1— 2L

Vers.  2,  3. — Identity  not  to  hefownd  in  continuity  of  form,  hut  in  'harmony  of  thi
inmr  spirit.  I.  Uselessness  of  outward  forms  when  their  spirit  has  passed  qui
OP  THEM.  The  Judaizing  party  cluug  to  their  circumcision  as  if  it  were  their  title  to
acceptance  with  God.  St.  Pai^l  shows  that,  since  the  substance,  of  which  circumcision
was  the  shadow,  has  beea  bestowed  upon  men,  to  insist  upon  the  outward  form  was  to
forfeit  the  reality  of  which  it  was  the  forecast.  The  truly  circumcised  were  such  as,
with  or  without  the  form,  worshijjped  God  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  All  forms  have
a  tendency  to  lose  their  informing  spirit  and  to  become  empty  husks.  If  this  takes
place  through  the  lukewarmness  of  those  who  use  them,  the  true  remedy  is  to  seek
to  breathe  in  them  once  again  the  spirit  which  is  their  life.  If  that  which  was  formerly
their  life  now  finds  truer  expression  in  newer  forms,  it  may  be  a  sign  that  the  eld  has
accomplished  its  purpose  and  should  now  cease  to  be.

II.  Obsolete  forms  mat  be  harmful  as  well  as  useless.  They  become  so  as  soon
as  they  are  regarded  as  essential,  apart  from  the  inner  spirit  which  makes  them  live.
They  then  become  loss  instead  of  gain,  and  actual  hindrances  to  the  promotion  of  that
which  they  were  designed  to  promote.

III.  Seek  to  distinguish  between  means  and  end.  This  is  necessary,  not  only  in
the  cultivation  of  spiritual  life,  but  in  the  promotion  of  any  purpose.  Not  unfrequently
means  are  so  multiplied  that  the  end  is  obscured  rather  than  forwarded.  See  that  the
means  used  are  actually  means  to  the  desired  end  and  are  not  tacitly  usurping  its  place.
Even  the  means  of  grace  may  cease  to  be  means  of  grace. — V.  W.  H.

Vers.  8,  9. — The  knowledge  of  Christ  the  one  thing  needful.  I.  What  it  is.  To
know  him  is  to  know  God,  and  to  know  God  is  eternal  life.  It  is  not  knowledge  aloui
him,  but  knowledge  of  him,  that  we  need.     We  must  know  him  as  we  know  a  person.

II.  How  WE  MUST  SEEK  THIS.  All  things  tliat  hinder  us  from  obtaininp;  this  know-
ledge must  be  surrendered.  Even  such  things  as  we  have  hitherto  made  a  boast  of
must  go  if  they  are  preventing  us  from  knowing  him.  Our  reputation  for  consi^tency,
our  hitherto  unsuspected  character,  our  most  cherished  occupations  or  friends, — all
these  are  "  loss "  in  comparison  with  the  knowledge  of  him  which  is  to  be  found  in
obedience  to  him.

III.  What  it  will  do  for  us,  ] .  It  will  win  Christ  as  Friend,  Advocate,  Redeemer,
King.  He  will  be  on  our  side,  however  coldly  earthly  friends  may  regard  us.  2.  Thus
winning  him  we  shall  be  found  in  him.  When  the  tempter  comes  to  allure  us  he
will  not  dare  approach,  for  he  will  find  us  in  him.  When  the  accuser  stands  up  at  the
last  day  to  charge  us  with  our  many  sins  his  words  will  fall  powerless,  for  we  shall  be
found  in  him  who  is  our  Defence.

IV.  What  it  will  bestow  upon  us.  Eighteousness ;  not  the  merely  external
righteousness  which  may  be  secured  by  the  punctual  observance  of  legal  duties,  but  the
righteousness  which  is  of  God.  This  righteousness  of  his  is  incarnate  in  Christ,  and  is
imparted  by  him  to  all  who  are  in  union  with  him  through  faitli.  This  is  complete
righteousness,  for  it  is  the  perfect  righteousness  which  Christ  himself  has  and  is.
—V.  W.  H.

Vers.  10,  II. — The  knowledge  of  Christ ;  its  degree  and  its  purpose.  L  The
knowledge  of  his  person.  This  is  the  initiatory  step.  We  must  first  recognize  him
to  be  our  own  God  and  Saviour,  and  One  who  is  to  be  altogether  longed  for.  Nathanael
thus  knew  him  (John  i.  49),  and  St.  Peter  (Matt.  xvi.  16).

II.  The  knowledge  op  the  power  of  his  resurrection.  This  is  a  step  beyond  the
simple  knowledge  of  his  person.  It  can  be  found  only  in  our  own  spiritual  experience
when  we  recognize  his  power  in  the  victory  which  he  wins  in  us  over  the  power  of  sin.
St.  Peter  did  not  learn  the  power  of  Christ's  resurrection  until  he  bad  received  the
Holy  Ghost.

III.  The  fellowship  of  his  sufferings.  When  we  have  experienced  the  power  of
his  resiinection  we  begin  to  find  that  his  sufferings  are  ours  and  ours  are  his.  We
begin  to  feel  something  of  that  keenest  of  all  his  sufferings,  the  misery  of  the  presenca
and  the  power  of  sin.  At  the  same  time,  we  find  that,  by  a  certain  law  of  reciprocity
our  own  sufferings  are  no  longer  exclusively  our  own,  but  that  be  ia  bearing  tkejn  witb
us  and  fat  oa.


CH.  ni.  1— 21.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN3.  148

IV.  By  these  stages  we  akf,  made  coNroBMABLB  TO  HIS  DEATH.  His  death  was  an
entire  death  unto  sin  ;  hy  our  thus  dwelling  in  him  and  he  in  us  we  also  die  unto  sin.

V.  Thus  dying  unto  sin  we  attain  to  the  eesukeection  or  the  dead  ;  i.e  not
merely  to  the  extension  of  life  after  physical  death,  but  to  the  complete  resurrection,
which  is  the  entire  victory  over  every  form  of  death,  natural  or  spiritual. — V.  W.  H.

Vera.  12 — 14. — The  Christian  race :  conditions  of  victory.  1.  The  recognition  that
wo  »re  not  yet  conquerors,  and  that  every  effort  on  our  part  is  necessary  ilf  we  would
Bccure  the  prize.  2.  The  knowledge  that  we  afe  not  running  the  race  in  our  own
strength,  but  that  we  are  seeking  to  seize  upon  a  victory  already  designed  for  us.
When  we  realize  that  Christ  has  grasped  us  we  know  that  we  are  being  upheld  by
him,  and  our  confidence  of  final  victory  is  no  longer  in  ourselves,  but  in  him.  3.  The
faith  that  we  are  freed  from  our  past  sins  by  the  atoning  power  of  Christ.  If  we  cannot
feel  assured  of  this  we  are  for  ever  worrying  about  the  things  which  are  behind  instead
of  forgetting  them,  and  are  thus  powerless  to  look  forward  to  the  things  that  are  befor«.
Look  forwards  and  upwards,  rather  than  backwards,  if  you  would  succeed  in  life's  race.
4.  Striving  under  such  conditions  we  are  more  than  conquerors  through  him  who  loves
us.— V.  W.  H.

Vers.  16,  16. — A  deficient  faith  v}iU  he  accepted  and  enlightened  if  it  he  held  in
a  good  conscience.  The  true  law  of  spiritual  progress  has  been  laid  down  by  St.  Paul
in  the  foregoing  verses.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  many  who  apiiear  to  be  making
such  progress  without  any  clear  idea  of  these  conditions  or  any  definite  grasp  of  the
gospel  scheme.     How  are  we  to  regard  such  ?

I.  As  not  ruLLY  enlightened.  He  who  is  perfect,  t.e.  full  grown  in  Christian
experience,  will  realize  that  the  progress  described  by  St.  Paul  is  the  only  true  form  of
spiritual  growth.

II.  Their  want  of  enlightenment  is  from  want  op  knowledge  and  not  from  an
EVIL  conscience.  Such  ignorance  will  not  hinder  them  from  receiving  God's  grace  if
they  persevere  in  that  to  which  their  conscience  guides  them.

III.  Such  persevebancb  will  lead  them  into  the  light.  However  deficient
their  knowledge  may  be,  their  faith  is  true  and  will  not  be  left  uniastructed.  ''  If  any
man  wills  to  do  God's  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine"  (John  vii.  17).  The
woman  who  sought  healing  by  touching  the  hem  of  Christ's  garment  is_  an  example  ol
uninstructed  faith  not  without  its  reward.  She  is  in  error  in  imagining  that  his
healing  power  proceeded  from  some  magic  effluence  from  his  body  rather  than  from  his
love.  Bnt  it  was  an  error  of  the  head  and  not  of  the  heart.  She  is  right  enough  in
her  simple  faith  in  him.  By  her  faith  she  gains  that  which  she  sought;  and  more,
even  his  blessing,  "  Go  in  peace  1 " — V.  W.  H.

Vers.  20,  21. — Our  heavenly  citizenship.  The  Christian  is  living  in  two  spheres
at  the  same  time.  Locally,  he  is  a  citizen  of  the  world;  spiritually,  he  is  in  heaven.
Compare  our  Lord's  description  of  the  twofold  condition  of  the  apostles  whom  he  was
leaving — they  were  "  in  the  world "  and  yet  they  were  "  in  him  "  (John  xvi.  33).
These  spheres  are  not  of  necessity  opposed  the  one  to  the  other,  but  tliey  become  so
when  the  lower  attempts  to  usurp  the  place  which  belongs  to  the  higher.

I.  The  difficulty  of  realizing  this  heavenly  citizenship.  We  are  surrounded
by  the  circumstances  of  our  external  lives,  which  press  upon  us  very  closely.  We  are
now  clothed  with  a  "  body  of  humiliation."

II.  The  blessings  which  proceed  from  realizing  it.  1.  Faith  in  the  power  of  our
King ;  if  we  are  his  subjects  he  has  a  duty  towards  us  which  he  will  surely  fulfil.
2.  Love  for  the  grace  which  he  bestows.  8.  Hope  that  he  will  come  to  free  us  from
this  divided  service.

III.  He  has  himself  shared  ni  this  twofold  life.  While  on  earth  he  was  still
"  in  heaven  "  (John  iii.  13).

IV.  We  are  to  share  in  his  victory  over  the  world.  The  body  of  his  humilia-
tion has  been  changed  into  the  body  of  his  glory.  We  are  to  be  changed  in  like
manner,  so  that  our  outward  condition  as  well  as  our  inner  life  may  partake  of  tha
heavenly  citizenship. — V.  W.  H.


150  THE   KPTSTLE  TO   THE   PHILIPPIANS.        [ch.  iii.  1— 21

Ver.  1— (See  on  oh.  iv.  4.)— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  2. — " Bogs''  Jews  regarded  the  Gentiles  as  Ao%s  (M;itt.  xv.  22,  et  seq.).  Tha
unclean  feeding  of  these  animals— the  so.ivengers  of  Eastern  cities — was  supposed  to  be
analogous  to  the  Gentile  freedom  in  eating  all  kinds  of  meats.  St.  Paul  turns  the
tables,  and  calls  the  Judaizers  who  feed  upon  carnal  ordinances  dogs  in  comparison
with  Christians  who  live  on  the  higher  spiritual  food.

I.  COKTEMPTUOUB   LANGUAGE   MAT    BE    OCCASIONALLY    PERMITTED    IN    CONTROVERST.

It  is  a  most  dangerous  weapon.  Rarely  is  it  called  for.  Only  they  who  have  great
kindness  of  heart  can  use  it  safely,  and  these  people  are  the  most  loth  to  employ  it  at
all.  Still,  even  Christ  called  Herod  a  fox  and  spoke  of  casting  pearls  before  swine.
Contempt  should  only  be  for  the  baseness  of  a  character,  never  for  the  human  soul  in
which  that  baseness  dwells.  But  there  are  some  habits  and  thoughts  which  we  should
heartily  despise,  and  which  can  be  best  condemned  by  contempt.

II.  OpPBOBRIOUS   epithets   are  apt  to   revert   on  the    HEAD   OP   THOSE   WHO   COIN

THEM.  Jews  who  regard  the  Gentiles  as  dogs  merit  the  same  name  when  they  cling  to
lower  thinking  aad  living  than  is  consistent  with  Christianity.  In  despising  others  we
may  be  preparing  the  way  for  contempt;  to  fall  on  ourselves.

III.  Lack  of  spiEiTnALiTT  is  the  boot  op  unoleanness.  The  Judaizers  are  dogs
because  they  cling  to  carnal  ordinances.  The  unspiritual  is  carnal,  and  the  carnal  in
its  unrestrained  exercise  is  the  unclean.  Therefore  the  remedy  for  impurity  of  thought
and  action  is  not  the  observance  of  rigorous  ritual,  but  the  cultivation  of  a  spiritual
tone  of  mind.

IV.  As  Christians  wb  abb  required  to  shun  the  first  appboach  to  what  is
UNHOLY.  The  carnal  ordinance  must  be  avoided  because  it  is  the  first  step  towards
the  carnal  sin.  We  ought  not  to  ask  how  far  we  can  go  safely  in  tiie  direction  of  evil,
but  rather  to  strive  to  keep  as  far  as  possible  away  from  it.  Even  the  company  of
those  who  are  unholy  must  be  shunned.  We  are  not  only  not  to  behave  like  the  dogs ;
we  are  to  beware  of  the  dogs. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  7,  8. — All  loss  for  Christ  is  gain.  No  one  of  the  early  Christians  was  favoured
with  richer  religious  endowments  or  with  higher  rank  than  those  enjoyed  by  St.  Paul,
and  no  one  was  called  to  make  more  heavy  social  and  ecclesiastical  sacrifices  in  entering
the  Church.  Yet  the  apostle  regarded  his  former  wealth  of  privileges  as  so  much  loss
because  it  was  a  hindrance  to  his  receiving  true  wealth  in  Olirist,  and  the  winning  of
Christ  as  not  simply  a  balance  of  profit,  but  as  wholly  a  gain ;  so  that,  though  in  the
eyes  of  the  world  he  had  made  an  astounding  facrifice,  in  his  own  estimation  he  had
made  no  sacrifice  at  all,  but  had  got  a  pure  and  simple  advantage  from  the  exchange.

I.  Religious  privileges  may  become  beligious  hindhances.  In  their  origin  and
primary  purpose,  of  course,  they  could  not  be  so,  or  they  would  never  be  privileges.  But
changing  circumstances  and  abuse  of  them  may  make  them  of  more  harm  than  good.
A  pure  Jewish  birth,  Pharisaism,  and  the  Law  were  once  all  s;ood.     But  in  St.  Paul's  day

.and  in  relation  to  Christianity  they  became  positively  injurious.  So  now  a  man's
position  and  education  in  religion  may  be  converted  into  a  hindrance  to  his  real  Christian
life.  1.  We  may  be  satisfied  with  these  privileges  and  so  not  care  to  go  on  to  the
higher  blessings.  The  self-com|ilacent  Pharisee  does  not  ask  for  and  therefore  misses
the  grace  which  the  penitent  publican  seeks  and  therefore  finds,  The  religious  posses-
sions of  the  former  result  in  his  poverty,  the  poverty  of  the  latter  in  his  wealth.  2.  We
may  he  prejudiced  by  the  nature  of  these  privileges  or  by  our  experience  of  them.  An
imperfect  religion  is  in  itself  better  than  no  religion,  but  it  becomes  worse  when  it
prejudices  us  against  a  higher  faith.

II.  The  gbeatest  beligious  peivileges  aee  of  no  use  without  Christ.  St.  Paul
counts  them  as  "but  dung."  To  be  born  of  Christian  parents,  to  be  educated  in
Christian  truths,  to  be  associated  in  Christian  fellowship,  and  to  be  zealous  in  Christian
work, — all  these  things  will  count  as  nothing  for  our  soul's  profit  if  we  do  not  know,
trust,  love,  and  follow  Christ.  It  is  true  that  they  who  have  not  an  opportunity  of
knowing  Christ  may  be  benefited  by  other  religious  aids.  But  when  Christ  is  accessible
a  higher  standard  is  set  before  us,  and  to  liye  in  the  beggarly  elements  is  won«  tbftq
fooUabi— it  is  fatal.


MI.  III.  1—21.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  161

III.  Wb  mat  have  to  make  great  sacrifices  in  ordek  to  receive  Christ.  Wa
may  have  to  give  up  worldly  position,  pleasant  social  conn.otions,  etc.  We  shall  have
to  renounce  all  our  Pharisaic  righteousness.  That  structure  which  we  have  been  build-
ing with  so  much  care  and  admiring  so  devoutly  must  be  razed  to  the  ground.  Let  us
count  the  cost.

IV.  To  gain  Christ  is  so  profitable  that  the  loss  of  all  things  else  counts  as
NOTHING  IN  comparison.  It  is  not  simply  that  the  scale  dips.  It  is  that  the  weight
on  the  other  side  is  not  felt;  nay,  that  the  value  of  tlie  things  given  up  is  converted
into  its  opposite,  because  they  hindered  the  reception  of  Christ.  In  the  great  equation,
all  earthly  things  that  stayed  us  from  seeking  Christ  are  lumped  together  and  a  minus
sign  affixed  to  the  whole.  If  wo  have  truly  won  Christ  at  the  greatest  cost  we  are
conscious  of  no  sacrifice.     It  is  all  infinite  gain. — W.  P.  A.

Ver.  10. — "  The  fellowship  of  his  sufferings."  I.  TnB  Christian  is  called  into  the
fellowship  op  ms  Lord's  sufferings.  '  1.  He  is  called  into  fellowship  with  Christ.
This  is  further  implied  by  the  clause,  "  becoming  conformed  unto  his  death."  It  is
St.  Panl's  conception  of  the  heart  and  essence  of  the  Christian  life.  He  constantly
describes  the  process  of  our  union  with  Christ  as  involving  our  repetition  of  Ginist's
experience  of  life,  suffering,  death,  resurrection,  and  ascension.  The  Christian  life  is  an
"Imifatio  Christi."  2.  The  Christian  is  called  to  suffer  with  Christ.  His  life  is  not
all  suffering.  Much  Divine  gladness  shines  across  the  path  of  his  pilgrimage.  But
while  new  joys  come  with  the  gospel,  new  sorrows  unfelt  before  also  acoompany  it.
Christ's  joy  is  in  his  people  (Jolin  xv.  11).  So  also  is  his  sorrow.  The  Christian  has
his  Tabor  and  his  Olivet;  he  has,  too,  his  Gethsemane  and  his  Calvary  (Rom.  vi.  5;
2  Cor.  iv.  10).  3.  The  necessary  experience  of  the  Christian  life  involves  a  fellow-
ship in  the  sufferings  of  Christ.  The  sufferings  are  not  accidental.  (1)  Externally,
they  are  caused  as  Christ's  were  caused.  "  A  servant  is  not  above  his  lord.  If  they
persecuted  me  they  will  also  persecute  you"  (John  xv.  20).  St.  Paul  suffered  from
Jewish  jealousy,  as  Christ  did  before.  More  generally  the  hatred  of  darkness  to  light
which  raged  against  the  great  Light  of  the  world  besets  and  attacks  all  the  children
of  light.  ('2)  Internally,  we  have  to  fight  all  evil,  and  the  mortal  conflict  is  pain-
ful. (3)  8ympa,theticaUy,  our  union  with  Christ  leafls  us  to  sorrow  with  him  in  his
sorrow.

II.  The  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings  is  one  of  the  greatest  Christian
privileges.  We  might  naturally  take  it  to  be  quite  otherwise.  We  might  think  it  a
thing  to  be  submitted  to  simply  as  part  of  the  necessary  cost  of  entering  the  kingdom
of  heaven.  But  St.  Paul  reckons, it  as  part  of  the  gain  in  comparison  with  whiLh  all
conceivable  earthly  advantages  are  but  as  refuse.  How  can  this  be  ?  Surely  we  cannot
embrace  and  love  pain  for  its  own  sake.  1.  Fellowship  with  Christ's  sufferings  is  a
great  honov/r.  It  is  something  to  be  counted  worthy  to  suffer  with  him.  We  honour
our  noblest  heroes  by  selecting  them  for  the  most  arduous  tasks.  2.  This  fellowship
preserves  us  from  many  evils.  Sorrow  is  a  spiritual  antiseptic.  It  kills  the  germs  of
corruption  that  breed  freely  in  luxury.  To  be  admitted  into  the  sacred  temple  of  the
sorrows  of  Christ,  to  be  touched  with  the  solemn  awe  of  his  agony,  and  to  feel  in  our-
selves some  faint  throbs  of  this  sublime  passion,  all  this  is  to  be  called  above  the  earthly
scenes  of  folly  and  sin  and  to  receive  a  baptism  of  purification.  3.  This  fellowship  leads
us  to  participation  in  Christ's  glory.  The  story  does  not  end  with  the  suffering.  It  looks
tragic;  but  it  is  no  tragedy;  for  it  issues  in  glad  hallelujahs.  But  as  even  Christ  was
perfected  through  suffering,  so  much  more  must  his  disciples  tread  the  via  dolorosa  in
order  to  reach  their  triumph.  It  is  they  who  suffer  with  him  who  will  also  be  glorified
together  with  him. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  13. — Forward.  Like  the  runner  who  will  lose  the  prize  if  he  mistake  any
point  short  of  the  goal  for  the  end,  or  if  he  waste  his  time  in  looking  back  on  the  course
traversed,  the  Christian  must  press  forward  with  his  face  towards  Christ,  unresting  till
the  great  race  is  won.

■  I.  Wb  must  not  consider  any  present  attainment  sufficient.  St.  Paul  was  no
novice  when  he  wrote  this  Epistle.  An  old  man,  rich  and  ripe  in  mafliy  graces,  far  and
away  beyond  the  experience  of  most  Christians,  he  still  felt  that  he  had  not  reached


152  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.         [oh.  m.  1—21.

the  great  end  of  his  efforts.  How  much  less  can  inferior  Christians  allow  themselves
to  be  satisfied  with  what  they  have  as  yet  acquired!  The  end  is  to  be  perfect  as  our
Father  in  heaven  is  perfect  (Matt.  v.  48).  We  are  not  blamed  if  we  have  not  yet
reached  that  crown  of  goodness.  But  we  are  blamed  if  we  are  not  pressing  on  to  it
and  rest  contented  with  anything  short  of  it.  Height  above  height  rises  before  us.
Let  no  inferior  aim  lull  us  to  unfaithful  indolence  with  its  soothing  prospects.

IL  We  must  look  fobwaed,  not  backwakd.  Some  men  stand  with  their  faces  to
the  west,  regrelting  the  lost  radiance  of  the  setting  sun.  Others  turn  their  gaze  on  the
cant,  eager  to  catch  the  first  streak  of  dawn.  Surely  the  latter  are  the  wiser.  Our  faces
look  forwards  that  we  may  see  the  path  we  are  about  to  tread  instead  of  looking  only
on  the  path  already  trodden.  1.  We  must  forget  past  attainments.  Otherwise  they
■will  be  a  snare,  and  out  of  the  very  fruit  of  good  deeds  may  be  distilled  the  poisonous
narcotic  that  will  prevent  the  repetition  of  them.  Let  the  sweet  fruit  be  cast  away
that  the  seed  may  be  sown  to  produce  future  fruit.  2.  We  must  forget  past  failures.
It  is  foolish  to  dwell  in  idle  regrets,  for  thus  we  neglect  the  duty  of  to-day  in  lamenting
the  neglect  of  yesterday's  duty  1  It  is  positively  wrong  to  clog  our  future  efforts  by
carrying  the  burden  of  past  sin.  If  God  has  forgiven  our  sin  we  should  forget  it.
3.  We  must  forget  past  joys  and  sorrows — this  only  in  a  measure,  of  course.  We  are
human,  and  there  are  wholesome  uses  of  memory.  But  still  the  dreamy  life  of  reflec-
tion is  Badly  hindering  to  progress.  Greater  joys  open  before  us — even  before  the
saddest,  most  desponding  of  us,  if  we  are  truly  following  Christ — than  any  that  lie
buried  in  the  graves  of  the  past.  They  who  may  hope  for  the  joy  of  the  resurrection
reunion  do  foolishly  to  weep  for  ever  at  the  tomb.

III.  We  must  8TBET0H  FOBWAED  TO  THE  THINGS  WHICH  AEB  BBFOBE.    The  pictUrBSque

figure  represents  the  eager  runner  who  stretches  out  his  hand  and  bends  his  body
_  towards  the  long-sought  end  of  liis  endeavours.  The  eye  must  precede  the  foot.  If
our  hearts  are  not  already  in  heaven  our  souls  cannot  be  travelling  thither.  Great
effort  is  also  necessary.  The  Christian  must  put  forth  all  his  energies.  His  life  is  a
battle,  a  wrestling,  a  race.

IV.  Cbeibt  is  the  End  of  the  bace.  1.  He  is  the  Goal.  We  are  to  strive  to  attain
unto  him.  The  Christian  course  is  marked  out  by  the  footprints  of  Christ.  Every
right  step  brings  us  nearer  Christ,  both  in  resemblance  and  in  fellowship.  Perfection
is  absolute  Christ-likeuess;  2.  Christ  is  also  the  Prize.  The  end  of  the  race  is  its  own
reward.  And  it  is  enough.  To  possess  Christ  is  worth  the  loss  of  all  earthly  posses-
sions (ver.  7).  It  is,  however,  in  the  end,  to  give  us  the  inheritance  of  all  things
(1  Cor,  iii,  22,  23).— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  15. — "  Otherwise  minded."  I.  Diveesity  of  opinion  is  possible  among  genuine
Chbistians.  St.  Paul  was  writing  to  a  Christian  Church  which  he  honoured  with  rare
commendation  for  its  fidelity  and  spiritual  attainments.  Nevertheless,  he  admitted
that  some  of  his  readers  might  not  see  truth  as  he  saw  \i.

II.  We  must  not  attempt  to  fobcb  othees  into  agkeement  with  oueselves.
Every  honest  thinker  must  believe  that  his  own  view  is  correct,  or  he  would  abandon
it.  In  fact,  he  only  adopts  it  because  he  believes  it  to  be  true.  1'herefore  he  must
wish  others  to  agree  with  him.  But  he  has  no  right  to  use  violence,  abuse,  and
recrimination.  He  should  respect  his  brother's  right  to  think.  St.  Paul  was  far
superior  to  the  Christians  of  PhilippL  Yet  he  treated  their  possible  difference  of
opinion  with  courtesy  and  gentleness.

III.  If  we  abb  bight  in  the  coubsb  of  the  Cheistian  life,  diffeebnces  of
opinion  on  speculative  points  will  not  be  fatal.  Tliey  are  not  unimportant.  All
truth  is  useful  and  all  error  injurious.  Still,  fidelity  to  Christ  in  practice  is  far  more
important  than  all  else.  And  even  men  who  are  clogged  and  maimed  by  egregious
errors — as  we  Protestants  think  Koman  Catholic  and  Gieek  Christians  must  be — will
reach  the  end  safely  if  they  are  truly  pressing  forward  to  Christ,

IV.  Fidelity  to  Chbist  will  lead  to  a  eevblation  op  tbuth  on  those  points
whbbe  we  ABE  AS  YET  IN  EBROB,  It  is  uot  by  Controversy,  much  less  by  excommuni-
•cation  and  brands  of  heresy,  that  error  is  eliminated  from  the  Church.  Nothing  opens
wur  eyes  so  clearly  as  faithful  service.  He  will  kaow  the  doctrine  who  keeps  the
I  commandment.— W<  F,  A.


OH.  in.  1—21.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  153

Ver.  17. — Imitation.  When  a  maa  invites  others  to  become  imitators  of  himself  he
must  be  either  possessed  by  an  absurd  self-admiration  or  almost  entirely  devoid  of  self-
regarding  feelings.  The  latter  was  the  case  with  St.  Paul.  He  saw  the  plain  tact  that
there  were  points  in  which  it  was  desirable  for  the  Fhilippians  to  imitate  him,  and  he
was  so  unselfishly  concerned  for  their  welfare  as  never  to  have  a  passing  thought  that
he  might  be  laying  himself  open  to  a  charge  of  self-glorification.  The  self-forget t'ul  man
will  dare  to  do  things  which  the  self-conscious  man  shrinl^s  from  in  modesty,  and  yet
the  former  is  the  humbler  of  the  two.  It  is  the  perfection  of  humility  and  self-abnega-
tion to  be  able  to  stand  as  a  model  for  others  without  a  suggestion  that  one's  own  glory
is  advanced  thereby,  with  nothing  but  regard  for  the  interests  of  the  others.

I.  Wk  ABE  NATURALLY  IMITATIVE.  If  We  do  not  follow  good  examples  we  go  after
the  bad.  Absolute  originality  is  almost  impossible.  Imitation  is  largely  unconscious.
But  it  is  profitable  for  us  to  make  use  of  this  powerful  instinct  by  turning  it  towards
the  best  models.

II.  Hdman  examples  may  be  followed  with  great  advantage.  Our  highest
model  is  God,  for  we  are  to  be  perfect  as  our  Father  in  heaven  is  perfect.  Christ  is
our  great  Example.  Still,  there  is  large  room  for  the  infiuence  of  other  men.  Several
things  give  force  to  this  influence.  1.  Similarity  of  circumstances.  We  can  select  an
example  from  among  men  who  have  similar  duties  and  temptations  to  our  own.  Our
fellow-men  have  all  to  fight  the  same  battle  with  sin.  2.  Personal  knowledge.  We
can  understand  best  the  examples  of  those  lives  which  pass  before  our  own  eyes.  3.
Affection.  This  draws  us  to  follow  those  we  love.  4.  Special  characteristics.  In
particular  circumstaiices  certain  men  become  the  best  examples.  Hence  one  use  of
biography,  knowledge  of  mankind,  etc.

III.  The  example  of  St.  Paul  is  of  peculiar  value.  This  may  be  considered  in
legard  to  his  whole  life  and  character.  Note  three  particulars  suggested  by  the  con-
text. 1.  His  liberality  of  sentiment.  This  was  a  special  point  for  the  Pliilippians  who
were  thieatened  by  Judaizing  narrowness.  2.  His  ceaseless  efforts  after  spiritual  progress.
(Vers.  12—16.)    3.  His  spirituality.    (Vers.  18—21.)

IV.  Every  teacher  should  endeavour  to  lead  by  example.  Example  will
affect  teaching  one  way  or  another.  If  it  is  bad  it  will  either  lead  people  astray  or,  if
they  resist  its  influence,  it  will  discredit  the  teacher  and  frustrate  his  work.  Without
posing  for  imitation,  every  leader  and  teacher  of  men  should  be  careful  to  be  worthy
of  it.

V.  Imitation,  to  be  profitable,  must  be  discriminating  and  free.  1.  Dis-
criminating. (1)  That  good  models  may  be  chosen  ;  and  (2)  that  these  may  be  followed
in  their  good  pomts  and  not  in  their  bad  points,  for  there  is  no  more  fascinating  snare
than  the  temptation  to  copy  only  the  weakness  of  great  men.  2.  Free.  A  servile
copying  may  lead  us  into  positive  wrong-doing,  since  "  circumstances  alter  cases,"  and
at  best  it  is  devoid  of  moral  principle.  We  must  imitate  the  spirit  of  our  examples,
translating  this  into  the  terms  of  our  own  individual  requirements. — W.  P.  A.

Ver.  20. — Citizenship  in  heaven,    I.  The  fact.    Christians  are  citizens  of  heaven.
1.  They  are  under  heavenly  government.    Other  men  are  ruled  by  earthly  iofluences —
laws  of  the  state,  social  customs,  worldly  expediency,  etc.    The  true  followers  of  Christ
obey  higher  laws  and  serve  an  unseen  King.     It  is  their  recognized  aim  to  do  God's
will  on  earth  as  the  angels  do  it  in  heaven.     They  confess  supreme  all  giance  to  a
heavenly  Lord.    2.  They  perform  heavenly  functions.    To  be  a  loyal  citizen  means  to
share  in  the  common  municipal  life.    This  Christians  undertake  in  their  lelations  with
the  city  above.     Their  conversation  is  to  be  in  heaven.     They  are  to  set.  their  affections
on  things  above.     Their  chief  concern  is  to  do  their  work  on  earth  so  as  best  to  promote
the  glory  of  heaven.     Generally  they  are  to  shape  their  lives  according  to  the  celestial
polity.    S.  They  enjoy  heavenly  privileges.    Citizenship  is  a  privilege.     This  was  wel'
understood  in  St.  Paul's  day,  when  some  men  prided  themselves  in  being  born  Boma
while  others  were  willing  to  pay  a  great  price  to  obtain  the  rights  of  Eoman  citizen.
(Acts  xxii.   28).      Englishmen   now  claim    protection    and   immunity  from   fore
exactions  in  all  parts  of  the  world  on  account  of  their  nationality.     So  Christians  ha
the  high  privileges  of  Divine  liberty,  safety,  and  hoaoui  that  accompany  a  heaTenlf


154  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.         [CH.  lu.  1— 21.

II.  The  influbncb  of  this  fact.  If  it  be  a  truth  that  Christiana  are  citizens  of
lieaven,  it  must  be  a  most  important  truth.  Yet  many  men  who  consider  themselves
Christians  live  as  though  they  had  not  the  faintest  conception  of  the  significance  of
their  heavenly  relationship.  Others  have  taken  the  opposite  course ;  forsaking  the
joys  and  duties  of  earth,  and  treating  the  world  as  a  sort  of  Siberia,  they  have  lived  like
exiles  waiting  only  fur  the  time  of  their  departure.  Clearly  this  is  not  the  use  of  the
heavenly  citizenship  which  the  apostles  would  have  advised.  1.  It  should  lead  to
living  worthily.  It  is  a  disgrace  for  an  Englishman,  on  visiting  a  country  of  savages,  to
abandon  the  decencies  of  civilization  and  adopt  the  practices  of  the  natives.  Christians
belong  to  a  higher  kingdom  than  anything  earthly.  They  are,  therefore,  to  see  to  it
that  they  do  not  degrade  their  citizenship  by  following  the  evil  customs  of  the  world,
but  abstain  from  fleshly  lusts  as  strangers  and  pilgrims  (1  Pet.  ii.  11).  Living  in  the
world,  enjoying  its  innocent  fruits,  and  doing  their  daily  work,  they  are  to  keep  them-
selves undstilrd  and  to  behnve  with  the  purity  and  charity  that  befit  the  fellow-citizens
of  angels.  2.  This  citizenship  should  prevent  Christians  from  being  disappointed  at
receiving  adversity  in  this  world.  They  are  to  expect  it.  This  is  not  their  rest.
Sojourners  on  earth,  they  are  not  to  be  surprised  if  they  miss  some  of  the  treasures  of
those  who  have  only  earthly  possessions.  3.  This  fact  should  inspire  a  constant  hope.
True  Christians  must  live  in  the  future.  Their  heavenly  citizenahip  is  the  promise
and  pledge  of  the  enjoyment  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  liglit.  They  are  to
look  for  "  a  city  which  hath  foundations,  whose  Builder  and  Maker  is  God."  Members
of  the  higher  kingdom,  they  should  live  in  expectation  of  the  glorious  advent  of  their
great  King.— W.'  F.  A.

Ver.  21. —  The  renewal  of  the  lody.  I.  Odb  body  is  a  mabk  of  oub  humiliation.
It  is  "  the  body  of  our  humiliation,"  not  "  our  vile  body,"  as  the  Authorized  Version
has  it.  St.  Paul  did  not  share  the  Stoic  contempt  lor  the  body ;  much  less  did  he
anticipate  the  Maniohean  hatred  of  it  which  is  the  true  parent  of  asceticism.  But
neither  did  he  altogether  admire  the  body  in  its  present  condition,  as  the  disciples  of
our  modern  school  of  carnal  a^stheticism  glory  in  doing.  He  regarded  it  as  a  great
evidence  of  our  humiliation.  His  words  give  little  warrant  for  Origeu's  strange  doctrirje
that  pre-existing  human  snuls,  having  sinned  and  fallen  in  a  purely  spiritual  sphere,
were  imprisoned  in  bodies  for  their  punishment  and  discipline,  and  that,  if  they  profit
by  the  purgatorial  earthly  life,  they  will  be  liberated  from  these  bodies  and  restored
to  the  S|jiritual  world.  Two  simpler  facts  come  nearer  to  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul.
].  We  have  outgrown  our  body.  The  body  which  is  glorious  in  the  animal  becomes
in  many  respects  a  hindrance  and  a  source  of  shame  to  the  man.  The  fact  that  the
body,  so  fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,  is  a  mark  of  humiliation,  proves  that  we
have  a  higher  nature  and  belong  to  nobler  living.  2.  We  have  degraded  our  body.
By  making  that  a  master  which  should  be  a  servant  we  show  our  own  humiliatioTi.
By  lowering  the  body  itself  to  sinful  ends  we  turn  it  into  a  visible  proof  of  our
degradation.

II.  We  need  a  suitable  body.  The  body  will  not  simply  be  cast  aside  as  a
worthless  thing,  like  the  old  skin  sloughed  off  by  the  serpent.  It  is  a  work  of  Grod
who  made  all  things  well.  It  has  great  purposes  to  serve,  for  it  is  our  medium  of  com-
munication with  the  external  world.  A  disembodied  spirit  is  an  insulated  spirit.  By
means  of  the  body  we  receive  information  from  without,  and  we  also  execute  our  will
on  things  outside  us.  The  scholar  must  have  eyes  and  ears  as  well  as  an  attentive
mind;  and  the  workman  must  have  muscular  arms  and  deft  fingers  as  well  as  good
plans  and  aims.  Probably  we  shall  always  need  some  sort  of  body,  some  sort  of
medium  through  which  to  receive  knowledge  and  accomplish  actions.

HI.  Chbist  will  fashion  our  body  anew.  The  gospel  comes  to  man  as  a  whole,
body  and  soul ;  and  it  offers  salvation  to  both  parts  of  his  nature.  It  begins  the  double
process  on  earth.  Christ  healed  the  sick.  Christianity  cares  for  the  bodily  condition
of  men.  The  hospital  is  a  most  Christian  institution.  By  ameliorating  the  sanitary
condition  of  men  we  indirectly  help  even  their  moral  and  spiritual  life.  Hereafter  a
bodily  renewal  is  to  be  accomplished.  What  it  shall  be  we  cannot  tell.  But  the
distinct  teaching  of  the  New  Testament  is  that  the  resurrection  will  not  revive  the
body  as  we  now  have  it.    We  are  to  be  "  changed,"  to  have  a  spiritual  Iwdy  j  what  ia


ofi.  IV.  1—23.]         THE  EriSTLB  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.


166


sown  in  corruption  will  be  raised  in  incorruption.  Christ's  risen  body  is  the  type  o)
this.  We  may  be  assured  that  all  that  .is  humiliating  and  provocative  of  evil  will
vanish,  while  greater  sensitiveness  and  flexibility  in  ministering  to  the  soul  and
resDonding  to  its  ideas  and  volitions  will  be  enjoyed. — W.  F.  A.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTEK  IV.


Ver.  1. — ^Therefore,  my  brethren  dearly
beloved  and  longed  for,  my  joy  and  crown.
The  apostle  here,  aS  in  1  Cor.  xv.  58,  urges
the  hope  of  a  glorious  resurrection  as  an
incentive  to  steaiifastness  in  the  Christian
life.  He  seems  scarcely  able  to  find  words-
adequate  to  express  his  love  for  the  Philip-
pians;  he  heaps  together  epithets  of
affection,  dwelling  tenderly  on  the  word
"  beloved."  He  tells  them  of  his  longing
desiie  to  see  them,  repeating  the  word  used
in  oh.  1.  8.  He  calls  them  his  "joy  and
crown  " — his  joy  now,  his  crown  hereafter.
He  uses  the  same  words  of  the  other  great
Mnoedouian  Church  in  1  Thess.  ii.  19,
"  What  is  our  hope,  or  joy,  or  crown  of
rejoicing?  Are  not  even  ye ?  "  The  Greek
word  for  "crown"  (^rTTe(fiavos')  moans
commonlyeither  the  wreath  ("thecorruptible
crowa,"  1  Cor.  ix.  25)  whioli  was  the  prize  of
victors  at  the  Grecian  games ;  or  a  garland
worn  at  banquets  and  festivities.  The
royal  crown  is  generally  StdSrii^a.  But
crT4<j>avas  is  used  in  the  Septuagint  for  a
king's  crown  (see  (in  the  Greek)  2  Sam.  xii.
30 ;  Ps.  XX.  i  (A.V.,  xxi.  3) ;  Esth.'viii.  15).
The  crown  of  thorns,  too,  which  was  used  in
mockery  of  the  Saviour's  kingly  title,  was
a-Tetpavos  4^  axavBav,  though  this  may
possibly  have  been  suggested  by  the  laurel
wreatli  worn  by  the  Eoman  Csesars  (see
Trench, '  Synonyms  of  the  New  Testament,'
sect,  xxiii.).-  "  The  crown  of  life,"  "  the
crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away,"  is  the
embl*n  both  of  victory  and  of  gladness.
Yet  it  is  also  in  some  sense  kingly :  the
saints  shall  sit  with  Christ  in  his  throne;
they  shall  reign  with  him ;  they  are  kings
("  a  kingdom,"  E.V.,  with  the  "best  manu-
scripts) and  priests  unto  God  (Kev.  1.  6).  In
this  place  victory  seems  to  be  the  thought
present  to  the  apostle's  mind.  In  ch.  ii.  16
and  iii.  12 — 14  he  has  been  comparing  the
Christian  life  with  the  course  of  the  Grecian
athletes.  Now  he  represents  his  converts
as  constituting  his  crown  or  wreath  of
victory  at  the  lust;  their  salvation  is  the
crowning  reward  of  his  labours  and  suffer-
ings. So  stand  fast  in  the  lord,  my  dearly
beloved.  So ;  that  is,  as  ye  have  us  for  an
example ;  or  perhaps,  as  becomes  citizens  of
the  heavenly  commonwealth.  The  same
word  (trT^Kere)  is  used  in  ch.  i.  27,  also  in
BOB^eotion  ^ith  the  idea  of  citizenship.


Ver.  2. — ^I  beseech  Euodias,  and  beseech
Syntyohe,  that  they  be  of  the  same  mind  in
the  lord ;  rather,  Euodia.  It  is  plain  from
the  next  verse  that  both  are  female  names.
The  narrative  in  Acts  xvi.  shows  that  the
female  element  was  more  than  usually
important  in  the  early  Philippian  ChUir&h.
Th(  se  ladies  seem  to  have  held  a  high
position  in  that  Cliurch;  possibly  they  may
have  been  deaconesses,  like  Phoebe  at
Cenchrea.  Their  dissensions  disturbed  the
peace  of  the  Church.  The  repeated  "  I  be-
seech''is  emphatic;  it  may,  perhaps  also
imply  that  both  were  in  fault.  St.  Paul
earnestly  begs  them  to  be  reconciled,  and  to
be  reooncileil  as  Chi-istians,  in  the  Lord,  as
members  of  hia  body,  in  the  consciousness
of  his  presence.  Mark  how  often  the  words,
"  in  Christ,"  "  in  the  Lord,"  occur  in  this
Epistle;  how  constantly  the  thought  of
spiritual  union  with  Christ  was  present  to
the  apostle's  mind.

Ver.  8. — And  I  entreat  thee  also,  true
yokefellow ;  rather,  yea,  with  E.V.  and  the
best  manuscripts ;  Kal  is  a  particle  of  earnest
appeal  (oomp.  Pljilem.  20  and  Kev.  xxii.
20);  I  ask  or  request.  The  Greek  word
epwTw  is  used  in  New  Testament  Greek  (in
classical  Greek  it  means  "to  inquire")  of
requests  addressed  to  an  equal ;  airm  is  used
in  adilressing  a  superior  (comp.  Trench,
'  Synonyms  of  the  New  Testament,'  sect.  xl.).
Who  was  the  "  true  yokefellow "  ?  Some,
following  Clement  of  Alexandria,  interpret
the  words  of  a  supposed  wife  of  St.  Paul.
But  the  Greek  adjective  has  the  masculine
termination ;  and  it  is  plain,  from  1  Cor.
vii.  8,  that  St.  Paul  was  unmarried.
Others  take  one  of  the  Greek  words  as  the
proper  name  of  the  person  addressed,
Syzygus  or  Gnesius.  On  the  first  supposition,
the  play  on  the  meaning  of  St/zygas,  yoke-
fellow, would  resemble  St.  Paul's  reference
to  Onesimus  in  Pliilera.  11.  But  neither  of
these  words  seems  to  occur  as  a  proper
name.  Some  again,  as  Chrysostom,  interpret
the  word  of  the  husband  of  Euodia  or
Syntyche :  this  does  not  seem  likely.  Others
think  that  Lydia  may  be  addressed  here.
The  omission  of  her  name  is  remarkable ;
but  she  may  have  been  dead  or  no  longer
resident  at  Philippi.  Others  understand
the  chief  pastor  of  the  Church  at  Philippi,
who  may  very  possibly  have  been  Bpaphro-
ditus  himself,  the  bearer  of  the  letter.  This,
on  the   whole,  aeema   the   moat  probabl«


150


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.         [oh.  iv.  1—23.


conjecture.  The  omission  of  the  name
implies  that  the  person  addressed  was  in  a
conspicuous  position,  bo  that  there  was  no
danger  of  mist;ikes.  An  important  duty  is
assigned  to  him.  And  it  may  be  that  the
word  "  yolcefellow,"  as  distinguished  from
"fellow-labourer,"  denotes  something  more
of  equality  with  the  apostle.  Help  those
women  which  laboured  with  me  in  the
gospel ;  rather,  as  B.V.,  help  those  women,
for  they  labouTed  xoith  me.  Help  Euodia
and  Syntyche  towards  a  mutual  re-
conciliation, and  that,  inasmuch  as  they
laboured  in  the  gospel.  With  Clement  also.
Are  these  words  to  be  connected  with
"help"  or  with  laboured"?  Is  Clement
associated  with  the  "  true  yokefellow  "  in  the
worlt  of  reconciliation,  or  with  the  women
who  laboured  with  St.  Paul  ?  The  balance
of  probability  seems  to  be  in  favour  of  the
first  alternative ;  there  appears  to  be  no
reason  for  mentioning  Clement's  labours  in
this  place ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  St.
Paul's  anxiety  for  the  reconciliation  of
Euodia  and  Syntyche  might  naturally  urge
him  to  ask  for  the  combined  efforts  of  all  his
fellow-labourera.  Whether  this  Clement  is
to  be  identified  with  St.  Clement  the
Bishop  of  Rome  is  an  open  question ;  there
are  no  sufficient  data  for  deciding  it  (see
Bishop  Lightfoot's  detached  note).  And
with  other  my  fellow-labourers ;  rather,  as
E.  v.,  and  the  rest  of  my  fellow-workers.  St.
Paul  appeals  to  them  all.  Whose  names  are
in  the  book  of  life.  St.  Paul  does  not  mention
their  names ;  there  is  no  need  that  he  should
do  80 — they  are  written  in  heaven  (comp.
Exod.  xxxii.  32 ;  Ps.  Ixix.  28 ;  Dan.  xii.  1 ;
and  Kev.,  passim').  The  book  of  life  is  the
roll  of  the  citizens  of  the  heavenly  kingdom.
The  passages  quoted  do  not  necessarily
involve  the  doctrine  of  an  unconditional,  ir-
reversible predestination,  or  the  phrase,  "  to
blot  out  of  my  book,"  could  not  be  used.

Ver.  4. — ^Bejoice  in  the  Lord  alway ;  and
again  I  say,  Eejoice;  rather,  asE.V.,  again
I  will  say.  St.  Paul  returns  to  the  key-note
of  the  Epistle,  Christian  joy.  He  writes
again  the  same  things  (see  ch.  iii.  1);  he
will  say  it  again,  lie  never  wearies  of  re-
peating that  holy  joy  is  a  chief  Christian
duty.  Rejoice  in  the  Lord ;  in  his  presence,
in  communion  with  him,  and  that  always ;
for  he  who  rejoices  in  the  Lord,  as  Chry-
sostom  says,  always  rejoices,  even  in
affliction :  "  Sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing  "
(2  Cor.  vi.  10).

Ver.  5. — let  your  moderation  be  known
unto  all  men ;  rather, /orl/earance,  or  gentle-
nets.  The  word  firiilicda.  (here  the  neuter
adjective  is  used)  is  translated  "  gentleness  "
in  2  Cor.  z.  1,  where  it  is  attributed  to  our
Lord  himself,  In  the  Aristotelian '  Ethics '
it  stands  for  the  temper   whioh  oontent»


itself  with  less  than  its  due,  and  shrink*
from  insisting  on  its  strict  rights.  There  is
no  joy  in  a  narrow  selfishness ;  joy  involve!
an  open  heart,  a  generous  love.  Joy  in  the
Lord  tends  to  make  men  gentle  and  mild  to
others.  "  Gaudium  in  Domino,"  says  Bengel,
"parit  verani  sequitatem  erga  proximum."
Vnto  all  men;  heattien  as  well  asCIiristian.
Compare  our  Lord's  word :  "  By  this  sliall
all  men  know  that  ye  are  my  disc'ples,  if  ye
have  love  one  to  another."  St.  Paul  would
have  the  heatlien  say,  "  See  how  these
Christians  love  one  another."  Their  mutual
love  would  be  the  blessed  means  of  drawing
fresh  converts  to  the  faith.  There  may
possibly  be  an  allusion  here  to  tlie  differ-
ences between  Euodia  and  Syntyche ;  let
there  be  no  more  disagreements,  but  rather
mutual  forbearance.  The  Lord  is  at  hand.
The  Aramaic  Maran-atha  ("  the  Lord
Cometh  ")  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  22  seems  to  imply
that  these  words  were  current  in  tlie  Church
as  a  formula  of  warning,  like  "Hallelujah"  as
a  set  form  of  praise.  The  Lord  is  at  hand ;
therefore  be  not  careful  to  exact  your  full
rights ;  love  is  more  precious  than  gold  in
the  treasury  of  heaven.  Comp.  Jas.  v.  8,
"  Be  ye  also  patient,  ...  for  the  coming  of
the  Lord  ilraweth  nigh."  Others  interpret
the  words,  not  of  the  future  advent,  but
of  the  Lord's  present  nearness.  Comp.  Ps.
cxlv.  18,  "  The  Lord  is  nigh  unto  all  them
that  call  upon  him."  But  this  seems
scarcely  so  appropriate  here.

Ver.  6. — Be  careful  for  nothing ;  ratherj
as  K.V.,  in  nothing  he  anxious.  Mepi/j-va  it
anxious,  distracting  care.  St.  Paul  does  not
wish  his  converts  to  be  careless,  but  to  be
free  from  that  over-anxiety  about  worldly
things  which  might  distract  their  thoughts
from  the  service  of  God,  and  hinder  their
growth  in  holiness.  Comp.  1  Pet.  v.  7,
where  the  apostle  bids  us  cast  all  our  care
(jiipiixva)  upon  God.  The  thought  of  the
Lord's  nearness  should  lead  us  both  to  be
forbearing  in  our  relations  to  others,  and  al.so
to  keep  ourselves  free,  as  far  as  may  be,
from  worldly  anxieties.  "  He  careth  for  us."
But  in  everything  by  prayer  andsnpplication
with  thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be  made
known  unto  God.  "  Curare  et  orare,"  says
Bengel,  "  plus  inter  se  pugnaut  quam  aqua
et  ignis."  In  everything ;  in  each  emergency,
little  or  great,  as  it  arises,  pray ;  cultivate
the  habit  of  referring  all  things,  great  or
small,  to  God  in  prayer.  The  two  words
rendered  "prayer"and  "Bupplication"(7rpo(r-
ivxh  and  Sfi)cns)  occur  together  also  in  Eph.
tL  18 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  1  and  v.  5.  The  first  has
been  defined  by  Chrysostom  and  others  aa
prayer  to  obtain  a  good ;  the  second,  prayer
to  avoid  an  evil.  Better,  perhaps,  as  most
modern  commentators,  vfoaivxh  is  the
general  word,  oovering  the  idea  of  prayei


,  H.  IV.  1—23.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANa


167


in  its  widest  meaning;  while  Seritris  is  a
Bpeoial  act  of  supplication  for  some
particular  object  of  neud  (see  Trench,
'  Synonyms  of  the  New  Testament,'  sect.  li.).
With  thanltegiving.  Thanksgiving  is  the
necessary  accompaniment  of  prayer;  it
ought  never  to  be  absent  from  our  devotions  ;
it  springs  out  of  that  holy  joy  which  St.
Paul  80  constantly  sets  before  us  in  this
Epistle  as  the  bounden  duty  of  Christians.
St.  Paul  himself  is  an  example  of  constant
thanksgiving.  All  his  Epistles,  except  those
to  the  Galatians,  1  Timothy,  and  Titus,  open
with  a  thanksgiving.  In  the  dungeon  at
Fkilippi  he  and  Silas  "prayed  and  sang
praises  unto  God"  (Acts  xvi.  25).  Our
requests,  the  things  for  which  we  ask,  are
to  be  mnde  known  unto  God;  irphs  rhv
©Edi/,  before  God,  in  the  presence  of  God,  by
prayer,  the  general  converse  of  the  soul
with  God ;  and  by  supplication,  direct
petitions  for  the  supply  of  our  necissitieg.
Indeed,  he  knows  our  necessities  before  we
ask ;  but  we  are  encouraged  to  make  them
known  before  him,  as  Hezckiah  took  the
letter  of  Sennacherib  and  spread  it  befoie
the  Lord.

Ver.  7. — And  the  peace  of  God,  which
passeth  all  understanding.  The  peace  which
God  gives,  which  flows  from  the  sense  of
his  most  gracious  presence,  and  consists  in
childlike  confidence  and  trustful  love.  This
peace  passeth  all  understanding;  its  calm
blessedness  transcends  the  reach  of  human
thought;  it  can  be  known  only  by  the  inner
experience  of  the  believer.  The  similar
passage,  Eph.  iii.  20,  "  Unto  him  that  is
able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all
that  we  ask  or  think,"  seems  decisive  for
the  ordinary  interpretation.  Bishop  Light-
foot,  Meyer,  and  others  take  another  view
of  the  passage:  "Surpassing  every  device
or  counsel  of  man,  i.e.  which  is  far  better,
which  produces  a  higher  satisfaction,  than
all  punctilious  self-assertion,  all  anxious
forethought."  Shall  keep  your  hearts  and
minds  through  Christ  Jesus ;  rather,  as  E.V.,
shall  guard  your  hearts  and  your  thoughts  in
Christ  Jesus.  Peace  shall  guard — "  a  verbal
parade  ix,  for  to  guard  is  a  warrior's  duty "
(Bishop  Lightfoot).  The  peace  of  God
abiding  in  the  lieart  is  a  sure  and  trusty
garrison,  guarding  it  so  that  the  evil  spirit,
once  cast  out,  cannot  return.  The  thoughts
issue  &om  the  lieart ;  for  the  heart,  as  com-
monly in  the  Hebrew  Soriptures,  is  regarded
as  the  seat  of  the  intellect,  not  of  feeling
only.  In  Christ  Jesus ;  in  the  sphere  of  his
influence,  his  presence.  True  believers,
abiding  in  Clirist,  realize  his  promise,  "Peace
I  leave  with  you,  my  peace  I  give  unto  you."

Ver.  8. — Finally,  brethren,  whatsoever
things  are  true.  He  repents  the  "finally"
of  ch.  iii  1.    He  again  end  again  prepares


to  close  his  Epistle,  but  cannot  at  once  bid
farewell  to  his  beloved  Philippians.  He
urges  them  to  fill  their  thoughts  with  things
good  and  holy.  Christ  is  the  Truth:  all
that  is  true  comes  from  him ;  the  false,  the
vain,  is  of  the  earth,  earthy.  Perhaps  the
verb  (iarty)  may  be  emphatic.  Sceptics  mny
deny  the  existence  of  absolute  truth  ;  men
may  soofiingly  ask,  "What  is  truth?"
Truth  is  real,  and  it  is  found  in  Christ,  the
Truth.  Whatsoever  things  are  honest.
The  word  (o-e/iii/a)  occurs  only  here  and  four
times  in  the  pastoral  Epistles.  It  is  a  word
dilfioult  to  translate.  "Honourable"or"rever-
end"  (the  renderings  of  the  E.V.)are  better
equivalents  than  "  honest."  It  points  to  a
Christian  decorum,  a  Christian  self-re.-;pect,
which  is  quite  consistent  with  true  humility,
for  it  is  a  reverence  for  the  temple  of  God.
Whatsoever  things  are  just ;  rather,  per-
haps, righteous,  in  the  widest  meaning.
Whatsoever  things  are  pure ;  not  only
chaste,  but  free  from  stain  or  defilement  of
any  sort.  The  word  used  here  (o7>'ifj)  is
not  common  in  the  New  Testament.  The
adverb  occurs  in  ch.  i.  16,  wliere  it  is  ren-
dered "sincerely,"  and  implies  purity  of
motive.  Whatsoever  things  are  lovely
(■irpo(T<pt\^') ;  not  beautiful,  but  pleasing,
lovable;  whatsoever  things  would  attract
the  love  of  holy  souls.  Whatsoever  things
are  of  good  report.  The  word  (^iStprifia)  means
"well-speaking"  (not  "well  spoken  of"),
and  so  "  gracious,"  "  attractive ; "  in  classical
Greek  it  means  "auspicious,"  "of  good
omen."  Of  these  six  heads,  the  first  two  de-
scribe the  subjects  of  devout  thought  as  they
are  in  themselves ;  the  second  pair  relate  to
practical  life ;  the  third  pair  to  the  moral
approbation  which  the  contemplation  of  a
holy  life  excites  in  good  men,  If  there  be
any  virtue.  This  word,  so  very  common  in
the  Greek  moralists,  occurs  nowhere  else  in
St.  Paul.  Nor  does  any  other  of  the  New
Testament  writers  use  it  except  St.  Peter
(1  Pet.  ii.  9  (in  the  Greek) ;  2  Pet.  i.  3,  5).
JBishop  Lightfoot  says,  "  The  strangeness  of
the  word,  combined  with  the  change  of  ex-
pression, ei  Tts,  will  suggest  another  explana-
tion: 'Whatever  value  may  reside  in  your
old  heathen  conception  of  virtue,  whatever
consideration  is  due  to  the  praise  of  men ; '
as  if  the  apostle  were  anxious  not  to  omit
any  possible  ground  of  appeal."  And  if
there  be  any  praise ;  comp.  Bom.  xii.  17
and  2  Cor.  viii.  21,  where  St.  Paul  bids  us
"  provide  for  honest  things,  not  only  in  the
sight  of  the  Lord,  but  also  in  the  sight  of
men."  Nevertheless,  in  the  highest  point
of  view,  the  praise  of  the  true  Israelite  is
not  of  man,  but  of  God.  Think  on  these
things ;  or,  ai  in  the  margin  of  B.V.,  take
account  of.  Let  these  be  the  considerations
which  guide  yoor  thoughts  and  direct  jronr


158


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   PHILIPPIANS.         [oh.  iv,  1—23.


motiveg.  The  apostle  implies  that  we  have
the  power  of  governiilg  our  thoughts,  and
go  are  responsible  for  them.  If  the  thoughts
are  ordered  well,  the  outward  life  will
follow.

Ver.  9. — ^Those  things,  which  ye  have  both
learned,  and  received,  and  heard,  and  seen
in  me,  do.  St.  Paul  turns  from  contempla-
tion to  piantical  life :  they  must  translate
into  action  ie  lessons  which  they  received
from  him.  The  verbs  are  aorists  and  refer
to  the  time  when  he  was  amung  them.  He
taught  not  by  word  only,  but  by  living
example;  they  saw  in  him  when  present,
and  heard  of  hhn  when  he  was  absent,  a
pattern  of  the  Christian  life.  And  the  God
of  peace  shall  be  with  you,  God  dwells
with  those  who  think  holy  thoughts  and
live  holy  lives;  and  with  him  comes  the
peace  which  is  his,  which  he  giveth  (comp.
Kom.  XV.  33).

Ver.  10.— But  I  rejoiced  in  the  Lord
greatly,  that  now  at  the  last  your  care  of
me  hath  flourished  again,  St.  Paul  thanks
the  Philippian  Church  for  the  gifts  brought
by  EpaphrodituB ;  his  expressions,  so  cour-
teous and  yet  so  dignified,  bespeak,  like  the
Epistle  to  Philemon,  like  all  his  writings,
the  perfect  gentleman  in  the  best  sense  of
the  word.  I  rejoiced  in  the  Lmd;  he  fulfils
his  own  precept  (ver.  i).  His  joy  rises  from
the  gift  to  the  love  which  prompted  the
gift,  and  thence  to  the  Divine  Giver  of  that
love.  Greatly.  Bengel  says,  "Hoc  vix
placuerit  Stoico.  Paulus  ingentes  affectus
habuit,  sed  in  Domino."  The  E.V.  render-
ing of  the  following  words  is  more  literal :
"Ye  revived  your  tliouglit  for  me."  The
verb  is  properly  Used  of  a  tree  putting  forth
fresh  shoots  after  its  winter  sleep.  JBengel
thinks  that  the  metaphor  was  derived  from
the  season ;  the  apostle  was  writing  in  the
spring.  Others,  as  Meyer,  render  differ-
ently, "  Ye  flourished  again  (i.e.  in  your
circumstances)  so  as  to  mind  my  interests."
As  the  words  might  setm  to  imply  some
degree  of  blame,  St.  Paul  hastens  to  ascribe
the  delay  of  the  Philippiaiis  to  causes  be-
yond their  own  control.  Wherein  ye  were
also  careful,  but  ye  lacked  opportunity;
more  literally,  wherein  ye  did  indeed  take
thought,  as  E.V.  It  may  be  that  they  had
no  suitable  messenger ;  but  St.  Paul  speaks
of  the  "  deep  poverty  "  of  the  Macedonian
Churches  in  2  Cor.  viii.  1,  2,  where  he  also
praises  their  liberality.

Ver.  11. — Not  that  I  speak  in  respect  of
want:  for  I  have  learned,  in  whatsoever
Btate  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content.  He  ex-
plains himself;  it  is  not  want  that  prompted
his  words.  Literally,  /  learned  (the  verb  is
Rorist) ;  that  is,  when  lie  became  a  Christian.
The  A.V.  is  verbally  inaccurate  in  the  fol-
lowing word*,  which  mean  literally, "  In  the


circumstancea  in  which  I  am."    Bnt  tha

sense  is  tha  same.  St.  Paul  is  speaking  of
his  present  condition :  he  is  content  with  it,
though  it  involves  all  the  hardships  of  cap-
tivity ;  his  present  contentment  is  a  sample
of  his  habitual  frame  of  mind.  AirapKris,
here  rendered  "  content,"  is  a  common  word
in  Greek  philosophy.  It  means  "self-sulli-
cient,"  "independent."  It  is  of  frequent
occurrence  in  Stoical  treatises  ;  but  St.  Paul
uses  it  in  a  Christian  sense ;  he  is  airipKrji
in  relation  to  man,  but  his  airapxtia  comes
from  God  (2  Cor.  ix.  8).

Ver.  12. — I  know  both  how  to  be  abased,
and  I  know  how  to  abound.  St.  Paul  had
experience  both  of  boitow  and  of  joy,  both
of  distress  and  of  comfort ;  he  knew  how  to
bear  himself  in  both,  because  his  ohiefest
joy  was  "in  the  Lord."  This  abiding  joy
raised  him  above  the  vicissitudes  of  this
mortal  state,  and  gave  him  fin  aliTdpKeia,
a  Christian  independence,  which  enabh'd  -
him  to  act  becomingly  both  in  adversity
and  in  prospeiity.  Everywhere  and  in  all
things  I  am  instructed;  literally,  as  K.V.,
in  every  tiling  and  in  all  things ;  as  we  sriy,
"in  each  and  all,"  in  every  condition  sepa-
rately and  in  ail  collectively.  The  R.V.
translates  more  accurately,  "  have  I  learned
the  secret."  The  Greek  /jitfiimnai  means
properly,  "I  have  been  initiated."  It  is  a
word  adapted  from  the  old  Greek  mysteries ;
comp.  Bengel,  "Disciplina  aicaua  imbutus
sum,  ignota  mundo."  St.  Paul  represents
the  advanced  Christian  life  as  a  m.ystery,
the  secrets  of  which  are  taught  by  God  the
Holy  Ghost  to  the  soul  that  longs  to  prove
in  its  own  personal  experience  "  what  is  that
good  and  acceptable  and  perfect  will  of
God."  St.  Paul  frequently  uses  the  word
fivffT-lipiO!/,  mystery,  fur  the  truths  once
hidden  but  now  brought  to  light  by  the
gospel.  Both  to  be  full  and  to  be  hungry,
both  to  abound  and  to  suffer  need.  The
word  rentlered  "to  be  full"  (xopTi£f€(reai)
is  strictly  used  of  animals,  and  means  "to
be  fdd.lered;"  in  the  New  Testament  and
later  Gieek  it  is  used  also  of  men,  without
any  depreciatory  significance,  as  in  Matt.
v.  6,  "They  shall  be  filled (xopTaffS^iroi/Tai)."

Ver.  13. — I  can  do  all  things'  through
Christ  which  strengtheneth  me ;  rather,  as
E.V.,  in  him  that  strengtheneth  toe.  The
best  manuscripts  omit  the  word  "  Christ "  in
this  place.  In  him.  It  is  only  in  Christ,  in
spiritual  anion  with  him,  that  the  Christian
is  avTipxris,  self-suthcient.  His  presence
gives  strength  to  do  and  suffer  all  things
(comp.  2  Cor.  xii.  9).

Ver.  14. — Notwititlstanding  ye  have  well
done,  that  ye  did  commnnioate  with  my
affiiotion ;  rather,  as  B.V.,  ye  had  fellomhip
with  my  affliction,  St.  Paul  values  the  sym-
pathy, the   fellow-feeling,  more   than  tbe


OH.  IV.  1—23.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.


159


gifts ;  he  could  have  done  without  the  gifts,
but  they  were  precious  as  a  proof  of  love.

Ver.  15. — Now  ye  Philippians  know  also,
that  in  the  heginning  of  the  gospel,  when  I
departed  from  Macedonia.  He  reminds  them
delicately  of  their  former  liberality  to  show
his  love  for  them ;  he  was  not  unwilling  to
receive  kindnesses  from  them.  He  had
always  reluscd  to  accept  contributions  from
the  Corinthians ;  but  the  bonds  which  bound
him  to  the  Macedonian  Churches  were  closer
and  tenderer.  In  the  beginning  of  the  gospel;
when  he  first  preached  in  Macedonia,  ten
years  ago.  The  words,  "  when  I  departed
from  Macedonia,"  may  refer  either  to  some
gifts  not  mentioned  elsewhere,  sent  to  him
when  be  left  Beroea  for  Athens ;  or,  if  the
aorist  be  taken  in  a  pluperfect  sense,  to  the
supplies  afterwards  sent  to  him  at  Corinth
(2  Cor.  xi  8,  9).  No  Church  communicated
with  me  as  concerning  giving  and  receiving,
but  ye  only.  Chrysostom  understands  this
of  giving  worldly  things  and  receiving
spiritual  things  (comp.  1  Cor.  ix.  11).  But
the  context  seems  to  restrict  the  meaning  to
temporal  gifts:  the  Philippians  gave,  St.
Paul  received.  Bengel  says,  "Poterant
dicere,  Faoiemus,  si  alii  feoerint;  nunc  eo
major  horum  laus  est :  ceterorum,  eo  minor."
Ver.  16. — For  even  in  Thessalonioa  ye  sent
once  and  again  unto  my  necessity.  This
shows  the  promptness  of  their  generosity;
they  not  only  helped  him  when  he  departed
from  Macedonia ;  but,  before  that  time,
while  he  was  still  at  Thessalonica,  the  city
which  he  visited  next  after  leaving  Philippi,
they  sent  more  than  once  to  supply  his
needs ;  corap.  1  Thess.  ii.  9  and  2  Thess.  iii.
8,  where  St.  Paul  says  that  he  avoided  being
chargeable  to  the  Thessalonians ;  for  which
purpose  he  laboured  with  his  own  hands ;
but,  it  seems,  he  needed  additional  help,  and
this  was  supplied  from  Philippi.

Ver.  17. — Not  because  I  desire  a  gift :  but
I  desire  fruit  that  may  abound  to  your
account ;  rather,  as  B.V.,  not  that  1  seek  for
the  gift ;  hut  I  seek  for  the  fruit  that  in-
ereaseth  to  your  account.  He  shrinks  sensi-
tively from  the  danger  of  being  mistaken ;
his  words  are  not  to  be  understood  as  a  hint
for  further  gifts.  It  is  not  the  gift  that  he
desires;  but  tliere  is  something  which  he
longs  for,  and  that  is,  charity,  the  fruit  of
the  Spirit,  showing  itself  in  the  generosity
of  the  Philippians — ^the  fruit  of  good  works,
continuiiUy  increasing,  and  Bet  down  in
heaven  to  their  account.

Ver.  18. — But  I  have  all,  and  abound :  I
am  full.  I  have  to  the  full  all  that  I  need,
Bnd  more.  (For  the  word  aire'xM,  comp.
Matt.  vi.  2, 5, 16,  and  Luke  vi.  24.)  Having
received  of  Epaphroditua  the  things  which
were  sent  from  you,  an  odour  of  a  swaet
imeUt  a  sacrifics  acceptable,  well-pleasing  to


God.  He  uses  another  metaphor  :  in  ver.  17
the  gift  was  fruit,  now  it  is  a  sacrifice  :  given
to  the  servant  of  God,  it  is  in  truth  ottered
to  Grod  himself.  "  How  high  does  he  lift
their  gift  I "  says  Chrysostom ;  "  it  is  not  I,
he  says,  who  have  received  it,  but  God
through  me."  The  words,  oo-^ur)  eiaSias,  an
odour  of  sweet  smell,  occur  often  in  the  Old
Testament  in  connection  with  saorifloe  (see
Gen.  viii.  21 ;  Bxod.  xxix.  18;  also  for  the
metaphor,  Eph.  v.  2).  In  Heb.  xiii.  18
almsgiving  is  also  described  as  a  sacrifice
with  which  God  is  well  pleased.  The  first
and  chiefest  offering  we  can  make  is  our-
selves :  "  We  ofi'er  and  present  unto  thee,  O
Lord,  ourselves,  our  souls  and  bodies "
(comp.  Eom.  xii.  1) ;  in  that  chief  offering
is  involved  the  lesser  gift  of  alms.

Ver.  19. — But  my  God  shall  supply  all  your
need;  rather,  as  R.V.,  every  need  of  yours.
My  God ;  the  pronoun  is  emphatic,  as  in  ch.
i.  3.  God  will  accept  your  offerings  as
made  to  him ;  you  have  supplied  my  need,
he  will  supply  every  need  of  yours.  Accord-
ing to  his  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus.
Not  by ;  it  should  be  "  in  Christ  Jesus."  The
reward  is  given  to  Iiis  saints  through  union
with  him ;  "  Beholding  as  in  a  glass  the
glory  of  the  Lord,  they  are  changed  iuto  the
same  image  from  glory  to  glory."  In  glory  ,-
that  is,  by  setting  them  in  glory — the  glory
of  holiness  now,  the  glory  of  eternal  life
hereafter.

Ver.  20. — Now  unto  God  and  our  Father
be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen  ;  rather,
with  R.V.,  unto  our  God  and  Father  be  the
glory.  Thethoiiglitof  God's  present  mercies,
and  the  hope  of  glory  to  come  mentioned  in
the  last  verse,  suggest  the  doxology.  Ob-
serve, St.  Paul  says,  "our  God  and  Father  "
here.  He  said,  "  my  God  "  in  ver.  19,  where
he  was  speaking  of  the  reward  which  God
would  give  for  kindness  shown  to  himself;
but  now  "  our  God,"  as  the  one  Object  of
praise  and  worship  from  the  universal
Church.  The  glory ;  the  article  is  com-
monly used  with  5dl|o  in  these  doxologies —
the  glory  which  is  God's  peculiar  possession,
which  is  essentiiiUy  his  (comp.  John  xvii.
5).  Bishop  LigLtfoot  says,  in  his  note  on
Gal.  1.  5,  "It  is  probable  that  we  should
supply  IvTiv  in  such  cases  rather  than  eo-tw.
It  is  an  affirmation  rather  than  a  wish.
Glory  is  the  essential  attribute  of  God.  See
1  Pet.  iv.  11,  'Q  4<Trlv  T)  5<S|a  koI  -rd  KpdTos,
and  the  doxology  added  to  the  Lord's  Prayer
(Matt.  vi.  13)."  For  ever  and  ever ;  literally,
for  the  ages  of  ages ;  for  the  ages  whioli  con-
sist, not  of  years,  but  of  ages,  for  the  count-
less ages  of  eternity  (comp.  6*1.  L  5  and
1  Tim.  i.  17).

Ver.  21. — Salute  every  saint  ia  Christ
Jesus.  Every  saint  individually — an  ex-
pression of  personal  affection.    The  words-


160


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.         [oh.  iv.  1—23.


"in  Christ  Jesus,"  may  be  taken  with
"ealute,"  as  in  Rom.  xvi.  22  and  1  Cor.  xvi.
19.  It  is  a  Christian  salutation,  an  acknow-
ledgment of  spiritual  relationship ;  or  better,
perhaps,  as  in  numerous  passages,  with
"  saint."  All  saints  are  in  Christ,  members
of  his  body,  knit  together  into  one  com-
munion and  fellowship  in  the  mystical  body
of  Christ.  It  is  this  union  with  Christ  which
makes  them  saints.  The  brethren  which  are
with  me  greet  yon.  Observe,  he  calls  them
"  brethren,"  though  he  had  none  like-minded
with  him,  save  only  Timothy  (ch.  ii.  20,  21).
Ver.  22. — AU  the  saints  ealute  you,  chiefly
they  that  are  of  Caesar's  household.  All  the
Christiana  at  Kome,  not  only  St.  Paul's  per-
sonal friends  and  companions.  It  is  not
cleat  why  he  lays  a  special  stress  on  those
belonging  to  Nero's  household.  The  reason
given  by  Chrysostom  seems  somewhat  fanci-
ful :  "  If  those  who  dwelt  in  palaces  despised
all  things  for  the  sake  of  the  King  of  heaven.


much  more  should  the  Philippians  do  so."

Some  of  them  may  have  been  known  to  the
Fhilippian  Christians.  The  term  familia
or  damns  Cmsaris  included  all  ranks,  from  the
highest  oiBoial  to  the  lowest  freedman  or
slave.  It  is  probable  that  those  alluded  to
here  belonged  to  tlie  humbler  classes.  But
at  any  rale  St.  Paul's  words  prove  that  his
preaching  had  penetrated  into  that  abyss  of
all  infamy,  thH  palace  of  Nero.  (For  the
Christianity  of  Seneca,  and  the  supposed
correspondence  between  him  and  St.  Paul,
see  Bisliop  Lightfoot's  dissertation  on  'St.
Paul  and  Seneca.'  See  also  bis  detached
note  on  '  Ctesar's  Household.')

Ver.  23. — The  grace  of  oui  lord  Jesus
Christ  be  with  yon  all.  Amen ;  read,  with  the
best  manuscript.s,  with  your  spirit.  St.  Paul
begins  with  "grace"  (ch.  i.  2),  and  ends
with  "  grace."  The  gracious  love  of  the  Lord
Jesus  was  the  joy  of  his  heart


HOMILETICS.

■Vers.  1 — 3. — St.  PauVi  relations  to  his  flock.  I.  St.  Paul  himself  (see  on  ch.  1.
3 — 8)  AN  EXAMPLE  TO  ALL  CHRISTIAN  MINISTERS.  1.  In  his  urgent  appeals.  Mark
how  he  enforces  the  necessity  of  perseverance,  how  he  brings  the  privileges  and  the
hopes  of  the  Christian  to  bear  upon  the  daily  life  of  practical  duties.  "  Therelore,"  he
says,  "because  you  are  citizens  of  the  heavenly  country;  because  you  look  for  the
Saviour's  coming ;  because  you  hope  for  a  glorious  immortality ; — thtr^ors,  stand  fwt  in
the  Lord."  The  faithful  minister  knows  the  extreme  difficulty  of  peraeveranoe,  of
patient  continuance  in  well-doing ;  he  will  constantly  enforce  it  upon  himself,  upon  his
people;  he  will  use  all  the  motives  suggested  by  the  study  of  Holy  Scripture  and  by
Christian  experience  to  press  home  this  paramount  obligation.  "  180  stand  fast,"  he
says.  St.  Paul  can  point  to  his  own  example:  would  that  we  could  do  the  like!  "  Stand
fast:"  it  is  the  word  used  already  in  ch.  i.  27 ;  it  involves  a  military  metaphor.  Stand
firm  in  your  ranks ;  present  a  serried  front  against  all  temptations ;  quit  yourselves
like  men,  like  fellow-citizens  of  the  saints,  in  the  good  fight  of  faith.  And  that,  in
the  Lord,  in  his  strength,  in  habitual  communion  with  him.  There  is  no  perseverance,
no  hope  of  final  viotoiy,  unless  we  abide  in  Christ.  2.  In  his  love  for  hit  flock  as  a
whole.  He  calls  them  his  brethren,  dearly  beloved  and  longed  for,  his  joy  and  crown.
And  these  were  not  mere  words  with  St.  Paul;  he  showed  by  his  labours  the  truth  of
his  affection.  His  ardent  love  for  Christ  issued  in  a  strong  constraining  love  for  the
souls  of  men.  To  save  souls  was  his  joy  now ;  he  knew  that  it  would  be  his  crown
hereafter.  The  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away  is  the  reward,  St.  Peter  tells  us,
of  those  presbyters  who  feed  the  flock  of  God  willingly  and  of  a  ready  mind.  St.  Paul
speaks  of  his  converts  as  themselves  constituting  his  crown.  When  he  bad  finished
his  course,  his  wreath  of  victory  would  be  the  salvation  of  those  precious  souls  which
had  been  saved,  under  God,  by  his  self-denying  labours.  The  sight  of  their  blessedness
would  increase  and  deepen  even  the  gladness  of  heaven,  even  his  own  joy  in  his  own
salvation.  3.  In  his  care  for  individual  memhers  of  the  Church.  He  thinks  of  Euodia
and  Syntyche;  he  has  hoard  of  their  dissensions;  he  begs  them  earnestly  to  be  of  the
same  mind,  and  that  in  the  Lord.  The  Christian  minister  should  know  his  flock  by
name,  should  think  of  their  individual  needs,  should  pray  for  them,  should  urge  them
^o  live  together  in  love.  4.  Be  asks  others  to  Iielp  in  the  work  of  restoring  peace.  The
Christian  pastor  should  gather  helpers  round  him.  It  is  good  for  his  people,  good  for
vhe  helpers  themselves.     To  work  for  Christ  strengthens  and  benefits  the  souL

II.  St.  Paul's  fellow-labourers.  1.  Euodia  and  Syntyche.  (1)  They  laboured  with
&%.  Paul  in  the  gospeL    The  word  is  a  strong  one ;  they  were  fellow-athletes  with  th«


ofl.iv.  1—2'.]         TtlE   EPISiLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  161


Bpbstle ;  tbfey  wete  eilga  j;ed  with  him  iJl  Snany  StrtiggleSj  hard,  it  may  be,  and  perilous,
for  the  cause  of  Christ.  S6.  Paul  gladly  acknowleiiges  the  help  which  they  had  given
him.  The  leniernlirance  Of  their  good  deeds  madS  him  feel  a  deeper  interest  in  their
spiritual  welfare.  Women  did  much  ftJr  Christ  in  ihe  Philippian  Church.  Christian
women  can  do  much  now,  mueh  tliat  mfen  cannot  do  so  well ;  their  gentle  tact,  tlieir
quiet  influence,  is  olten  of  the  greatest  Value-.  (2)  Yet  they  quarrelled.  Their  dis-
agrceuieat  was  doing  harm  to  thetliSelveB  and  to  the  Church.  The  iiidulgeuoe  of
unkind  ftielihgs  impairs  the  Spiritual  life  aiid  checks  our  growth  in  holitiess;  The
dissensions  of  Christians  are  a  grievouB  hindrance  to  the  spread  of  the  goSpel,
Mutual  love  was  to  be  the  mark  Of  Christ's  disciples  j  alasl  how  often  there  has  been
more  hate  thati  love!  Note  St.  Paul's  estteme  anxiety  to  retioncile  the  two  women ;
he  entreats  tliem  himself;  he  bfegS  others  to  help ;  he  knew  the  immense  im]Kirtance
of  Christian  union.  2.  Climent  and  others.  We  know  not  who  they  were.  Clement
may  possihly  be  the  famous  Bishop  of  Rome;  of  the  others  the  very  names  are
unknown.  They  are  not  in  the  world's  foil  of  hetoesi,  But  what  was  earthly  lame  to
thum?  Their  names  wei'e  in  the  buok  of  lite,  the  book  Of  remeiuliranoej  that  is
written  before  the  Lord  for  them  that  lear  the  Lord  and  that  think  upon  his  Name.
We  may  well  be  content  to  be  obSGure  here,  like  La6;aru6  the  beggar,  if  eur  name,  like
his,  is  known  in  heaven.

Lessons.  1.  To  love  souls,  to  count  the  winning  of  souls  the  hoblest  work,  the
salvation  of  souls  the  most  precious  crown.  2.  To  do  all  that  lies  in  us  to  heal
disseusions  and  to  promote  Chiistian  Unity.  3.  To  desire  above  all  things  that  our
names  may  be  written  in  the  Lamb's  book  of  life.

Vers.  4 — 7. — The  key-note  of  the  EpMle:  holy  joy,  with  its  blessed  results.  I.  The
Duty  of  eejoicino.  1.  The  Christian  should  learn  to  i  ijoice  always.  The  word  "always"
is  emphatic.  There  lies  the  difficulty,  there  too  lies  the  blessedness^  of  rejoicing  in  the
Lord.  It  is  easy  to  njoice  in  moments  of  exciteuientj  but  to  rejoice  always,  in  afilio-
tion,  ih  pain,  in  weariness,  in  disappointment,  is  difficult  indeed.  St.  Paul  had  learned
the  lesson  which  he  teaches — he  n-joiced  in  hardships  and  in  chains.  2.  Christian  joy
is  joy  in  the  Lord.  Eejoice  in  What  he  did,  in  what  he  is,  in  himself.  Rejoice  in  his
incarnation,  his  holy  life,  his  sufiferings  for  us,  his  precious  death,  his  resurrection,  his
ascension,  his  perpetual  intercession.  Rejoice  in  his  humility,  his  purity,  his  unselKsh*
iiess,  ids  lioly  courage,  his  love,  his  gentleness,  his  synlpathyj  his  ^jower,  his  jjlery,  hia
majesty.  Eejoice  in  himself,  in  spiritual  fellowship  with  him,  in  his  most  gracious
presence  abidmg  in  the  Christian  heart.

II.  TkE  KERULts  OF  HOLY  JOt.  1.  Christian  joy  leads  to  gentleness  and  forbearance
towards  others.  He  who  rejoices  in  the  Lord,  hajipy  in  that  great  possession,  is  not
selfish,  does  not  insist  eagerly  oh  his  own  rights,  but  will  give  way  to  others,  will  he
gentle  and  kind ;  and  that  because  the  Lord  is  at  hand.  '1  he  Christian  who  rejoices
in  the  Lord  loves  his  appearing,  loves  to  think  on  it,  to  prepare  for  it.  He  does  not  set
overmuch  store  on  his  earthly  rights,  in  view  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord  and  the  great
reward  reserved  for  the  faithful  servant.  2.  Holy  joy  diipels  anxious  care.  He  who
rejoices  in  the  Loid  is  not  disturbed  by  distracting  anxiety  about  worldly  things.  Holy
joy  keeps  the  mind  clear  and  calm ;  it  concentrates  the  thoughts  upon  the  great  gladness
of  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  in  comparison  with  which  the  objects  of  worldly  pursuit
are  insignificant  indeed.  If  we  are  learning  to  rejoice  in  him,  we  shall  learn  in  like
measure  the  difficult  less<ih  to  cast  all  our  care  Upon  him,  for  we  shall  know  that
he  caueth  lor  us.  3.  Inner  spiritual  joy  must  express  itself  in  prayer  and  supplication.
(1)  For  prayer  is  converse  with  God,  and  we  must  take  deliuht  in  holding  converse
with  him  whose  presence  is  our  Chiefest  joy.  Hence  our  love  for  firayer  is  a  sure  index
of  onr  love  lor  God.  The  more  We  love  him,  the  more  constant  our  prayers  will  be ;  we
shall  learn  to  pray  always,  on  all  occasions,  great  and  small,  The  Christian  makes  his
requests  known  unto  God  in  everything,  in  all  the  difficulties  of  his  jaily  life.  Nothing
is  too  small  to  ask  God's  counsel  upon,  nothing  so  great  and  engrossing  as  to  keep
the  Cliristian  from  his  prayers.  (2)  Prayer  is  the  general  conveise  of  the  solil  with
G-od;  supplicution  consists  in  direct  petiiions  for  ourselves  and  for  others.  Intercessory
jifayer  is  the  bouhden  duty  of  the  Christian.  We  must  pray  for  our  family^  our  neigh-
bour. Our  Church,  our  nation,  for  all  ChristiAn  people,  for  the  heathen,  for  missions.
PHILIPPIANS.  II


162  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.         [oh.  !▼.  1— 23.

Christ  encourages  us  to  come  to  him  with  all  our  wants.  "  All  things  whatsoever  ye
shall  ask  in  prayer,  believing,  ye  shall  receive."  (3)  But  to  be  able  to  pray  in  times
of  distress  and  crushing  sorrow,  when'  prayer  is  most  needful  and  most  helpful,  we  must
learn  to  pray  in  health  and  prosperity ;  we  must  pray  in  everything.  Daniel,  in  the
hour  of  danger,  "  kneeled  upon  his  knees  three  times  a  day,  and  prayed,  and  gave  thaoks
before  his  God,  as  he  did  aforetime"  He  had  formed  the  habit  of  prayer.  That  habit
is  the  result  of  loug  practice;  it  is  deepened  and  strengthened  by  perseverance.  Happy
are  they  who  by  the  grace  and  help  of  the  Holy  Spirit  form  that  habit  in  early  life.

4.  Holy  joy  implies  habitual  thanksgiving.  "In  everything  give  thanks"  is  the  precept
of  St.  Paul.  Hb  illustrates  his  teaching  by  his  own  example :  he  sang  praises  unto
God  in  the  duugeon  at  Philippi;  his  Epistles  abound  in  doxolo-ies,  in  thanksgivings.
He  had  formed  the  habit  of  giving  thanks  continually ;  it  grew  out  of  that  holy  joy
which  filled  his  soul.  Holy  joy  finds  its  natural  expression  in  psalms  and  hymns  and
spiritual  songs.  The  soul  which  is  blessed  with  that  highest  joy  which  is  the  fruit  of
the  Spirit  must  give  thanks  always  for  all  things ;  for  such  a  one  knows  by  his  own
happy  experience  that  God  maketh  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that
love  him.  Daniel  gave  thanks  in  the  extremity  of  peril;  Job,  in  his  deep  distress:
"  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away  ;  blessed  be  the. Name  of  the  Lord."

5.  Holy  joy  expresses  itself  in  prayer  and  thanksgiving ;  prayer  and  thanksgiving  bring
peace.  Peace  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  Spirit  is  given  in  answer  to  earnest
prayer.  "  My  Father  will  give  the  Holy  Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him."  It  is  the
lieace  of  God,  the  peace  which  he  giveth.  It  is  the  peace  of  Ghiist,  such  peace
as  lie  had.  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you :  my  peace  I  give  unto  you.''  It  is  trustful  love
and  childlike  confidence;  it  implies  the  blessed  consciousness  of  forgiveness  and
acceptance  with  God.  The  heart  in  which  that  peace  abideth  is  not  troubled,  neither
is  it  afraid.  For  (1)  the  peace  of  God  passeth  all  understanding ;  none  can  tell  its  calm
blessedness  but  those  to  whom  it  is  given.  No  energy  of  thought  can  comprehend  it ;
lio  effort  of  imagination  can  picture  it;  only  by  our  own  happy  experience  can  we  tell
its  exceeding  pre(;iousness.  And  (2)  it  keeps  the  heart  and  thoughts.  It  is  like  a
garrison  of  angels;  it  fills  the  heart  with  holy  thoughts,  holy  memories,  holy  hopes;
it  keeps  it  safe  from  the  temptations  of  the  evil  one;  it  leaves  no  room  for  sinful
imaginations  to  pollute  the  shrine  that  is  dedicated  to  God.  Wicked  desires  cannot
ester  the  heart  where  the  peace  of  God  keeps  guard.  Like  all  good  gifts,  it  blesses  us
in  Christ  Jesus,  in  the  sphere  of  his  influence,  flowing,  as  it  does,  from  his  grace  and
his  atonement.

Lessons.  1.  The  truest,  the  most  abiding  joy  is  joy  in  the  Lord.  The  best  ol
earthly  joys  comes  from  the  society  of  those  whom  we  dearly  love.  Christian  joy
springs  from  fellowship  with  Christ.  Pray  for  grace  to  win  Christ,  to  know  Christ,  to
love  Christ.  2.  Love,  joy,  peace,  are  the  fruit  of  thie  Spirit;  pray  for  the  blessed
experience  of  the  working  of  the  Spirit  in  the  heart.     "  Ask,  and  ye  shall  have."

Vers.  8,  9. — Exhortation  to  cultivate  habits  of  holy  thought.  I.  The  importance  or
GOVEBNINO  THE  THOUGHTS.  1.  The  thouyhts  are  an  index  of  the  character.  The  current
of  thought  seems  ever  changeful,  dependent  on  the  varyin>;  circumstances  of  the  passing
hour.  It  may  be  so  within  certain  limits;  but  in  truth  its  general  direction  is
determined  by  the  character.  The  thoughts  run  in  channels  worn  for  them  by  the  oft-
repeated  actions  wh'ch  form  our  habits,  good  or  bad.  If  the  peace  of  God  rules  in  the
heart,  the  thoughts  will  be  holy ;  if  room  is  left  for  the  temptations  of  the  world,
the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  they  will  be  of  the  earth,  earthy.  The  thoughts  show, what
the  character  is.  2.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  thoughts  react  powerfully  on  th»
character.  A  sinful  thought,  brought  again  and  again  before  the  mind,  strengthens  the
natural  tendency  of  the  will  to  evil  and  leads  to  the  sinful  deed.  Therefore  the
thoughts  must  be  disciplined  and  brought  iuto  captivity  to  the  law  of  Christ.  "Keep
thy  heart  with  all  diligence ;  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."  Here  is  the  hardest
battle  of  the  Christian  life ;  to  govern  the  thoughts  there  is  need  of  constant  watchful-
ness and  persevering  prayer.

II.  The  lesson  drawn  out  into  details.  1.  "  Whatsoever  things  art  true.'  God
is  true;  his  promises  are  true,  so  are  his  most  awful  warnings.  Christ  is  true;  he  is
ti»9  Truth ;  his  gospel  is  true.  Iloliness  is  (rue,  real ;  "{Tow  (tiidetk  ffiith,  hope,  charity.


CH.  IV.  1—23.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPHANS.  163

The  devil  is  a  liar  and  the  father  of  lies.  He  said  to  Eve,  "  Te  shall  not  surely  die ; "  it
was  the  first  wicked  falsehood.  The  world  is  false  with  its  cheating  pleasures;  it
passeth.away  and  the  lusts  thereof.  2.  "  Whatsoever  things  are  honest."  Whatsoever
things  are  deep  and  earnest,  honourable  and  reverend.  The  Christian  life  hath  a
decorum  of  its  own,  a  calm,  grave  diiinity.  Eeverence  anil  godly  fear  are  essential  to
acceptable  service.  Charity  "doth  not  behave  itself  unseemly."  3.  "Whatsoever
things  are  just"  The  saintly  life  is  not  of  the  world,  but  it  is  in  the  world  and  hath
its  duties  there.  Holiness  is  not  separate  from  morality;  it  transcends  morality,  but
it  implies  it.  We  must  bear  always  in  our  thoughts  the  Saviour's  rule:  "Do  unto
others  as  ye  would  they  should  do  unto  you."  4.  "  Whatsoever  things  are  pure"  The
pure  in  heart  shall  see  God.  "  He  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil."  Nothing  that
defileth  can  enter  into  his  presence.  The  Christian  heart  is  the  chosen  temple  of  God
the  Holy  Ghost.  To  bring  unclean  thoughts  into  that  most  sacred  presence  is  an  awful
sin.  The  Christian's  thoughts  must  be  pure  and  holy.  5.  "  Whatsoever  things  art
lovely"  The  Christian  character  is  lovable ;  gentleness,  humility,  charity,  naturally
attract  love.  "  Think  on  these  things ; "  see  them  in  their  perfection  as  exemplified  in
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  meditate  mucli  on  his  perfect  hohness.  6.  "  Whatsoever  things
are  of  good  report"  Think  on  such  things  as  are  gracious  and  attractive.  Let  nothing
coarse  or  vulgar  occupy  your  thoughts;  let  images  of  true  beauty  fill  your  souls.  7.
"  If  there  he  any  virtue,  and  if  there  he  any  praise."  "  Provide  things  honest  in  the
sight  of  all  men."  Do  not  neglect  even  the  more  human  conceptions  of  goodness.  All
good  thoughts  have  their  value ;  think  on  every  form  of  virtue,  all  things  worthy  of
praise.

III.  The  lesson  bnfokced  by  example.  1.  Holy  thought  leads  to  holy  living,
St.  Paul  was  able  to  illustrate  his  precepts  by  his  own  h(.ly  life.  Nothing  enforces
religious  teaching  so  powerfully  as  the  example  of  the  teacher.  He  gave  them  a  rule  of
thought;  he  exhibited  in  his  own  life  a  rule  of  conduct.  2.  The  blessed  result.  St.
Paul's  holiness  flowed  from  the  presence  of  God ;  the  God  of  peace  will  abide  with  all
who,  like  St.  Paul,  strive  always  to  think  holy  thoughts  and  to  live  holy  lives.

Lessons.  1.  Pray  for  grace  to  govern  the  thoughts.  2.  It  is  most  important  to
mark  what  the  thoughts  naturally  turn  to  in  times  of  leisure ;  this  should  be  a  frequent
EuVject  for  self-cx»minalion ;  it  shows  the  bent  of  the  character.  3.  Remember  the
infl  jeooe  of  example.

Vers.  10 — 13. — St.  PauVs  happy  temper.  L  His  jot  over  the  appsotion  op  the
Philippians.  1.  Their  loving  tlumght  for  him,  gave  him  great  joy.  He  greatly  loved
his  converts;  their  love  for  him  was,  next  after  the  blessed  love  of  Christ,  his  greatist
comfort  and  support.  He  rejoiced  in  the  proof  of  their  love;  it  was  sweet  to  him;  it
was  good  for  them,  an  evidence  of  their  spiritual  progress.  2.  He  may  perhaps  have
feared  that  iheir  love  was  growing  cold;  now  He  rejoiced.  The  spiritual  life  has  its
seasons,  its  winter  and  its  spring,  its  times  of  depression  and  its  times  of  fervour.  It
cannot  but  be  affected  in  some  degree,  while  we  are  in  the  flesh,  by  physical  causes
and  by  outward  circumstances.  We  must  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  cast  down ;  we
must  struggle  on,  looking  always  unto  Jesus.  Our  moods  and  feelings  are  changeful.
He  is  "  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and  for  ever."  ,

II.  His  contentment.  1.  Me  had  learned  to  he  independent  of  external  circum-
stances. That  joy  in  the  Lord  of  which  he  speaks  so  much  in  this  Epistle  armed  his
soulagaiast  the  trials  of  life.  He  that  hath  found  Christ  will  not  be  wholly  cast  down
by  outwiird  troubles.  "Cast  down  [rather,  'being  oast  dowa'],  but  not  destroyed"
(2  Cor.  iv.  9).  "  Come  unto  me,  all  that  are  weary  and  heavy  laden  .  .  .  and  ye  shall
find  rest  unto  your  souls."  No  one  was  ever  more  tried  than  St.  Paul ;  but  he  was  con-
tent in  the  midst  of  hardships,  self-sufScient  in  the  Christian  sense,  not  with  the
independence  of  pride  or  Stoicism,  but  resting  upon  Christ.  2.  He  was  armed  both  for
prosperity  and  adversity.  Christian  self-sufficiency,  which  is  really  the  sufficiency  of
Christ,  is  shown  in  sorrow  and  in  joy ;  "  in  all  time  of  our  tribulation,  in  all  time  of  our
wealth."  The  true  Christian  can  bear  misfortune  and  hardship  with  dignity,  without
ill  humour  and  complaints ;  he  can  bear  riches  and  honour  with  self-possession,  without
arrogance  or  elati  n.  Tit's  true  self-sufficiency  manifests  itself  in  all  the  circumstancei
tf  lite,  "  iu  evei-^  thJni  and  in  all  things."    §,  Ht  was  taught  o/  Qoi,    "  1  have  how


164  THE  EMSTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.         [Ch.  iv.  1— 23.

instructed  j "  "  I  have  learned  the  &6cxeU"  This  Christian  self'Siiffioienoy  oomeS  from  th«
teaohitig  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost ;  it  id  a  secret  which  he  alone  cab  teach,  "  The  secret
of  the  Lord  is  with  them  that  fear  him."  The  soul  in  its  converse  with  God  learns
many  mysteries  of  spiritual  experience,  mysteries  of  grace,  mysteiies  of  self-renuiicia-
tion,  mysteries  of  self-consecration.  St.  Paul  had  been  initiated  into  all*  Long  traioiiig,
under  the  guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  had  led  him  through  all  the  deep  and  holy
mysteries  of  the  life  that  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God.  We  must  ask  the  same  Holy
Spirit  to  guide  us  into  all  truth.  4.  He  was  strengthened  in  Ohriit.  Here  is  the
source  of  Christian  self-siifflciency.  It  is  only  in  Christ,  in  spiritual  union  with  Christ,
that  the  Christian  possesses  strength.  Wltliout  him  we  can  do  nothing :  in  him  we
can  do  all  things.  His  strength  is  made  perfect  in  our  weakness.  Therefore  the
Christian  must  not  be  discouraged  j  he  must  not  shrink  from  the  battle  against  evil  in
himself  and  in  the  world.  He  is  indeed  weak  and  helpless,  but  he  has  the  presence  of
Christ,  and  in  the  strength  of  that  presence  he  can  do  all  things.  "  We  are  able,"  said
the  sons  of  Zebedee.  We  may  in  all  humility  say  the  same  if  we  do  verily  believe  in
Christ.  All  things  are  possible  to  him  that  believeth.  God  giveth  us  the  victory
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.

Lessons.  1.  It  is  easy  to  say,  "Thy  will  he  done; "  it  is  very  hard  to  work  that
prayer  into  our  lives.  St.  Paul  did  so ;  so  may  we  by  the  grace  of  God.  2.  It  is  a
secret  to  be  learned  only  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  3.  I'hat  teachihg^  can  make  us  con-
tented always,  self-sufficient  through  the  strength  of  Christ.

Vers.  14 — ^20. — 2%e  sympathy  of  the  Philippians  with  8t.  Paul.  I.  TheIb  gifts.
1.  They  had  fellowship  with  him  in  his  afflietion.  They  made  it  thar  own ;  they
showed  the  reality  of  their  sympathy  by  their  gifts.  They  were  themselves  in  a  great
trial  of  afflictions,  in  deep  poverty.  They  did  not  make  their  afflictions  or  their  poverty
an  excuse  lor  not  aiding  the  apostle ;  they  assisted  him  again  and  again.  They  did
well,  he  says.  Christian  sympathy  is  a  beautiful  thing ;  it  sweetens  the  cup  of  sorrow ;
it  is  one  of  God*6  most  precious  gifts.  St.  Paul  felt  it  deeply.  He  did  not  seek  their
alms;  that,  indeed,  helped  him  in  his  trouble.  But  he  could  have  done  without  it,  he
had  learned  the  great  lesson  of  contfentinent.  But  the  sympathy  of  Christian  love  was
very  precious  to  him;  he  yearned  for  it;  it  was  his  fchiefest  comfort  next  after  the
presence  of  Christ.  He  prized  it  for  their  sake  as  well  as  for  his  own ;  it  proved  that
his  labours  had  not  been  in  vain.  It  was  good  for  them  too;  it  was  good  lor  them  to
show  sympathy,  as  it  was  for  the  apostle  to  receive  it.  Christian  sympathy,  like
mercy,  is  twice  blest — '^  it  blesseth  him  that  gives  and  him  that  takes."  2.  They  gave
readily,  spontaneously.  It  was  "  in  the  beginuilig  of  the  gospel ;  "  they  had  but  just
become  Christians;  St.  Paul  had  but  just  left  liiem.  He  was  at  Thessalonica,  the  chief
city  of  Macedonia.  The  Philippians  did  not  leave  the  duty  of  ministering  to  the
apostle's  wants  to  the  Thessalonians ;  they  sent  once  and  again,  the  little  town  to  the
great  city,  unto  his  necessities.  They  were  the  first,  it  seems,  to  have  the  great
privilege  of  supporting  St.  Paul  in  his  apostolic  labours.  They  did  not  wait  to  see  what
others  would  giVe ;  they  set  the  example ;  they  gave  what  they  could,  and  that  at  once.
3.  They  were  not  weary  in  well-doing.  They  sent  again  and  again,  twice  at  lea.st,  to
Thessafonica ;  a  third  time,  when  St.  Paul  departed  from  Macedonia.  "Brethren  from
Macedonia "  supplied  his  wants  at  Corinth  (2  Cor.  xi.  9).  "  The  Churches  of  Mace-
donia "  abounded  in  their  liberality  towaids  the  poor  brethren  at  Jerusalem  (2  Cor.  viii.
1,  2) ;  and  now  they  sent  Epaphroditils  to  relieve  the  apostle's  wants  in  his  Roman
imprisonment.  4.  They  gave  unastced.  St.  Paul  did  not  desire  gifts;  he  was  even
unwilling  to  receive  assistauce  from  uther  Churches.  "1  seek  not  yours,  but  you,"  he
said  to  the  Corinthians.  But  the  Philippians  loved  him  for  his  work's  sake  and  for  his
own  sake.  They  gave  freely  out  of  love ;  they  gave  gladly,  for  thej  had  learned  of
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  great  Teachef,  that  "  it  is  moire  blessed  to  give  than  to
receive."

II.  St.  Pa  til's  tBELlNQS  ON  ESCEiviNtf  THEiil  CONTRiBDitON.  1.  Eis  Sensitive
nature  is  deeply  touched  with  the  evidence  of  their  love;  but  he  shrinks  from  appearing
to  invite  further  liberality.  It  is  not  the  gift,  he  soys,  that  he  seeks.  He  is  pleased,
he  rejoices,  but  not  for  his  own  sake ;  It  is  lot  the  givers,  for  the  sakeof  the  Philipiiiaiis,
that  St  Paul's  heart  is  touched  with  holy  joy.    It  is  good  for  them  to  give  j  he  knows


CH.  nr  1—23.]         THE   EPISTLE   TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  165

it.  Their  bounty  is  set  down  to  their  account  in  the  treasury  of  heaven,  and  this
thought  is  full  pf  sweetness  to  the  apostle's  soul.  2.  Mis  contentment.  He  needed
nothing  more,  he  askid;  Epaphroditus  had  brought  all  he  wanted,  and  more  than  he
wanted.  Mark  the  vmworldlinesa  of  the  apostle.  We  are  never  satisfied  j  whatever  we
have  we  want  more.  He  was  satisfied  ajnid  hardships,  in  captivity.  For  he  had  the
peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding^  and,  living  that,  he  could  not  crave  for
earthly  comforts,

in.  Thf  ACOEPTABIBNESS  OP  THEIR  oiFT.  1.  Those  gifts  relieved  St.  FauVs  toonts,
but  they  had  a  far  higher  character — they  were,  he  tells  us,  "an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,
a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well-pleading  to  Uod,'*  Clu'iatian  almsgiving  is  a  very  sacred
thing ;  God  accepts  the  gift  aa  given  to  himself.  It  has  a  sacrificial  character ;  for  it
issues  out  of  that  spiritual  sacrifice  olTered  to  God  by  the  royal  priesthood^  the  sacrifice
of  self.  We  are  bidiien  to  present  our  bodies  as  a  living  sacrifice.  The  offering  of
ourselves  sanctifies  the  lesser  offering  of  our  earthly  goods.  2,  The  reward.  The  cup
of  cold  water  given  in  the  name  of  a  prophet  would  bring  a  propliet's  reward.  The
Philippians  had  supplied  the  apostle's  needs ;  they  had  done  it  for  Christ's  sake,  who^e
servant  he  was  :  God  would  supply  all  their  needs,  They  had  given  according  to  their
means,  out  of  their  deep  poverty ;  God  would  reward  them  according  to  his  riches.
What  a  word  is  this !  The  riches  of  God  are  infinite  j  infinite,  then,  is  the  reward,  not
of  almsgiving  iu  itself,  but  of  the  faith  and  love  which  prompted  it.  "  Can  two  mites
buy  the  kingdom  ?  "  asks  St.  Chrysoatom.  Yes,  if  they  are  given  in  the  spirit  of  the
poor  widow,  in  undoubting  faith  and  selffsaorifioing  love.  God  will  reward  those  who
raiiiister  to  his  saints,  in  glory— rin  the  glory  of  his  grace  and  presence  now,  in  the  glory
of  heaven  hereafter.  He  will  reward  them  in  Christ  Jesus,  in  virtue  of  that  living
union  with  Christ,  through  which  alone  all  spiritual  blessings  flow  into  the  believer's
soul.  3.  The  thanksgiving.  The  glory  is  God's.  It  is  he  who  giveth  his  people  a
willing  heart  to  offer  willingly.  The  glory  is  his.  Men  see  their  good  works  and
glorify  their  Father.  All  glory  is  his,  all  majesty,  dominion,  and  power,  and  that
tlironghout  the  ages  of  eternity.

Lessons.  Learn:  1.  The  beauty  of  Christian  sympathy.  2.  The  blessedness  of
Oh ristian  almsgiving.  3.  To  give  like  the  Philippians,  gladly.  3.  To  receive,  if  need
be,  like  St.  Paul,  prizing  the  love  more -than  the  gift.  4.  Always  to  ascribe  the  glory
to  God.

Vera.  21 — 23. — The  salutation$.  I.  The  apostle's  own  8Ai,tttations.  i.  ITiey
teach  the  duty  of  Christian  courtesy.  A  Christian  salutation  is  real ;  it  is  a  benediction,
iiot  a  mere  form  ;  for  it  is  the  expression  of  that  love  which  ought  to  be  the  distinguish-
ing mark  of  Christians.  2.  He  saluiea  every  saint.  He  does  not  single  out  individual
names  in  this  Epistle ;  he  sends  his  love  to  every  saint.  We  have  noticed  more  than
once  how  often  the  word  "all"  occurs ;  there  was  no  schism  in  the  Philippian  Church  ;
all  loved  St.  Paul,  and  all  were  dear  to  him.  There  were  personal  quarrels,  but  no
religious  animosities.  It  was  a  united  Church,  one  in  faith  and  love.  3.  He  ealls
them  "  saints  in  Christ  Jesus  "  at  the  end  of  his  Hpistle,  as  he  had  done  in  the  first  verse.
It  is  one  of  the  highest  titles  by  which  Christiana  can  be  addressed.  It  reminds  us  of
our  high  privileges  and  of  our  great  responsibilities.  We  are  saints  by  dedication,  we
have  been  once  made  members  of  Christ.  We  must  walk  "worthily  of  the  calling
wherewith  we  were  called ; "  it  must  be  our  most  earnest  effort  to  follow  after  holiness
of  heart  and  life,  and  to  abide  in  Christ.  It  is  an  a.vvful  as  well  as  a  blessed  thing  to
be  a  Christian,  redeemed  with  the  most  preeioua  blood,  reconciled  to  God  by  the
tremendous  sacrifice  of  the  cross.  The  word  "  saint"  reminds  us  of  our  duties  and  of
our  hopes.     Therefore  St.  Paul  loves  to  repeat  it.

II.  Salutations  sent  feom  Home.  1.  From  the  brethren  which  were  with  him.
He  means  his  personal  companions  who  had  oome  to  Home  with  him  or  joined  him
there  afterwards.  Except  Timothy,  they  were  not  like-minded  with  himself  (ch.  ii.
20,  21) ;  yet  he  calls  them  "  brethren."  He  had  that  charity  which  "  hopeth  all  things,
believeth  all  things,  endureth  all  things."  2.  I^om  the  Roman  Christians.  "All  the
saints,''  he  says, "  salute  you."  He  mentions  especially  the  Christians  of  Nero's  household.
The  gospel  had  reached  that  gink  of  all  impurity ;  there  were  saints  there.  Whether
ilaves  (as  they  probably  were)  or  ofgoiaU  of  the  oourti  whether  of  higher  or  lowet


led  THE  fiPlsTLE  TO  THE  PfllLlPPlA'KS.       [ofl.  iv.  1-28.

■    '•        -■    -         -.  ■    ■■         -..  .^ —

rank,  they  were  attached  to  the  person  of  Nero  and  witnessed  the  abominations  of  his
loathsoujc  life.  God's  grace  is  sufficient  for  us,  whatever  our  outward  lot  may  be.  St
Paul  in  chains,  these  Christians  of  Nero's  household  in  the  palace,  lived  a  holy  life.
Holiness  is  possible  in  all  conditions  of  life,  in  the  deepest  poverty,  and  amid  all  tlie
temptations  of  wealth  and  evil  example.  It  needs  only  the  grace  of  Grod.  3.  There-
fore the  apostle  ends,  as  he  began,  with  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Christ  is
the  Alpha  and  Omega,  his  grace  is  the  beginning  and  the  end.  He  is  the  Author  and
Finisher  of  our  faith.  His  grace  is  sufBcient  for  us.  To  him  be  the  glory  for  ever  and
ever.

Lessons.  Learn  :1.  To  be  courteous  to  all  men.  2.  To  strive  with  all  earnestness  to
become  saints,  not  in  name  only,  but  in  deed  and  in  truth.  3.  Not  to  lay  blame  on
our  circumstances,  but  to  strive,  whatever  our  circumstances  may  be,  to  aiiorn  the  doc-
trine of  Grod  our  Saviour  in  all  things.  4.  To  trust  only  in  God,  to  pray  consiantly
for  Ms  graceu


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  1. — The  duty  of  steadfastness.  The  apostle  grounds  this  duty  upon  the  heavenly
citizenship  and  the  hope  of  the  coming  Saviour.     Mark —

I.  His  endearing  address.  "My  brethren  beloved  and  longed  fir,  my  joy  and
crown,  so  stand  fast,  beloveii."  The  accumulation  of  epithets  marks  the  intense  affec-
tion and  delight  of  the  apostle"  in  converts  so  worthy  of  his  concern  for  their  good.
The  twofold  repetition  of  the  term  "beloved"  in  a  single  sentence  marks  love  as  the.
domitunt  feeling;  the  other  terms  indicate  either  his  an.tiety  to  see  them,  the  joy
whicli  their  Christian  kindliness  carried  to  his  heart,  or  the  triumph  of  Divine  grace  in
their  conversion  which  redounded  so  signally  to  his  own  final  victory.

II.  The  abiding  attitude  op  all  true  believers.  "  So  stand  fast  in  the  Lord."
It  implies:  1.  That  they  are  exposed  to  influences  calculated  to  mar  the  integrity  of
their  walk.  There  is  a  threefold  hostility  always  at  work  against  a  believer — the  world,
the  flesh,  and  the  devil  (Eph.  vi.  12),  tending  to  shake  heart  or  mind.  Probably  I  he
ixpostle  thought  of  the  spiritual  risks  that  threatened  from  the  side  of  Judaistic  zealotry.
2.  The  true  spring  of  Christiam,  steadfastness  is  in  the  Lord,  as  the  element  of  the
spiritual  life.  We  are  said  to  stand  in  faith  (2  Cor.  i.  24)  and  to  stand  iu  grace  (Rom.
v.  2),  but  these  phrases  only  represent  the  methods  in  which  the  believer  finds  his  weak-
ness linked  with  the  omnipotence  of  Divine  grace.  The  counsel  of  the  apostle  is  needful
in  every  age.  The  caprice  of  opinion  was  never  more  marked  than  in  our  time.  There  is
a  lifting  of  anchors  that  bodes  no  good,  with  a  drifting  any  whither,  but  usually  toward
intellectual  darkness.  Therefore  believers  must,  in  the  imbroglio  of  strange  beliefs,
"  stand  fast  in  the  Lord."— T.  0.

Vers.  2,  3. — A  touching  personal  appeal.  "  I  exhort  Euodias,  and  I  exhort  Syntyche,
that  they  be  of  the  same  mind  in  the  Lord."

I.  Women  held  a  leading  place  in  the  Christian  society  or  Philippi.  1.
It  was  to  women  that  the  apostle  first  preached  tlie  gospel  in  that  Boman  town.  (Acts
xvi.)  They  were  the  first  converts  to  Christianity  in  Europe.  2.  It  was  women  who
first  gave  hospitable  reception  to  the  apostle  in  a  town  which  never  ceased  to  show  him
substantial  kindness.  3.  It  was  probably  owing  to  the  prominence  of  Christian  women
at  Philippi  that  the  apostle  became  such  a  debtor  to  the  most  liberal  of  all  the  Churches.
Their  sympathetic  natures  would  initiate  and  sustain  projects  of  Christian  generosity.

II.  The  two  women  herb  addressed  were  evidently  influential  members
OF  THE  Chorch.  1.  They  were  ladies  of  rank,  who  displayed  an  active  zeal  for  the
cause  of  Christ.  Their  names  appear  in  the  ancient  inscriptions.  The  women  of  Mace-
donia held  a  high  social  place  in  that  age.  These  good  women  helped  the  apostle  \a
Christian  labours,  "Inasmuch  as  they  laboured  with  me  in  the  gospel."  As  women
were  not  allowed  to  preach  (1  Tim.  ii.  12),  it  is  evident  that  their  service  was  of  a
more  private  kind,  either  in  instructing  the  young  or,  more  probably,  in  instructing
female  converts  who  were  not  accessible  to  members  of  the  other  sex.  Tlie  order  ol
deaconesses  evidently  arose  out  of  some  necessity  of  this  sort,    g,  Thy  had  differencei


6k.  IV.  1-21]        tfli!  fePtSf  LE  fO  THE!  PfltLlPPlANa  187

of  a  mrt  calculated  to  mar  thir  influence  and  to  shake  the  faith  of  converts.  '  The
difibrences  were  lass  prol'alily  iu  the  way  of  religious  opiaiou  than  of  meihods  of  reli-
gious work.  Perhaps  a  di  Ifeienoe  of  temperament  may  have  put  them  out  of  sy  mpai  hy
with  each  other,  and  a  spirit  of  rivalry  may  have  led  to  unseemly  dissensions  in  the
Church.  3.  There  is  an  urgency  in  the  apostolic  appeal  which  displays  an  anxiety  on
their  account.  He  says,  "  1  exhort  Euodias,  and  I  exhort  Syntyche,"  as  if  he  regarded
them  both  as  equally  oiien  to  censure.  He  thus  addresses  his  appeal  to  each  individu-
ally. He  counsels  them  to  find  in  the  Lord  the  true  centre  of  their  unity.  Let  them
think  as  the  Lord  thinks,  do  as  the  Lord  does,  and  submit  to  his  supreme  guidance  in
the  sphere  of  their  Christian  labours.  4.  ffe  appeals  to  fits  true  i,okefeUow — wtioevcr
he  or  she  may  have  been — to  use  his  influence  to  effect  a  reconciliation  between  the  two
ladies.  "  Yea,  I  ask  thee  to  assist  them,  inasmuch  as  they  lalionred  with  me  in  the
gospel."  There  is  no  more  important,  though  delicate,  service  than  to  promote  a  better
understanding  between  two  Christian  people  whose  paths  have  disagreeably  crossed
each  other.  5.  2%e  importance  of  the  case  is  manifest  from  the  leading  place  that  the
apostle  assigns  to  the  two  ladies,  besides  "  Clement  and  other  my  fellow-workers,  whose
names  are  written  in  the  book  of  life."  They  held  a  distinguished  place  beside  these
labourers.  If  Clement  was  the  well-known  author  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians,
they  are  distinguished  by  association  with  his  venerable  name.  It  the  apostle's
other  fellow- workers  are  unnamed,  they  are  named  iu  the  book  of  life.  This  suggestive
phrase  implies  that  (1)  salvation  is  an  individual  thing,  for  individual  names  have
their  record  on  high;  (2)  that  their  salvation  is  an  event  already  fore-ordained;  and  (3)
therefore  absolutely  certain. — T.  G.

Ver.  4. — Christian  Joy  a  duty.  "  Rejoice  in  the  Lord."  This  sentence  is  the  key-
note of  the  Epistle.     The  world  holds  that  believers  have  no  joys.

I.  Believers  odght  to  rejoice.  1.  Because  it  is  a  commanded  duty.  "Rejoice
in  the  Lord."  2.  Because,  if  commanded,  it  is  provided  hy  the  Holy  Spirit,  for  it  is
part  of  the  Spirit s  fruit.  (Gal.  v.  22.)  3.  Because  joy  is  characteristic  of  the  Chris-
tian. The  early  Christians  " ate  their  meat  with  gla' mess  and  singleness  of  heart"
(Acta  ii.  46).  This  joy  is  not  inconsistent  with'  sorrow.  The  apostle  himself  was
"  sorrowful,  yet  alway  rejoicing  "  (2  Cor.  vi.  10).     "  Rejoice  with  trembling."

II.  The  nature  of  this  jot.  "  In  the  Lord."  The  world  rejoices  in  the  creature,
but  the  believer  rejoices  in  the  Creator  of  all  things.  1.  Because  the  Lord  is.  2.
Because  he  is  the  Poi'tiun  of  his  people.  3.  Because  of  all  the  manifestations  of  his
■power,  wisdom,  and  grace.  4.  Because  the  believer  hopes  for  the  glory  to  come.
(Rom.  V.  2.)

III.  The  believer  is  to  cherish  an  abiding  jot.  "Rejoice  in  the  Lord  at  all
times."  In  dark  days  as  well  as  bright  days.  A  permanent  habit  of  joy  is  reasonable,
when  we  consider  (1)  that  there  is  no  change  in  the  Lord,  the  Source  of  our  joy ;  (2)  that
our  relationship  to  him  is  unchangeable.

IV.  Mark  the  emphatic  bei'etition  of  the  command.  "  And  again  I  will  say,
Kejoice."  This  attests  its  importance.  1.  Joy  is  the  spring  of  energy.  "A  weary
heart  tires  in  a  mile."  A  cheerful  Ciiristian  is  usually  a  very  active  one.  "  The  joy  of
the  Lord  is  his  strength."  2.  It  kills  the  taste  for  sinful  pleasures.  It  excludes  from
the  heart  everything  it  cannot  harmonize  with  itself.  3.  It  enables  the  belieoer  to  con-
front persecution.  The  early  Christians  "  took  joyfully  the  spoiling  of  their  goods."
4.  It  enhances  the  charm  and  influence  of  Christian  life. — T.  0.

Ver.  5. — The  virtue  of  forbearance.  "Let  your  forbearance  he  known  to  all  men.
The  Lord  is  at  hand."

I.  The  nature  of  this  vibtue.  1.  It  is  the  opposite  of  contention  and  self-
aggrandizement,  rigour  and  severity.  2.  It  is  the  spirit  that  enables  a  man  to  bear
injuries  with  patience  and  not  to  demand  all  that  is  rightly  his  due,for  the  sake  of
peace.  The  apostle  corrected  the  litigious  spirit  of  the  Corinthians  hy  asking  them,
"  Why  do  ye  not  rather  take  wrong  ?  "     (1  Cor.  vi.  7.)

II.  The  advantages  ov  this  virtue.  1.  It  cmtribtttes  greatly  to  the  comfort  of
life  and  the  peace  of  society.  There  is  always  a  tendency  to  friction  in  the  relations  of
life  where  the  spirit  of  forbearance  doei  not  govern  them.    2.  Jt  centributei  to  tht  use-


168  TBia  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHlLlPPlANS.       t"*  "■  l-^i

fulness  of  Christian  peoph  atiif  promote^  the  glory  of  Ood.  This  true  spirit  of  Christ
>vi]l  give  a  mjin  great  influence!  with  Ws  fellows  and  will  redound  to  the  credit  of  the
S<i!5pel,

1{I.  The  beason  to  ehtokcb  this  dijtt.  "  The  L(Ord  is  »t  hand."  Let  us  beai
ivith  others,  ?e(^ing  the  time  is  near  when  w?  W^y  eX|ieet  the  "Lord  to  bear  wi^h
us.  All  our  rivalries  find  disputes  ought  to  disappear  in  the  light  of  the  judguiept
^)0^^ing.^T.  C.

Vers,  6,  7.—^ A  cure  for  care.  The  apostle  forbids  harassing  anxjety  and  enjoins
prayerfulncsa  as  the  aiire  way  to  pcape.     "  Be  anxious  far  nothiTig."    Mfirk — ■

I.  The  wise  cotiNaEL  of  the  apostle.  1.  This  dogs  not  mean  that  we  are  not
to  he.  anxious  abaui  duty.  We  ought  to  have  a  deep  CQ»cern  fpr  every  interest
of  God's  kingdom.  A  certain  measure  of  anxious  thought  is  necessary  to  the  efficient
performance  of  every  duty  of  life.  2,  It  means  that  we  are  not  to  he  anxious  about  the
result?  of  our  work  or  consequences  gmerally,  (X)  Pecause  God  holds  th'^se  }n  his  own
hands  J  (2)  liecause  our  anxiety  will  not  ward  off  tlie  auticii'ated  eyil ;  (3)  because  the
evil  may  turn  out  for  good,  3.  Over-anxiety  is  siiiful.  (1)  It  is  the  disrefiard  ot  a
Divine  command ;  (2)  it  distrusts  God's  power  and  vvis^om ;  ^^3)  it  doubts  the  reality
cf  the  promises ;  (4)  it  deters  froi»  duty ;  (5)  it  spoils  the  temper  and  comfort  of
wnrk.

II.  The  bbmbdt  for  ovbbtAnxiety,  "In  everything  by  prayer  and  supi'lication
with  tbanksgivins!  let  your  requests  he  m^de  known  to  Qod."  1.  The  range  of  prayer.
"  lu  everything."  This  counsel  is  often  neglectL'd,  for  men  carry  their  great  misfortunes
or  their  great  anxieties  to  God,  but  keep  their  trivial  vexations  to  themselves.  A
goqd  man  has  paraphrased  this  passage  thus ;  "  Be  careful  for  ijothing  j  be  prayerful
for  eveiytliing;  be  thankful  for  anything."  2.  27(6  variety  of  prayer.  The  word
"  prtvyer  "  here  poipts  to  the  frame  of  mind,  the  word  "  supplication  "  to  the  actual  asking
of  blessiiig,  the  requests  point  to  the  various  parts  of  the  supplication,  while  the  thanks-
giving marks  the  subjective  condition  of  aqceptance.  3.  The  effects  of  prayer.  (1)  It
tends  to  place  everything  in  God's  hand,  with  *  feeling  ibat  he  will  do  all  things  well.
The  burden  is  cast  upon  the  Lord.  (2)  It  le^ds  the  praying  man  to  look  for  answers
to  prayer  in  the  eypntS  of  Divine  providenpe.  (3)  It  increases  devout  inquisitiyeness
to  know  the  Divine  will  as  recorded  in  the  Worq.

III.  Tpp  RESULT.  "  And  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding  keep  your
hearts  and  mmds  in  Christ  Jesus,"  This  beautiful  text  is  often  the  subject  of  inde-
pendent treatment,  but  we  have  no  right  tp  separate  wha,t  God  ha?  joined  together ;
and  accordingly  it  is  only  when  we  are  careful  for  nothing  and  pi'ayeriul  in  everything
that  we  may  expect  to  enter  into  Divine  peace.  1.  The  Uftture  of  the  peace  of  God.  It  is
deep  inward  repose  of  spiritual  life,  and  is  called  "the  peace  of  God"  because  he  com-
municates and  sustains  it,  as  the  result  of  our  recopiilifttipn  with  him.  (1)  It  springs
out  of  our  justification.  (Rom.  v.  1.)  (2)  It  apices  in  th?  squI  as  part  of  our  spiritual-
miiidedness.  "Eor  to  be  spiritually  tninded  is  lite  and  peace"  (Riim,  viii.  6.)  (3)  It  is
the  (tbiding  experience  of  the  so/ints  so  long  as  they  are  practicaUy  consistent  in  their
wcklle.  "  Great  peace  have  they  (hat  love  thy  Law  "  (Ps.  oxix.  Kio).  "  Thou  wJlt  keep
him  in  perfect  peace  whose  mind  is  stayed  on  thee'"  (Isa.  xxvi,  3),  (4)  It  is  almost
inexplicabie.  "  It  passeth  all  nnderntanding."  (a)  It  passeth  the  understanding  of
wicked  or  worldly  men ;  for  their  experience  lies  in  a  very  different  sphere.  (6)  It
sur[iasses  the  understanding  of  godly  men  J  for  light  often  breaks  in  upon  their
darkness,  in  a  way  quite  my.sterious.  Who  can  understand  the  peace  of  the  dying  ?
Does  it  not  pass  all  understanding?  2.  The  efftcis  qf  this  peg,ce.  "It  shall  keep  your
hearts  and  minds  iu  Christ  Jesus."  This  does  not  signify  that  the  peace  shall  keep
liossessjoii,  hut  rather,  as  the  word  gigpifieg,  garrison  pr  stand  gentry  before  the  heart
or  mind,  so  ag  t<>  prevent  the  intrusion  of  disturbing  or  disquieting  thcmghts.  It  is
Ciirist  hiiiisoif  who  i  lants  the  garrisim  there.  (1)  M  case  of  intellectual  doubts,  the
jieace  will  either  prevent  their  arisinii  at  all  or  repel  them  when  they  arise.  (2)  In
the  case  of  the  hitter  reineinbiance  if  my  past  sins,  this  pi  ace  carries  me  back  to  the
refgiicilintim  eff  oied  by  Christ  on  fhe  crofs,  (3)  In  case  of  anxieties,  feurs^  cmd
eckr^hly  salieitudes,  the  peace  of  Ood  carries  »  l)elievev  back  to  the  point  of  hit  past
itlivtrances  j  and  he  ^ayg,  "  Thpu  haat  been  my  helpi  therefore  in  the  shadow  of  thy


08,iv.  1—230        THE  EPISTI^E  TO  THK  fHlLlpPIANS.  169

wingg  wjll  I  Tejoice."  (4)  It  is  a  &frong  gtmrd  against  sin.  The  religiously' peaceful  arc
the  morally  strong,  Duty  is  ple:isant,  obe'lienoe  is  sweet,  because  the  s[)iritual  mind
is  in  liiirmony  with  Goii'a  miud,  ^in  is  rejected  because  it  threateng  to  undermine  the
pi'ace.  3.  The  aUding  source  of  tf^is  peace.  ''  In  Christ  Jesus,"  (1)  He  is  vur  Pecfce.
(Bjih,  ii.  14.)  Not  in  the  mere  sense  of  h?ing  our  Peace-maker,  as  ii  he  had  retired
after  he  had  made  it,  but  he  is  the  continuous  Snuice  qf  our  peace.  (2)  ffe  gives  pea:e
as  his  legactf  to  the  Vhurch.  (John  xiv.  27.)  He  imparts  that  central  calm  that  is
at  the  heart  of  the  endless  agitations  that  shake  our  merely  earthly  life. — T.  0.

Ver.  8. — ^Ijeetsfor  Christiam.  stvdjf-  The  gospel  does  more  than  hold  out  a  refuge
to  the  guilty;  it  takes  all  who  accept  Christ  under  its  supreme  and  exclusive  direction.
Therefore,  in  his  parting  words  to  his  converts,  the  last  counsel  of  the  apostle  is  of  a
beautifully  practical  charapter:  "  Finally,  brethren,  whatgoeyer  things  are  true,  what-
soever .things  are  venerable,  whatsoever  things  are  just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,
whatsoever  things  are  lovely,  whatsoever  thin-^s  are  of  good  report ;  if  there  be  any
virtue,. if  there  be  any  praise,  think  on  these  things."

I.  Subjects  of  Christian  contemplation.  There  is  a  certain  order  in  the  series
here  exhibited.  1.  Things  that  concern  us  absolutely,  '*  Whatsoever  things  are  true,
whatsoever  things  are  venerable,"  (1)  Things  true.  That  is,  true  as  opposed  to  false ;
for  lying  is,  according  to  the  apostle,  a  breach  of  the  social  contract  (Eph.  iv.  25).  True
as  opposed  to  insincerity ;  true  in  speech,  true  in  conduct.  Things  true  stand  at  the
head  of  the  series,  because  the  truth  is  the  ground  of  all  God's  commands,  and  the
ground  of  our  obedience.  The  love  of  truth  is  the  intellectual  part  of  piety.  It  raises
the  moral  temper  and  tone  of  the  world.  As  it  is  by  the  truth  we  are  sanctified,  it  is
natural  that  things  true  should  be  the  subject  of  constant  Christian  thought.  (2)  Things
venerable.  A  man  is  very  much  what  he  thinks ;  therefore  make  venerable  themes
the  subjects  of  your  deepest  thought.  Grave  things  strengthen  and  deepen  Christian
character  and  intensify  Christian  (eeling.  Character  formed  on  such  a  basis  will  be
dignified.  "  Acceptable  to  God  and  appro  /ed  of  men  "  (Eom.  xiv.  18).  2.  Things  that
concern  us  relatively.  "  Whatsoever  things  are  just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure."
(1)  Things  just  or  righteous.  Justice  maintains  right  relations  between  man  and  man,
holds  the  balance  fairly  between  conflicting  interests,  co-ordinates  the  rights  of  each
with  all.  Love  of  justice  is  the  moral  part  of  pietj',  as  the  love  of  truth  is  the  intellec-
tual part  of  it.  Justice  is  peculiar  in  this  respect,  that  there  are  no  degrees  of  it,
as  there  are  degrees  of  goodness  or  generosity;  for  a  man  less  than  just  is  unjust.  A
man,  again,  may  do  a  hundred  kindly  acts,  but  if  he  fail  in  one  act  of  justice  the
bleniihh  is  fatal  to  character.  There  is,  therefore,  great  need  that  Christian  people
should  be  just  in  all  their  acts.  Religion  does  not  exempt  them  from  the  laws  which
bind  men  of  the  world.  (2)  Things  pure.  Not  merely  chastity,  but  purity  in  the
widest  sense.  There  must  be  pure  thinking,  pure  reading,  pure  action.  "  Blessed  are
the  pure  in  he,art."  Let  the  mind  dwell  on  pure  themes.  3.  Things  that  suggest  moral
approbation  from  the  outside.  "  Whatsoever  things  are  lovely,  ...  of  good  report."
The  lour  things  already  mentioned  describe  their  obaracter  in  themselves.  These  two
mark  the  impression  made  upon  the  world.  (1)  Tilings  lovely.  They  suggest  the
kindly  graces  of  character.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  being  dignified,  majestic,  and
venerable,  but  not  lovely,  A  Christian  ought  not  to  be  morose,  unkind,  or  fault-
finding. Nothitig  tends  to  injure  the  cause  of  religion  more  than  an  unlovely  temper,
an  eye  severe  and  unkind,  a  brow  hard  and  stern.  Yet  the  apostle  gives  only  the
fifth  place  to  "things  lovely,"  as  if  to  iiidipate  tjiat  personal  kii)dness  or  good  nature
is  not  to  supply  the  room  of  justice  or  purity.  (2)  Things  of  good  report.  Things  such
as  all  men  agree,  in  commending — courtesy,  urbanity,  justice,  temperance,  purity,  trt(th,
respect  to  parents.  Men  of  the  world  will  not  withhold  their  praise  from  men  distin-
guished by  these  vjrtues.  Christians  ouglit  to  remember  the  words,  "  Let  not  3  our  good
be  evil  spoken  of."  They  are  to  "vvalk  in  wisdom  t()ward  them  that  are  without."
4.  Things  to  be  inclined  ifi  a  larger  category^  "  If  there  be  any  virtue,  if  there  be  any
praise."  This  claug^  is  thrown  in  as  an  altgr-thought,  to  cover  possible  omissions,  for
the  8ul  jects  of  Christian  oonlierpjilation  are  gndless,  (1)  Virtue,  The  apostle  never
uses  this  old  heathen  term  except  in  this  plape,  hut  ee  seems  to  Bs^y  thfit  Christian
jeople  ar«  not  to  neglect  the  study  of  that  which  i?  best  in  heathen  oonceptioo,


1?6  fm  fePiBTLU  1:0  tMa  PHlLlPPiANS.         [en.  iv.  l-«i

(2)  Priiise.  He  had  often  despised  the  praise  of  men,  but  he  concedes  hero  that  some
considci-atiou  ought  to  be  given  even  to  what  is  worthy  of  praise  among  men.

II.  The  duty  and  advantaqb  of  coNTEMPLATiNa  THESE  THINGS.  "  Thiiik  on
these  things."  1.  The  mind  takes  the  stamp  of  what  it  thinks  on.  There  is  an  assimi-
lating process  by  which  the  graces  or  virtues  we  have  specified  are  stamped  doeiily  ujion
Christian  character.  It  is  with  these  graces  as  it  is  with  Christ  himself.  He  is  the
glass  "in  which  we  behold  the  glory  of  God,  and  so  are  changed  into  the  same  imnge
from  glory  to  glory."  2.  There  are  blessed  effects  upon  the  world.  A  life  exempliiyiu^
the  graces  of  holy  living  is  the  most  liliely  to  arrest  the  careless  and  the  wicked.  The
living  epistles  of  Christ  are  made  to  be  known  and  read  of  all  men. — T.  0.

Ver.  9. — The  apostle  himself  an  example  to  believers.  "  Those  things,  which  ye  both
learned,  and  received,  and  heard,  and  saw  in  me,  do :  and  the  God  of  peace  shall  be
with  you."

I.  The  apostle's  precepts.  "  Learned  and  received."  The  reference  is  to  his  oral
teaching,  which  included  all  the  principles  out  of  which  these  graces  or  virtues  take
their  origin  and  growth.

II.  The  apostle's  example.  As  set  before  them  in  what  they  heard  of  him  wlieu
absent,  and  in  what  they  saw  of  him  when  he  was  present  They  witnessed  his
laborious  usefulness,  his  patierit  submission  to  jicrsecution,  his  spiiituality  and  care  for
his  own  spii-itual  life,  and,  above  all,  his  splen.lid  decision  of  character.

III.  The  efi-ect  of  following  these  precepts  and  this  example.  "  The  God
of  peace  shall  be  with  you."  The  way  of'  peace  lies  along  -the  pathway  of  obedience.
The  blessing  of  the  Lord  is  upon  them  who  lore  him  and  keep  his  commau'l-
ments. — T.  0.

Vers.  10 — 13. —  The  secret  of  contentment.  The  apostle  now  turns  to  his  personal
relations  with  the  Philippian^,  and  commends  them  for  their  considerate  and  timely
liberality  in  the  times  of  his  distress.

I.  The  apostle's  jot  in  their  liberality.  " But  I  lejoiced  in  the  Lord  greatly,
that  at  length  ye  revived  your  iiiteiest  in  me;  in  which,  indeed,  ye  did  inteiv.-it
your.-ielves,  hut  ye  had  no  opportunity."  1.  There  never  was  a  man  who  more  keenly
appreciated  Christian  kindness  than  the  apostle.  Self-reliant  and  jealously  independent
as  he  was,  his  happiness  was  greatly  increased  by  the  thoughtful  generosity  of  his
converts.  It  was  in  no  degree  diminished  by  the  fact  that  his  friends  had  no  oppor-
tunity of  helping  him,  perhaps  because  he  was  far  beyond  their  reach  in  the  sweep
of  his  missionary  journeys.  2.  Their  kindness  {inspired  him  with  a  holy  joy.  Not
because  it  was  in  answer  to  prayer  for  timely  help,  but  because  it  typified  the  true
grace  of  God  in  his  converts.  Their  liberality  was  an  evidence  at  once  of  their
personal  interest  in  him  and  of  their  Christian  standing  in  the  Lord.

II.  The  apostle's  contented  spirit.  "  Not  that  I  speak  in  respect  of  want :  for
I  have  learned,  in  whatsoever  state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content.  I  know  both  how-
to  be  abased,  I  know  also  how  to  abound.  In  everything  and  in  all  circumstances
1  have  learned  both  to  be  full  and  to  be  hungry,  both  to  abound  and  to  suffer  need,"

1.  What  a  checkered  experience  was  that  of  the  apostle  I  He  had  experience  of  want
and   of  fulness  in  his   wanderings  as  an  apostle.     He  was  no  stiaiiger  to  hunger.

2.  What  a  happy  spirit  for  such  a  lifel  He  was  conti-nt  with  such  things  as  he  had..
The  poet  says —

"Art  thou  poor?
Yet  hast  thou  golden  slumbers,  O  sweet  Content.'*

There  is  no  passage  in  any  writer  which  depicts  a  more  expansive,  a  more  positively
exalted  attitude  of  mind  than  he  describes  in  this  passage  as  the  virtue  of  content.  It
is  that  condition  of  mind  in  which  nolliiiig  can  foil  the  energy  of  the  spirit.  It  is  the
quality  which,  having  evoked  generosity  in  others,  flows  forth  in  gratitude  for  that
generosity;  which,  having  faikd  to  evoke  generosity,  manifests  itself  in  submission  to
clisaiipointment  and  in  patient  trust  for  the  luture  gerrnination  of  the  seed  sown.

III.  The  tkub  secret  or  contentment.  "I  can  do  all  things  in  him  that  infuses
Btreugth  into  me."    This  language  implies  that  there  is  a  Divine  spring  of  help  in  %\\


m.  IV.  1-23.]     f as  fiptsTLfi  *6  tm  pmtmtk^B.  m

Condi  I  ions.  1.  Consider  the  extent  <i/ a  ilhristian's  ability.  (1)  lie  is  able  to  undergo
every  trial.  (2)  To  brave  every  sort  of  suffering.  (3)  To  overcome  every  vari.  ti/  of
temptation.  (4)  I'o  perform  every  duty.  2.  Consider  the  source  of  the  CAiistiu.  a
strength.  "In  him."  By  viitue  of  our  vital  union  with  Christ  we  have  access  to  the
true  Source  of  strength.  Christ  infuses  strength  into  us :  (1)  By  his  teaching.  (2)  5?/
his  example  of  holy  patience  and  forbearance.  (3)  By  the  moral  influence  of  his  death
as  a  real  sacr^ce  for  sin.  (4)  By  the  abundant  bestowal  of  his  Holy  Spirit.  Thus
the  believer  becomes  "strong  iu  tlie  Lord,  and  in  tlie  power  of  his  might."

IV.  The  significance  op  the  apostle's  statement.  (1)  It  was  at  once  a  declaration
of  experiences  and  (2)  an  expression  of  giatitude. — T.  0.

Vers.  14 — 18. — Tlie  circumstances  of  their  liberality.  The  apostle  guards  against  any
appearance  of  slighting  their  gifts  by  specifying  the  grounds  of  his  joy  in  them.

I.  ThBIE    liberality   was    not    mere    ALMSGIVlNa,    BUT     AN    ACT    OF    CHRISTIAN

SYMPATHY.  "  Ye  did  well  in  communicating  with  my  affliction."  They  were  ready  to
share  the  burden  of  his  troubles.  There  were  no  converts  nearer  to  the  heart  of  the
apostle  or  more  closely  identified  with  his  deepest  trials.

II.  The  apostle's  willingness  to  accept  their  gifts  was  exceptional  in  its
CHARACTER.  While  he  refused  to  receive  gifts  from  the  Corinthians  (2  Cor.  xi.  9)
and  fiom  the  Thessalonians  (1  Thess.  ii.  5  ;  2  Thess.  iii.  8)  because  he  would  not  com-
promise his  independence  in  the  case  of  Churches  which  were  only  too  ready  to  question
his  motives,  he  conferred  on  the  Philipiiians  the  exceptional  privilege  of  ministering  to
his  wants.  Once  when  he  lelt  Macedonia,  and  twice  when  he  was  in  Thessalonica,
they  sent,  "  to  relieve  his  want."

III.  This  willingness  did  not  imply  that  he  coveted  their  gifts.  "  Not  that
I  seek  the  gift,  but  1  seek  the  fruit  that  aboundeth  to  your  account."  He  does  not
seek  to  stimulate  their  generosity,  but  rather  to  increase  that  recompense  which  every
firesh  proof  of  their  love  would  be  sure  to  enhance.

IV.  His  acknowledgment  op  their  latest  gifts  by  Epaphromtus.  "  I  have  all
things  and  abound :  I  am  full,  having  received  from  Bpaphroditus  the  things  sent  from
you,  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well-pleasing  to  God."  1.  It  was
a  thoughtful  kindness  to  send  him  gifts  while  he  was  a  prisimer  at  Borne.  The  Christians
at  Rome  seem  to  have  been  lax  in  this  duty.  As  he  could  not  gain  a  living  for  himself
in  prison,  he  was  the  more  dependent  on  outside  generosity.  2.  It  was  doubly  pleasant
to  have  the  gifts  from  Pliilippi  conveyed  by  one  so  faithful  and  so  dear  to  the  apostle  as
Bpaphroditus.  3.  The  gifts  in  his  eyes  owed  their  chief  value  to  their  being  acceptable
in  God's  sight— 1.  0.

Ver.  19. — The  true  source  of  supply  in  spiritual  need.  The  apostle  seems  to  say,
"You  have  supplied  all  my  wants;  my  God  shall  supply  all  yours  in  turn."
Consider —

I.  The  Author  op  supply.  "  My  God  shall  supply  all  your  need."  1.  The  expres-
sion, "  my  Ood,"  seems  to  say  that  what  the  apostle  had  found  him  to  be  in  all  his
wants,  his  converts  would  be  sure  to  find  him  likewise.  "  My  God,"  (1)  because
he  is  mi'.ie  and  I  am  his;  (2)  because  he  has  me  wholly  in  charge  and  has  all  my
interests  committed  to  him.  2.  The  expression  implies,  not  merely  God's  ability  and
willingness  to  supply  all  our  need,  but  his  obligation  to  do  so,  in  virtue  of  the  covenant
between  him  and  his  people.

II.  The  nkeds  of  the  Christian.  "  All  your  need."  1.  This  dues  not  signify  all
that  the  Christian  wants  ;  only  what  he  needs.  In  our  waywardness  and  our  childish-
ness we  ask  for  many  things  which  are  not  really  needful  to  us,  but  rather  hurtful.
2.  Our  needs  are  many.  (1)  In  temporal  things ;  (2)  in  spiritual  things.  We  need  faith
and  its  increase,  love  and  its  enlargement,  hope  and  its  brighter  kindling,  grace  in  all
its  fulness  and  variety,  perseverance  in  grace  to  the  eud.

III.  The  rule  or  measure  op  supply.  "According  to  his  riches  in  glory.''  Not
the  riches  of  his  glory,  bnt  according  to  his  riches,  which  will  find  their  full  develop-
ment in  placing  the  Christian  in  glory.  Thus  there  in  an  inexhaustible  supply  iu
God.

lY.  Ths  meoium  OS  SUPPLY.    "  lo  phrist  Jesus."    In  virtue  of  our  union  with  )iJm


172  THR  Efl^TliK  TO  TBE  PHIUpPUNS.         ton.  nr.  1—28.

we  receive  of  his  fulness,  grace  for  grace,     That  uuioa  is  the  guarantee  of  a  full  supply
for  all  (lur  w  eds.

V.  The  doxoloqt  appkopbiatb  to  buoji  a  thought.  "Now  to  God  even  our
Father  bithe  glpry  fur  ever  and  ever,  Anjen."  This  anticipatory  doxology  is  suggested
by  tlie  prfgnant  thought  of  this  passage.  The  glory  is  due  to  him  who  supplies  our
ueed.-^T.  0,

Vers.  21,22. — Mutual  salutation*.  I.  Christiakity  is  the  beligion  of  good  will  to
MAN.  It  wishes  well  to  all  nien,  but  especially  to  those  of  the  hovisehold  of  faith.  'I'he
apostle  asks  the  Philippians  to  salute  each  indivi'lual  saint  as  if  he  weie  to  be  the
recipient  of  a  sepnratfi  blessing:  "  Salute  every  saint  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  blessings
we  wish  for  our  friends  are  only  to  be  enjoyed  ip  Christ  Jesus.

II.  The  salutations  indicate  tpb  solidarity  of  the  Church.  The  Church  at
Eome  is  closily  bound  to  the  Qhurch  at  Philippi.  1.  The  salVitatioii  of  the  apostle's
qornpanioins.  "The  brethren  which  afe  with  me  salutg  you."  'I'hat  is,  as  distingi}is.lied
from  the  siiints  at  Rome.  The  brethren  included,  at  least,  Timothy,  Luke,  Epaphro-
ditns,  Aristarchus,  Tychicus,  Epaphfas,  Mark,  Demas,  Onesinius.  2.  The  salutation
of  the  saints,,  and  especially  those  of  Qxsar's  housejfiold.  "  All  the  .saints  salute  you,  but
es]  ecially  those  of  Cjesar's  household."  The  taints  qf  the  groat  City  of  Rome,  so  far
from  despising  the  saints  of  the  colonial  town  of  Philippi,  acknowledge  a  common
brotherhood  in  their  kindly  greeting;.  The  thought  of  the  saints  in  Caesar's  household
sugtrests  many  reflections  as  to  the  penetvati^e  power  of  the  gospt'l.  It  is  a  remarkabje
tribute  ti>  its  power  that  there  should  be  saints  in  the  household  of  Nero  Qsesar.  Marl^ :
(1)  The  place  of  these  saints.  "  In  Csesar's  household."  Whether  they  were  members
of  the  Prfetorian  Guard  or  retainers  in  the  emperor's,  family,  they  were  (q,)  in  the  most
jinporlant  piisitioi)  in  the  woild — at  Rume,  the  seat  of  empire,  with  communications
reaching  to  the  ends  of  the  earth  ;  (6)  they  were  tolerated  in  iheir  religion,  during  the
brief  interval  when  Eome,  with  a  glorious  impartiality,  opened  its  gates  tq  all  the  faiths
of  the  world,  but  in  two  years'  time,  indifference  turned  to  hatred,  and  hatred  to  per-
secution; (c)  they  were  in  the  mostcorru|it  household  in  the  world,  in  the  last  place
where  we  should  have  expected  to  find  saints,  ^2)  The  chctra^Aer  of  their  saintship.
(a)  It  was  heroic  saintship ;  (6)  it  showed  independence ;  (c)  it  showed  constancy.
The  catacombs  of  Rome  convey  the  record  of  this  saintship  in  the  original  purity  of
gospel  life,— T.  C.

Vers.  1 — 9.T— r^e  life  vf  joy  and  jpjofe.  Celestial  dtizenship,  "  other-vorldliness,"
as  it  has  been  called,  should  have  a  further  issue  than  the  expectation  of  the  advent.
It  should  have  practical  issues  in  a  life  of  great  peace  and  joy.  It  is,  therefore,  to  such
a  life  Paul  calls  his  Philippiap  converlis.    Let  ua  look  i^t  the  interesting  detail^.

I.  Celestial  citizi;nship  ca^ls  foji  unity  and  co-opebation  in  the  work  of
the  Loed.  (Vers.  1 — 3.)  Nothing  is  so  productive  of  unity  as  our  assurance  that  we
are  citizens  qf  the  same  heaven.  Why  should  compatriots  fall  out  in  this  distant  land?
Should  we  pot  bury  our  differences  arid  march  forwafd  shoulder  to  shoulder  ?  Buodias
and  Syntyche  must  be  of  the  same  mipd  in  the  Lord.  The  workers  male  and  female
at  Philippi  are  cordinliy  to  co-operate.  They  ought  to  he  a  vmited  band.  As  heaven
overarches  us  all  aud  unifies  the  population  of  the  globe,  so  should  the  thought  of  our
Celestial  citizenship  make  all  one.  For  in  heaven  there  shall  be  no  divisions  and  vexa-
tious. The  brotherhood  shall  never  there  be  broken.  For  unbroken  brotherhood,
therefore,  we  should  long  and  labour  here.

II.  Celestial  citizenship  calls  fob  jot  in  the  Lobd  at  all  times.  (Ver.  4.)
'.I'he  art  of  enjoying  life  is  what  Christianity  alone  can  teach  us.  Man's  effort  at  first
was  to  rejoice  apart  from  God ;  to  eat  and  enjoy  the  fruit,  no  matter  what  charges  God
had  given.  And  this  idea  still  haunts  mankind.  Prodigals  and  legalists  imagine  that
they  can  enjoy  life  most  away  from  the  heavenly  Father  (Luke  xv.  11 — 32).  But  we
learn  a  different  lesson  in  the  gospel.  We  learn  that  the  Father's  house  is  full  of
"  music  and  dancing;"  in  other  words,  heaven  is  the  home  of  joy — joy,  too,  that  is
everlasting.  And  we  realize  that  ii^  the  Lord  alone  the  sources  of  true  and  lasting  joy
»re  to  be  found.  When  we  look  to  him  and  confide  in  him,  then  we  ccme  as  citizeAS
of  heaven  to  rejoice  in  him  »t  all  times.    In  seaiocs  of  sorrow  as  well  as  ip  seasons  of


oa.  IV.  l-"23.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  173

mirth  there  may  be  an  undertone  of  oelestial  joy.  Man  is  called  to  joy,  not  to  troublei
The  art  is  in  going  straight  tu  Jesus  the  infinite  Fountain,  and  in  avuiding  the  broken
cisterns  th-it  line  our  way*

III.  Celestial  citizenship  bbbpeaks  MODBRATtoN,  (Ver,  5»)  It  ill  befits  a  citizen
of  heaven  to  be  ostentatious  and  venturesome  to  the  utmost  brink  of  Christian  liberty.
Display  is  not  the  outcome  or  issue  of  a  consciousness  of  our  citizenship  abovet  Especially
when  we  live  with  the  abiding  persuasion  of  tlie  Lord's  speedy  advent,  all  want  of
moderation  seems  out  of  placci  In  proportion  as  we  rejoice  in  the  Lord  shall  we  be
distinguished  by  moderation  in  our  life  and  carriage.  If  G»d  gives  abundance,  it  is
that  We  may  manifest  the  spirit  of  moderation  aud  never  be  the  least  intoxicated  by
success.     Ostentation  must  be  left  to  the  world.

IV.  Celestial  citizenship  Calls  fob  a  life  without  carefulness.  (Vers.  6,  7.)
Just  as  in  heaven  tlie  saintly  souls  keep  nothing  back  from  God  and  so  live  an
unclouded  life  before  him,  so  ought  celestial  ditizens  to  live  the  open  life  with  God  here
and  be  correspondingly  free  from  care.  And  here  it  may  be  observed  that  an  old
divine  has  quaintly  put  oUr  duty  as  expressed  in  these  verses  thus,  that  we  should
"  be  careful  for  nothing  ;  be  prayerful  for  everything;  be  thankful  for  anything."  The
result  of  sueh  confidence  is  ^eace,  "  God's  peace  which  passeth  aU  understanding  shall
keep  our  hearts  and  minds,"  or,  as  the  Revised  Version  has  it,  "  shall  guard  your  hearts
and  your  thoughts  in  Christ  Jesus."  Freed  from  anxious  care,  Why  should  we  not  be
peaceful ?

V.  Celestial  citizenship  oallb  upon  tw  to  look  out  fob  And  think  upon  the

TEUE,  THE  HONOURABLE,  tHE  JUST,  THE  PUBG,  THE  LOVELY,  THE  OBACIOUS,  THE

manlt,  AND  THE  PBAiSEFOL,  (Ver.  8.)  NoWj  it  is  truly  wonderful  how  a  joyful
Christian  spirit  will  discover  upon  his  path,  be  it  ever  so  Inwly,  such  food  for  thought
as  is  sketched  for  us  here.  It  has  been  said  with  great  btauty,  "  If  we  do  but  open
our  hearts  at  a  single  point,  the  spiritual  water  and  blood  will  find  an  entrance,  will
purge  our  egotism  and  complete  the  saerificei  In  this  confidenoe,  'as  sorrowful,  yet
always  rejoicing,'  we  shall  go  freely  on  our  appoitited  way,  knewing  that  it  ruay  become
to  us  a  discipline  of  God,  and  that  thefe  is  no  way  so  beaten  but  that  things  true  and
honest,  and  just  and  lovely,  may  be  found  in  it."  The  joyful,  heaven-centred  soul
discerns  food  for  meditation  where  others  cannot  find  it,  and  moves  upward  upon  a
path  6f  increasing  light  towards  "  the  perfect  day."

VI.  The  God  of  peach  grants  fellowship  to  stroH  citizens.  (Vef.  9.)  If  we
honestly  enter  upon  the  joyful,  peaceful  life  of  heavenly  citizenship,  the  felt  presence
of  God  as  the  God  of  peace  shall  be  always  with  us.  OVef  the  peace  he  has  made  in
our  once  tempest- tossed  hearts  he  will  rejoice  with  singing,  and  in  his  love  and  fellow-
ship we  shall  be  enabled  to  rest.  The  Kibg  of  the  celestial  country  can  keep  his  citizens
company  all  the  time  they  are  here  on  earth ;  they  ate  at  home  with  God  all  theif
happy  days ;  he  takes  their  burdens  from  them  and  soothes  them  in  sorrow  and  makes
them  somewhat  Worthy  of  their  heavenly  hopes.  With  sUch  well-filled  minds  and
hearts  may  we  journey  onward  towards  the  fatherland  above  1 — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  10^^23,-^3rae  «r<  of  Divitiie  contentment.  The  Philippians,  having  sent  by
Epaphroditus  certain  loVe-tokens  to  the  apostle,  must  have  a  receipt  from  the  mag-
nanimous receivef.  Most  likely  they  were  not  of  much  intrinsic  value,  but  Paul's  great
heart  rejoices  over  them  and  calls  them  "  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  well-
pleasiug  unto  God."  At  the  same  time,  he  lets  them  know  that  he  could  have  been
content  Without  these  love-tokenS,  though  he  is  delighted  with  them ;  for  he  has  learned
the  itsson  of  the  years,  to  be  content  with  any  state  in  which  a  loving  Lord  mlgbt  be
pleased  to  iilace  him.    And  here  we  have  to  notice' —

L  Contentment  iB  an  abt.  (Ver.  11.)  It  must  be  "  learned."  We  cannot  acquire
it  at  a  bound.  We  must  serve  our  apprenticeship  to  it  as  to  any  other  art.  It  is
not  a  science  to  be  theoretically  mastered,  but  an  art  to  be  practically  obtained.  We
must  go  to  the  "  school  of  art,"  we  must  set  ourselves  earnestly  as  scholars  to  learn  the
lessim  and  we  must  "  keep  our  hands  in  "  by  constant  practice.

II.  The  contented  spibit  makes  little  of  its  wants.  (Vers.  11-^13.)  Paul  had
not  lent  any  word  to  Philippi  about  his  needs.  He  bad  become  so  superior  to  eircum-
iitancfis  that;  abascinetit  ajid  abundance  made  no  diffeience  to  him.    Faith  in  Christ


174  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.iv.1— 28.

made  him  independent.  It  is  the  humble  spirit  which  trusts  the  omnipotent  Saviour
■which  proves  to  be  really  the  independent  spirit.  It  is  humility  and  independence
which  always  go  together.  When  we  control  our  desires,  minimize  our  wants,  we  can
reoch  independence  more  really  than  by  acquiring  vast  estate.  The  rich  are  often  dis-
contented. Tiieir  desires  outstrip  all  acquisition,  and  they  are  discontented  in  spite  of
their  abundance.

III.  The  contented  spieit  makes  much  of  its  bounties.  (Vers.  12 — 18.)  With
the  independence  Paul  manifests  magnanimity.  See  how  he  speaks  of  the  aittention  of
the  Pbilippians.  He  make.s  it  out  that  they  have  been  always  sending  to  him — that
every  time  they  had  an  opportunity  they  were  sending  him  their  love-tokens.  "Once
and  again  "  they  had  sent  to  his  necessity.  Now,  it  requires  a  big  contented  spirit  jo
take  the  kindness  of  others  cordially.  Emerson  says,  "  You  cannot  give  anything  to
a  magnanimous  person.  After  you  have  served  him  he  at  once  puts  you  in  debt  by
his  magnanimity.  The  service  a  man  renders  his  friend  is  trivial  and  selfish  compared
with  the  service  he  knows  his  iriend  stood  in  readiness  to  yield  him,  alike  before  be
had  begun  to  serve  his  friend  and  now  also.  Compared  with  that  good-will  I  bear  my
frii  nd,  the  benefit  it  is  in  my  power  to  render  him  seems  small.  Besides,  our  action  on
each  other,  good  as  well  as  evil,  is  so  incidental  and  at  random  that  we  can  seldom
hear  the  acknowledgments  of  any  person  who  would  thank  us  for  a  benefit  without
some  shame  and  humiliation.  We  can  rarely  strike  a  direct  stroke,  but  must  be
content  with  an  oblique  one;  we  seldom  have  the  satisfaction  of  yielding  a  direct
benefit  which  is  directly  received.  But  rectitude  scatters  favours  on  every  side  without
knowing  it,  and  receives  with  wonder  the  thanks  of  all  people."  In  the  same  way,  we
find  the  magnanimous  Paul  making  as  much  of  the  kindness  of  the  Fhilippians  as  led
them,  we  may  be  sure,  to  wonder  at  such  mention  being  made  of  their  gilts  at  aU.

IV.  The  contented  spirit  looks  at  all  in  a  spikitual  light.  (Vers.  19—23.)
Paul  was  glad  of  their  gift,  for  it  was  spiritual  "  fruit."  It  was  a  benefit  to  them  more
than  to  him.  Did  they  not  realize  that  "  it  is  better  to  give  than  to  receive"  ?  They
had  pleased  God  by  their  goodness  to  his  servant.  And  he  would  supply  all  their
need,  according  to  his  glorious  riches  in  Christ  Jesus.  He  would  give  them  spiritual
compensation.  They  would  get  a  benefit  in  soul  which  was  cheaply  bought  by  what
they  had  given.

He  then  sums  up  the  joy-inspiring  Epistle  with  salutations,  among  others,  from
those  saints  in  Caesar's  household.  This  shows  what  success  Paul's  mission  had
enjoyed  at  the  capital,  how  even  the  entourage  of  the  emperor  had  felt  the  spell
of  the  aged  prisoner.  Paul  had  shown  that  he  could  live  a  heavenly,  joyful,
contented  life,  in  spite  of  his  imprisonment  and  possible  martyrdom.  The  hero  made
heroes  of  others.  The  guardsmen  who  were  chained  to  him  cleaved  to  him  in  love.
May  such  a  celestial  life  be  ours  I — B,.  M.  B.

Vers.  1—7. — Various  exhortations.  I.  Steadfastness.  "  Wherefore,  my  brethren
beloved  and  longed  for,  my  joy  and  crown,  so  stand  fast  in  the  Lord,  my  beloved."
As  in  the  first  chapter  our  performing  our  duties  as  citizens  is  followed  by  the  exhor-
tation to  stand  fast,  so  here  our  possession  of  the  privileges  of  heavenly  citizens  is
more  formally  made  the  ground  of  the  same  exhortation.  We  are  to  stand  fast  so
as  has  been  pointed  out,  ».«.  as  heavenly  citizens.  There  might  be  a  standing
fast  against  becoming  heavenly  citizens.  And  even  as  heavenly  citizens  they  were
to  stand  fast  in  the  Lord,  i.e.  within  the  limits  and  to  the  extent  prescribed
by  Christ,  and  in  the  strength  offered  by  Christ.  But  the  duty  of  steadfastness
is  almost  lost  sight  of  in  the  wealth  of  epithets  of  endearment  with  which  it  is
surrounded.  The  Philippians  were  his  brethren  beloved  ;  he  cherished  the  warmest
feelings  toward  them.  They  were  his  longed  for ;  he  had  in  absence  a  great  desire  to
see  them.  They  were  his  joy ;  he  had  a  great  delight  in  their  Christian  excellences.
They  were  his  crown,  or  wreath  of  victory  round  the  diadem ;  they  were  evidence  that
he  had  not  run  in  vain.  And,  having  stated  ttie  duty  with  all  brevity,  he  falls  back  on
the  first  epithet,  as  if  he  had  difficulty  in  breaking  away  from  affectionate  expression-
Let  them  not,  then,  grieve  such  love  by  neglecting  to  stand  fast,

IL  The  reconciliation  op  Euodia  and  Syntyohe.  1.  Direct  appeal.  "I  exhort
Euodia,  and  I  aiiliQXt  Sj-at^che,  to  be  of  the  same  mind  iu  the  Lord."    It  i»  a


CH.  IV.  1—23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   PHILIPPIANS.  176

strange  destiny  by  which  the  names  of  these  women  have  been  banded  down  from
generation  to  generation  in  Gud's  Book,  in  connection  with  a  difference  which  existed
between  them.  It  is  well  that  our  differences  are  soon  forgotten,  as  even  our  names
will  be  after  we  are  gone.  And  yet  the  record  is  kept  of  our  differences,  as  of  our
names,  in  God's  book  of  remembrance.  It  would  be  a  surprise  to  these  women  to  be
thus  referred  to  by  name  in  the  apostle's  letter,  read  before  the  assembled  congregation.
And  so  it  will  be  a  surprise  to  us  to  hear  many  things  in  connection  with  our  names
read  out  before  the  assembled  universe.  The  apostle  appeals  to  each  separately,  as
being  both  to  blame,  though  not  necessarily  equally  to  blame.  Their  own  conscience
would  tell  them  how  much  they  were  each  to  blame  ;  and  so  our  conscience,  appeal  d  to
at  the  last  day,  will  tell  us  how  much  we  are  each  to  blame.  It  would  be  humbling
to  these  women  to  have  public  notice  taken  of  their  difference ;  and  so  we  ought  to  be
humbled  now  on  account  of  our  differences,  that  we  may  not  be  humbled  by  publicity
hereafter.  The  difference  between  these  women  arose  from  their  not  being  in  the  Lord
in  the  matter  concerned,  i.e.  not  following  Christ's  leading,  not  cherishing  Christ's
spirit.  And  so  it  is  when  we  are  not  true  to  Christ  tliat  differences  arise  between  us.
The  way  in  which  these  women  were  to  be  of  one  mind  was  by  returning  to  thffleading
and  influence  of  Christ;  and  there  is  no  other  way  in  which  a  reconciliation  can  be
satisfactorily  efl'eoted.  2.  Assistance  of  the  apostle's  yokefellow  at  PhiUppi  solicited.
"  I  beseech  thee  also,  true  yokefelk)w,  help  these  women,  for  they  laboured  with  me
in  the  gospel,  with  Clement  also,  and  the  rest  of  my  I'ellow-workers,  whose  names  are
in  the  book  of  life."  The  true  yokefellow  not  being  named,  we  are  to  understand  the
one  to  whom  it  properly  belonged  to  grant  assistance  in  the  work  of  reconciliation,
viz.  the  ministfer  of  the  Church  at  Philippi.  Had  Paul  bren  present  he  would  have
undertaken  the  work ;  but,  in  his  absence,  it  fell  to  hirn  who  was  set  over  the  Church
and  over  these  women  in  the  Lord,  and  who  «  as  of  like  spirit  with  him,  to  undertake
it.  The  ground  on  which  the  apostle  was  so  anxious  to  have  the  reconciliation  effected
was  that  they  were  deserving  women.  And  it  was  satisfactory  that,  when  their  names
were  to  go  down  to  all  ages  in  connection  with  a  difference,  there  was  also  some-
thing to  be  added  which  was  to  their  credit.  They  had  labouied  m  the  gospel,  and  in
honourable  company.  That  is  the  testimony  that  is  borne  regarding  them.  The
influence  of  women  seems  to  have  be§n  a  feature  of  the  Macedonian  Churches.  At
Thessalonica  it  is  said,  "  Of  the  chief  women  not  a  few."  At  Beroea,  "  Many  of  them
believed :  ahso  of  the  Greek  women  of  honourable  lank  not  a  few."  And  in  connection
with  the  start  of  the  Philipiiian  Church,  it  is  said,  "  We  spake  to  the  women  that
were  gathered  together."  "The  extant  Macedonian  inscriptions,"  says  Liglitfoot,
"  seem  to  assign  to  the  sex  a  higher  social  influence  than  is  common  among  the  civilized
nations  of  antiquity.  In  not  a  few  instances  a  metronymic  takes  the  place  of  the
usual  patronymic  ;  and  in  other  cases  a  prominence  is  given  to  women  which  can
hardly  be  accidental.  But  whether  I  am  right  or  not  in  the  conjecture  that  the  work
of  the  gospel  was  in  this  respect  aided  by  the  social  condition  of  Macedonia,  the
active  zeal  of  the  women  in  this  country  is  a  remarkable  fact,  without  a  parallel  in
the  apostle's  history  elsewhere,  and  only  to  be  compared  with  their  prominence  at  an
early  date  in  the  [jersonal  ministry  of  onr  Lord."  We  can  think  of  Buodia  and  Syntyohe
as  of  the  number  of  those  who  assembled  at  the  riverside.  It  may  have  been  in
connection  with  their  work  that  they  differed.  The  Greek  word  translated  "  laboured  "
suggests  that,  while  they  strove  with  each  other  in  a  way  that  was  not  to  their  honour,
they  at  the  same  time  strove,  as  in  the  games,  in  the  sphere  of  the  gospel.  Of  the
honourable  company  in  which  they  thus  nobly  strove,  the  first  was  Paul.  The  next
is  Clement,  whose  identity  with  Clement  of  Rome  is  very  doubtful.  Of  the  others,
the  names  are  not  given,  hut  the  honourable  thing  is  said  regarding  them  that  they,
as  well  as  Clement,  were  Paul's  fellow-workers,  and  that  their  names  are  in  the  book
of  life.  Not  known  now  to  men,  they  are  known  to  God,  written  among  the  living
in  Jerusalem.  Their  names  are  in  the  register  of  the  covenant  people  kept  in  the
heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  will  yet  be  read  out  before  the  assembled  universe  as
among  those  who  have  title  to  all  covenant  privileges.

Ill,  The  duty  of  bejuiuixo.  "Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway:  again  I  will  say,
Hej  ice."  The  apostle  lakes  up  the  pariiiig  address  which  was  broken  off'  at  ch.  iii.  1,
>!,n;.i„tiiene4  here  by  tlae  addition  of  "»lway,"  aud  repealed  with  emphasis  in  »  fortn


It6  THE   EPISTLE   TO  THIS  PHlLIPPIANS.         [cS.  iv,  1^23

which  points  to  tlie  miixiniutn  of  ileliberatiun,  "  Asaiti  I  will  say,  Rejoice."  All  wish
to  rejoice,  but  niist^ikes  are  iha^le  even  by  Christians  as  to  the  object.  According
to  the  teaching  here,  we  are  to  rejoice  in  the  Lord.  Or,  as  Christ  says,  bringing
us  ba('k  to  the  pure  lonnt  of  joy,  "Howbuit  in  this  rejoice  not,  that  the  s|.iiita
are  subject  unto  you;  but  rejoice  that  yoUf  names  are  written  in  heaven."  We
are  not  to  rejoice  in  ourselves,  or  in  any  of  God's  creatures,  as  though  they  were
the  first  cause,  the  primal  souice  of  joy.  Nay,  we  are  not  even  to  rejoice  primarily
in  works  which  God  may  do  by  us.  When  one  is  etuinently  successful  in  con-
version-work, we  say,  perhaps  not  without  a  feeling  of  envy,  "  What  a  joy  munt
fill  that  man's  soul  1 "  If  we  were  the  instiument  of  converting  sinners  like  hinij
we  think  we  could  rejt)ice  too.  But  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  most  successful
labourer  in  the  vineyard  is  not  before  the  liumblest  Christian  in  the  deepest  source
of  his  joy.  What  we  have  all  alike  to  rejoice  in  is  this,  that  our  names  are  written  in
heaven ;  in  other  words,  that  we  ourselves  are  the  children  or  people  of  God,  that  we
liave  God  as  our  Portion,  that  he  regards  us  individually  with  judicial  favour  and
fatherly  love.  There  is  thus  a  very  humble,  self-excluding  element  in  our  joy.  The
ground  of  rejoicing  in  the  Lord,  for  us  who  were  born  in  sin,  is  the  atoning  work  of
Christ.  To  atone  for  sin  entailed  great  sorrow  on  our  Substitute.  From  eternity
haviftg  joys  most  etalted  in  himself,  he  endured  pains  which,  cimsidering  their  cautfi,
were  infernal.  The  pains  of  hell  got  hold  upon  him.  Think  of  Gethsemane;  think
of  Calvary.  But  he  never  veered  a  hairbreadth  from  the  purpose  of  o«r  salvation.  He
set  his  face  like  a  flint,  and  so  the  work  was  done,  and  dune  for  ever.  And  now,  in
Christ,  God  stands  in  a  gracious  relation  to  his  people.  He  has  entirely  altered  their
relation  to  him,  from  being  objects  of  his  regard  to  being  objicts  of  ms  complacent
regard.  Double  reason,  then,  have  we  for  rejoicing  in  God.  "O  Lord,  I  will  praise
thee:  though  thou  wast  angry  with  me,  thine  anger  is  turned  away,  and  thou  com-
fortedst  me."  Ours,  theti,  should  be  a  deep  and  a  perennial  joy.  Even  under
depreciation  of  eairthly  comfort,  there  should  be  more  gladness  in  our  heart  than  men
of  the  world  have  in  the  time  that  their  corn  and  their  wine  and  their  oil  abound.
Gild,  in  Christ,  is  Inore  to  us  than  corn,  or  wine,  or  6il  j  ay,  more  than  the  dearest
earthly  friend,  and  One  who  will  never  fail  us;  and  iherefore  we  may  alway  rejoice.

IV.  DuTT  OF  FOEBBABANCE.  1.  Stated.  "  Let  your  forbearance  be  known  unto
all  men."  Forbearance  is  reasonableness  (to  which  the  derivation  points)  on  its
gentle  side.  It  is  the  opposite  of  rigorism.  It  is  "  considerateness  for  others,  not
urging  one's  own  rights  to  the  uttermost,  but  waiving  a  part,  and  thereby  rectifying
the  injustice  of  justice.  The  archetype  of  this  grace  is  God,  who  presses  not  the
strictness  of  his  Law  against  us,  as  we  deserve,  though  having  exacted  fullest  pay-
ment for  us  from  our  Divine  Surety."  It  was  a  grace  especially  to  be  "known"
unto  their  persecutors.  It  was  a  grace  to  be  "known"  unto  the  worst  offenders.
As  inseparable  from  them,  it  w  as  to  be  "  known "  unto  all  men ;  i.e.  in  all  their
dealings  with  men.  2.  Enforced.  "  The  Lord  is  at  hand."  Eigorism  "  would  be
taking  into  our  own  hands  prematurely  the  prerogative  of  judging,  which  belongs
to  the  Lord  alone  !  and  so  provoking  God  to  judge  us  by  the  strict  letter  of  the  Law."
Let  us  think  kindly  of  men,  even  of  the  worst  of  men,  as  those  who  are  still  under
trial,  and  who,  by  our  forbearance,  may  be  won  over  to  the  Lord's  side.  And,  as
judgment  lingereth  not,  let  us  fully  embrace  the  opportunity.

V.  MBAN.S  to  BE  USED  AOAlNsI  ANXIETY.  1.  I'/ie  evU  to  be  avoided.  "In  nothing
be  anxious."  "Nothing"  has  the  emphasis.  To  not  one  thing  is  our  anxiety  to
extend.  Anxiety  is  harassing  care,  very  different  from  the  providential  care  of  God.
We  cannot  help  having  cares  in  the  world — cares  about  getting  a  livelihoodj  cares  about
health,  cares  about  higher  matters,  cares  about  those  who  are  near  and  dear  to  us,  and
cares,  beyond  our  immediate  circle,  for  men  generally  and  for  the  Church.  But,  thuuuh
we  cannot  help  having  cares  in  this  world,  we  are  not  to  be  harassed  by  fares,  as
thousih  we  had  to  bear  them  ourselves.  2.  Means  to  be  used  against  the  evil.  "But
in  everything  by  prayet  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be  made
known  unio  God."  Over  ai^aiust  the  "nothing"  of  anxiety  is  the  "everything"  by
prayer.  Every  part  of  our  life  is  to  be  connected  with  prayer.  There  is  nothing  too
small  to  be  connected  with  prayer.  Specially  on  every  occasion  of  care  are  we  to  pray.
A  'id,  while  we  pray  generally,  we  are  to  make  our  prayer  turn  u{wu  our  special  Be«d.


OH.IV.  1— 23.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  177

We  are  to  supplicate  to  he  relieved  from  care,  or  to  tie  strengthened  under  care.  And
while  we  thus  supplicate  for  relief  or  strengthening,  we  are  to  be  thankful  for  our
freedom  from  other  cares,  for  the  number  of  our  mercies,  for  the  special  mercy  that  is
mingled  with  our  care.  In  our  supplication  we  are  to  have  special  petitions  which  we
are  to  make  known  unto  God.  For  though  known  unto  God  are  all  our  wants,  yet  it
is  good  for  the  work  of  communion,  for  the  exercise  of  faith  and  of  other  graces,  that  we
should  make  our  wants  known  in  the  proper  quarter.  If  we  have  cares,  what  more
natural  than  that  we  should  go  with  them  to  him  from  whom  they  have  come  as  their
First  Cause  ?  That  must  be  more  satisfactory  than  going  to  an  intermediate  cause  or
burdening  ourselves  with  them.  We  can  feel  assured  of  bis  thoroughly  understanding
our  case,  of  his  power  to  help  as  having  inexhaustible  resources  at  his  command,  and
of  his  being  invested,  not  with  a  mere  earthly  gt  eatness  such  as  might  repulse  us,  but  with
a  greatness  which  is  fitted  to  be  a  home  and  a  shelter  to  us.  He  will  not  cover  himself
with  clouds,  so  that  our  prayer  shall  not  pass  through.  He  will  not  turn  away  our
prayer  nor  his  mercy  from  us.  3.  Blessed  results  of  using  the  means.  "And  the
peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding,  shall  guard  your  hearts  and  your
thoughts  in  Christ  Jesus."  This  is  the  peace  of  God,  i.e.  of  which  God  is  the  source
and  origin.  It  is  not  the  peace  of  unfallen  beings,  but  the  peace  of  those  who- have
been  sinners  and  are  now  reconciled,  the  sweet  sense  of  sin  forgiven,  the  blessed  feeling
that  the  condemnation  which  was  resting  upon  us  is  now  removed.  More  than  that,  it
is,  in  its  essence,  a  holy  tranquillity,  that  comes  from  resting  in  God,  such  a  tranquillity
as  fills  the  mind  in  God.  It  is  a  peace  which  passeth  all  understanding,  which  has
a  mysterious,  unspeakable  sweetness  about  it,  so  that  he  who  has  once  felt  what  it  is
would  never  like  to  lose  it.  This  peace  is  to  guard  our  hearts  and  our  thoughts,  is  to
be  stationed  as  a  strong  guard,  so  that  no  disturbing  influence  shall  pass  through  to  the
centre  of  our  being  or  into  the  workings  of  our  mind.  So  effectually  is  anxiety  to
be  excluded.  Our  wisdom,  then,  is  to  seek  repose  by  prayer,  "If  your  mind  be
overcharged  or  overwhelmed  with  trouble  and  anxiety,  go  into  the  presence  of  God.
Spread  your  case  before  him.  Though  he  knows  the  desires  of  your  heart,  yet  he
has  declared  he  will  be  sought  after ;  he  will  be  inquired  of  to  do  it  for  you.  Go,
therefore,  into  the  presence  of  that  God  who  will  at  once  tranquillize  your  spirit,
give  you  what  you  wish  or  make  you  more  happy  without  it,  and  who  will  be  your
everlasting  Consolation,  if  you  trust  in  him.  He  will  breathe  peace  into  your  soul,
and  command  tranquillity  in  the  midst  of  the  greatest  storms." — R.  P.

Vers.  8,  9. — Categories  of  morality.  Conclusion  a/rmownced.  "  Finally,  brethren."
This  is  his  second  attempt  to  conclude.  In  the  usual  form  he  intimates  that  all  he  has  to
say,  in  addition  to  what  he  has  already  said,  he  is  now  to  state  shortly.  In  other  Epistles
Paul  gives  a  considerable  place  to  ordinary  morality,  including  the  relative  duties.  Ha
does  not  deem  it  necessary  (there  being  no  urgency)  to  write  at  length  to  the  Philippians
upon  this  subject.  He  only  puts  it  into  his  conclusion,  where  brevity  is  a  necessity.
And  there  is  not  that  plain  mode  of  expression  which  is  found  elsewhere :  '  Let  him  that
stole  steal  no  more."  But,  as  for  advanced  or  skilled  Christians,  there  is  a  certain  trans-
cendental mode  of  expression,  with  an  added  reference  to  apostolic  interpretation.

I.  Categories  OF  morality  fob  thought.  The  summarizing  under  "virtue  and
praise  "  points  to  morality,  as  does  also  their  being  presented  for  practice  in  the  ninth
verse.  They  are  emphatically  separated  as  categories  by  the  repetition  of  "  whatsoever
things,"  while  the  summary  is  made  emphatic  by  the  repetition  of  the  words,  "  if  there
be  any."  They  seem  to  be  arranged  in  pairs,  according  to  the  following  division.  1.
Things  in  themselves.  2.  Things  in  relation  to  law.  3.  Things  in  relation  to  the  esti-
mation in  which  they  are  held.  4.  Summary.  It  will  be  most  suitable  to  our  homi-
leotic  purpose  to  name  them  separately.  "  Whatsoever  things  are  true."  There  are
things  that  are  ti-ue  in  themselves — that  would  have  been  true  if  there  had  never  been  a
Bible,  that  would  have  been  true  if  there  had  never  been  the  placing  of  man  under
law.  There  is  an  eternal  standard  by  which  things  are  to  be  judged.  There  are  immut-
able principles  which  lie  at  the  foundation  of  morality.  The  things  that  are  neces-
sarily true  subsist  in  God,  and  as  subsisting  in  God  he  is  immutable — a  rock  on
which  we  can  absolutely  depend.  The  things  that  are  true  are  also  to  be  in  our-
selves. That  cii laialy  moans  that  we  are  to  speak  the  truth.  For  veracity  1  elongs  to
jrBJLIFFIANSb  V


178  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   PHILIPPIANS.         [oh.  it.  1—38,

the  eternal  order  of  things,  while  a  lie,  however  glossed  over,  is  an  infringement  of  that
order.     But  our  whole  life  is  to  be  founded  in  truth.     If  it  is  to  be  founded  in  the  work
of  Christ,  yet  is  it  in  the  work  of  Christ,  as  wrought  out  in  acconiance  with  eternal
principles,  and  in  that  work  as  giving,  relatively  to  us,  added  sanction  and  lustre  to
those  priuciples,  as  what  must  regulate  our  life.     We  are,  therefore,  under  all  tempta-
tion to  have  to  do  with  falsehood,  to  hold  close  by  the  true  as  that  alone  which  can
give  stability  to  our  life.     "Whatsoever  things  are  honourable."    There  are  things
which  are  honourable  in  themselves.    They  are  more  than  venerable  from  antiquity.
They  are  to  be  honoureii  from  their  essential  and  eternal  worth.    As  subsisting  in  God,
ttiey  are  the  ground  of  his  being  infinitely  to  be  honoured.     The  things  that  are  honour-
able are  also  to  be  in  ourselves.    That  certainly  means  that  we  are  to  be  honest,  as  the
word  used  to  be  in  the  translation.     For  there  is  disgrace  necessarily  attaching  to  a
dishonest  action.     But  more  than  that,  it  means  that  our  whole  life  is  to  be  based  on
what  can  be  thoroughly  respected — on  what  can  bear  looking  into  as  in  its  nature  and
bearings  honourable ;  on  what  is  to  be  honoured,  whether  men   honour  it  or  not ;  on
what  we  cannot  respect  ourselves  if  we  do  not  honour.     If  we,  amid  all  temptation  to
act  basely,  keep  our  mind  open  to  the  honourable,  then  we  shall  have  a  diynily,  gravity,
taken  from  that  to  which  we  look  and  with  which  we  converse.     "  Whatsoever  things
are  just."    This  brings  in  relation  to  law.    The  things  that  are  just  are  in  Grod  in  the
position  in  which  he  is  placed  as  Lawgiver  and  Administrator.     He  absnlutely  fills  up
what  belongs  to  him  in  the  position ;  he  acts  according  to  the  eternally  true  and  hon-
ourable, «.e.  according  to  his  own  eternal  excellence  as  moral  Governor.     He  is  just  in
placing  us  under  law,  in  the  nature  which  he  has  given  us,  in  what  he  exacts  of  us,  and
in  all  his  dealing  with  us  as  under  law.    He  never  can  do  wrong  to  any  of  his  creatures.
Though  clouds  and  darkness  are  round  about  him,  yet  judgment  and  justice  are  the  habi-
tation of  his  throne.    And  the  things  that  are  just  are  to  be  in  us,  as  placed  under  law  to
God.  We  are  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  duty  that  belongs  to  us  in  the  position.   Obedience,
compliance  with  the  Divine  will  in  all  matters,  is  what  we  owe  to  God.    Justice  requires
that,  as  dependent  creatures,  we  should  humbly  acknowledi;e  and  worship  him.  We  are
to  do  the  duty  of  every  relation  in  which  we  stand  to  our  fellow-men.    We  are  to  be  in
subjection  to  the  higher  powers,  and  not  only  because  of  the  wrath,  but  also  for  con-
science sake.     We  are  to  honour  all  men,  whatever  their  condition,  because  of  the
dignity  of  their  nature.     And  far  be  it  from  us  that  we  should  do  any  of  our  fellow-men
the  injustice  of  defrauding  them  or  of  treating  them  uncharitably.    We  are  to  be  cha-
racterized by    universal,  deep-reaching   conscientiousness.     "  Whatsoever  things  are
pure,"    There  is  not  only  justice,  but  purity  in  relation  to  law.     The  things  that  are
pure  are  absolutely  in  God.     He  is  so  pure  that  even  the  stars  are  not  pure  in  his  sight.
He  rules  in  the  interests  of  purity.     He  holds  up  before  us  a  high  conception  of  purity
in  his  Statute-book,    "  The  words  of  the  Lord  are  pure  words :  as  silver  tried  in  a  fur-
nace of  earth,  purified  seven  times ; "  "  The  commandment  of  the  Lord  is  pure."    He
looks  upon  purity  wherever  it  is  with  complacency,  and  it  has  a  place  with  him ;  but
he  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity,  and  evil  shall  not  dwell  with  him.    The
things  that  are  pure  are  also  to  be  in  ourselves.    We  are  to  be  pure  in  the  narrower
sense.     We  are  to  be  chaste  in  our  thoughts,  in  our  words,  in  our  actions.    More  than
that,  we  are  to  have  chastity  as  a  preservative  and  a  defence  to  our  whole  nature.     We
are  to  be  kept  within  the  Law,  by  our  great  sensitiveness  ami  strong  attraction  to  snow-
white   purity,  to   heavenliness,  and    by  onr  repelling   the    slightest   suggestion  of
impurity,  by  our  shrinking  from  the  slightest  touch  of  worldliness.    We  are  to  have
God's  own  love  for  that  which  makes  and  keeps  us  pure,  and  his  own  abhorrence  and
loathing  of  sin  as  that  which  defiles.     "  Whatsoever  things  are  lovely."    This  brings
in  relation  to  the  estimation  in  which  things  are  held.    For  the  Greek  word  seems  to
point  to  things  which  are  worthy  of  love.    There  are,  indeed,  things  which  are  lovely
according  to  the  eternal  standard  of  taste.     As  subsisting  in  God  they  are  the  ground
of  his  being  infinitely  to  be  loved.     We  read  of  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  Gtxl.    He  is
beautiful  in  his  whole  character,  but  especially  in  his  love  in  Christ.     Gtid  is  love ;  and
herein  is  love.    In  this  he  as  it  were  surpasses  himself.     He  magnifies  his  Word  above
all  his  Name.    He  is  beautiful  as  he  comes  forward  and  does  not  spare  his  own  Son,  but
delirers  him  up  for  us  all.     He  is  beautiful  in  bis  forbearance  towards  sinners  and  his
exercising  towards  them  the  prerogative  of  pardon.    His  beauty  is  manifested  in  hiia


raiT.  1— 23.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHIL1PPIAN8.  17«

who,  standing  upon  our  earth,  said,  "  And  I,  if  I  he  lifted  np  from  the  earth,  will
draw  all  men  unto  myself."  And  the  things  which  are  lovely  are  to  be  in  us.  It  is
true  of  virtue  as  a  whole  that  it  is  lovely.  Cicero  says,  "  There  is  nothing  more  lovely
than  virtue,  nothing  which  more  allures  to  loving."  But  the  things  that  are  lovely  ar«
especially  tbose  that  rise  to  a  high  standard.  We  must  not  be  merely  righteous ;  but
we  must  be  good.  Even  Lot  is  called  righteous  in  Scripture ;  but  there  was  one  that
towered  high  above  him,  having  the  things  that  are  lovely.  How  beautiful  to  see
Abraham  exercising  the  grace  of  hospitality  I  How  beautiful  to  see  his  generous  treat-
ment of  Lot,  his  not  standing  on  his  rights  with  him,  his  forgiving  his  selfishness,  hiu
heaping  on  his  head  coals  of  kindness !  How  beautiful  especially  to  see  him  going  so
far  in  his  self-denial  toward  God  as  not  to  withhold  from  him  his  son,  his  only  son  1
Did  he  not  have  the  qualities  of  a  noble,  royal  nature?  "  Whatsoever  things  are  of
good  report."  This  is  distinctly  estimation.  There  are  things  which  sound  well  in
the  ear.  Of  even  God  in  connection  with  the  redemption  from  Egypt  it  is  said  that  he
had  gotten  himself  a  name.  It  sounded  well  in  the  ears  of  the  Israelites,  and. of  the
uncovenanted  nations  too.  And  so  God  has  gotten  him  a  name  in  connection  with  the
great  redemption  from  sin.  It  can  be  said  of  the  name  of  Redeemer  that  it  sounds  well.
And  we  are  to  have  the  things  of  good  report  in  us  too.  Virtue,  says  an  ancient  philo-
sopher, is  the  concurring  voice  of  the  good.  The  things  that  are  well  reported  of  are
especially  those  that  rise  above  the  common  standard — that  show  disinterestedness  and
devotion.  If  a  thing  is  lovely,  in  itsulf,  it  is  an  additional  advantage  that  it  is  well
spoken  of,  especially  among  the  good.  "  If  there  be  any  virtue."  This,  showing  a
change  of  form,  but  still  universality,  seems  to  summarize  the  preceding,  with  the  sole
exception  of  the  last.  The  derivation  of  "  virtue  "  points  to  manliness  or  valour.  But
it  is  to  be  taken  as  inclusive  of  every  form  of  moral  excellence.  We  are  to  have  the
excellence  that  comes  from  the  true,  from  the  honourable,  from  the  just,  from  the  pure,
from  the  lovely.  But,  lest  that  should  not  cover  the  whole  ground  of  excellence,  he
adds,  "  If  there  be  any  virtue."  "  And  if  there  be  any  praise."  We  are  not  to  under-
stand anything  that  is  praiseworthy,  but  the  actual  bestowment  of  praise.  It  covers
the  things  that  are  of  good  report ;  but  points  rather  to  the  distinct  embodiment  of
moral  judgment  regarding  things  in  eulogy,  such  as  Paul's  praise  of  love  in  the  thirteenth
chapter  of  1  Corinthians,  and  our  Lord's  praise  of  humility  and  other  virtues  in  the  beati-
tudes. "  Think  on  these  things."  We  come  to  the  things  which  have  been  mentioned
partly  by  intuition,  but  we  must  dwell  upon  them  and  converse  with  them,  if  we  would
have  a  clear  apprehension  of  them  and  have  skill  in  detecting  their  counterfeits.  The
thought  of  the  psalmist  is  that  the  use  of  the  understanding  is  necessary  to  the  right
keeping  of  God's  Law.  If  we  allow  the  intellect  to  slumber,  do  not  examine  into  cir-
cumstances and  carefully  investigate  the  moral  character  of  what  we  are  doing,  we  may
go  far  enough  astray  from  the  true,  and  honourable,  and  just,  and  pure.  It  is  by  con-
stantly judging  our  conduct  by  these  things  that  they  come  to  have  the  shaping  of  our
life.  "  To  cover  human  life  with  beauty,  to  carve  it  into  nobleness,  requires  thought  as
truly  as  to  cover  canvas  with  lovely  forms  or  to  make  the  hard  and  unwilling  marble
assume  a  shape  of  majesty  and  grace.  Is  there  any  nobler  use  of  the  intellect  of  man
than  this,  to  serve  the  conscience  and  the  heart  with  faithful  loyalty,  to  master  the
moral  laws  by  which  life  should  be  ruled,  and  the  motives  which  may  assist  the  vacil-
latirig  will  in  keeping  them  ?  Among  common  men,  what  restless,  incessant  thought
there  is  about  how  they  may  extend  their  trade  and  increase  their  profits,  come  to  live
in  a  larger  house  and  keep  a  better  table,  and  how  little  thought  about  the  eternal  law
of  righteousness  and  their  obligation  to  keep  and  honour  it  I  Do  Christian  men  believe
that  he  who  gave  them  their  intellect  meant  them  to  think  incessantly  of  the  price  of
iron,  the  rate  of  wages,  the  condition  of  the  money  market,  the  furniture  of  their
houses,  the  fruit  in  their  gardens— never  or  only  sluggishly  about  his  own  awful
majesty,  his  glorious  perfection,  his  ideas  of  what  human  life  ought  to  be  ?

II.  These  catesoeibs  of  mobalitt  also  fob  practice  with  the  help  of  apostolic
INTEEPKETATION.  1.  Interpretation  of  his  teaching,  "The  things  which  ye  both
learned  and  received."  The  only  difference  between  these  verbs  seems  to  be  that  in  the
former  we  are  pointed  more  to  the  activity  of  the  taught,  in  the  latter  more  to
the  activity  of  the  teacher.  The  fact  that  Paul  holds  up  these  high  categories  before  the
Philippians  shows  that  they  were  in  an  advanced  state.    At  the  aame  time,  it  was  not


180  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANa        [oh.  it.  1—28.

long  since  they  bad  come  out  of  heatheidsnu  And  the  apostle  refers  them  to  such
simple  rules  as  he  had  laid  down  for  their  conduct,  of  which  there  are  examples  in  other
Epistles.  2,  Interpretation  of  his  example.  "  And  heard  and  saw  in  me."  They  heard
when  he  was  ahsent  and  saw  when  he  was  present.  It  is  well  when  both  teaching
and  life  go  together.  It  was  a  great  advantage  to  the  Philippians  that,  when  the
inles  of  their  life  were  completely  changed  for  them,  these  were  not  only  presented  in
their  particularity,  but  were  exempli  ded  in  their  teacher  of  whom  they  heard,  or,  what
was  better,  whom  they  saw  among  them.  Thus  could  they  be  led  on  from  the  state  of
childhood  to  the  state  of  maturity,  in  which  they  could  he  thought  of  as  conversing
with  the  high  categories  of  morality.  "These  things  do."  Calvin  properly  remarks,
"  Meditation  precedes,  practice  follows."  Once  we  have  carefully  thought  of  our  conduct
in  the  light  of  the  great  categories,  there  is  the  carrying  our  thought  into  practice.  If
we  have  thought  well  beforehand,  we  have  a  great  advantage ;  but  it  will  never  be  but
difBcult,  considering  the  treachery  of  our  hearts,  the  strength  of  our  temptations,  to  bring
our  daily  practice  up  to  our  thought.  It  is  difficult  enough  to  do  the  things  that  are
true,  that  are  honourable,  that  are  jnst,  that  are  pure ;  how  much  more  to  do  the
things  that  are  lovely,  that  are  of  good  report  1

in.  Promise  attached  to  practice  following  on  thought  of  the  categobibs.
"And  the  God  of  peace  shall  be  with  you."  There  is  a  recurrence  with  a  difference  of
form  to  the  thought  of  ver.  7.  There  peace  was  to  guard  those  who  prayed.  Here  the
Ood  of  peace  is  to  be  with  those  who  practise  the  moralities.  He  has  peace  in  his  own
mind,  in  his  own  balanced  perfections ;  and  he  has  peace  in  what  he  thinks  of  us.
And,  as  we  strive  to  carry  out  his  holy  purposes,  be  stands  by  us  to  banish  our  fears,  to
soothe  our  minds.  "Great  peace  have  they  who  love  thy  Law;  and  nothing  shall
offend  them."  Let  us  bring  the  six  great  categories  into  our  life,  and  we  shall  assuredly
have  the  peace  which  God  himself  has  in  their  absolute  possession. — B.  F.

Vers.  10 — ^20. — Pavl  tltanhs  the  Philippians  for  their  contribution.  There  is
noticeable  throughout  mingled  dignity  and  delicacy.  He  is  careful  on  the  one  hand  to
maintain  his  independence,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  show  his  sense  of  their  kindness.

L  The  revived  thought  shown  Df  tbeib  contbibution.  "  But  I  rejoice  in  the
Lord  greatly,  that  now  at  length  ye  have  revived  your  thought  for  me ;  wherein  ye  did
indeed  take  thought,  but  ye  lacked  opportunity."  The  occurrence  was  associated  in
his  mind  with  joy.  He  verily  thought  that  the  Lord  had  put  it  into  the  hearts  of  the
Philippians  to  send  that  contribution  to  him.  His  joy  rose  to  a  great  height.  What
made  him  rejoice  so  greatly  was  that  then  at  length  (an  indefinite  period,  which  went
back  at  least  to  the  coming  of  Epaphroditus)  their  thought  for  him  was  putting  forth
new  shoots  as  trees  do  in  spring.  This  was  a  revival  which  by  no  means  reflected  on
their  past.  It  had  been  winter  with  them,  and,  while  winter  lasts,  no  one  expects
nature  to  revive.  But  as  soon  ae  the  proper  season  ceme  round  the  fresh  shoots
appeared.

IL  Statement  regarding  contentment.  1.  Introduced.  "  Not  that  I  speak  in
respect  of  want."  He  was  not  to  be  understood  as  thinking  merely  of  want.  He  was
in  such  a  relation  to  a  state  of  want  that  the  mere  escape  from  it  could  not  make  him
jubilant.  2.  Sis  state  generally.  "  For  I  have  learned,  in  whatsoever  state  I  am,
therein  to  be  content."  To  be  content  is,  literally,  to  be  self-sufSoient,  independent.
He  was  thus  content  relatively  to  his  being  in  one  state  or  another.  He  had  learned
to  be  content.  "  These  words  signify  how  contentedness  may  be  attained,  or  how  it  is
produced ;  it  is  not  an  endowment  innate  to  us ;  it  doth  not  arrive  by  chance  into  us ;
it  is  not  to  be  purchased  by  any  price ;  it  springeth  not  up  of  itself,  nor  ariseth  from
the  quality  of  any  state ;  but  it  is  a  product  of  discipline — '  I  have  learned.'  It  is  an
art  which  cannot  be  acquired  without  studious  application  of  mind  and  industrious
exercise ;  no  art,  indeed,  requireth  more  hard  study  and  pain  toward  the  acquiry  of  it,
there  being  so  many  obstacles  in  the  way  thereto;  we  have  no  great  capacity,  no
towardly  disposition  to  learn  it;  we  must,  in  doing  it,  deny  our  carnal  sense,  we  must
settle  our  wild  fancy  and  suppress  fond  conceits ;  we  must  bend  our  stiff  and  stubborn
inclinations;  we  must  repress  and  restrain  wanton  desires;  we  must  allay  and  still
tumultuous  passions ;  we  must  cross  our  humour  and  curb  our  temper:  which  to  do
U  •  hard  chapter  to  learn ;  much  consideration,  much  practice,  much  oontentioi  and


OH.  IV.  1-23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  181

diligence  are  required  thereto.  Here  it  is  an  art  wMch  we  may  observe  few  do  much
study,  and  of  the  students  thereof  few  are  great  proficients ;  bo  that  'Qui  fit,  Mecosnas  ?'
Horace's  question,  '  How  comes  it  to  pass  that  nobody  liveth  content  with  the  lot
assigned  by  God  ? '  wanted  not  sufBoient  ground.  However,  it  is  not  like  the  quadra-
ture of  the  circle,  or  the  philosopher's  stone,  an  art  impossible  to  be  learned,  and  which
will  ba£9e  all  study ;  there  are  examples  which  show  it  to  be  obtainable ;  there  kre
rules  and  precepts  by  observing  which  we  may  arrive  to  it"  (Barrow).  The  apostle
for  one  had  learned.  The  force  of  the  language  is,  "  I/or  my  part,  have  learned."
"  With  noble  self-consciousness,"  is  the  remark  of  Meyer.  He  had  been  exceptionally
placed  for  learning  this  lesson.  There  were  few,  if  any,  who  could  compare  with  him
in  the  changes  he  had  seen  in  providence,  in  the  states  through  which  he  had  been
made  to  pass.  And  he  had  rightly  improved  his  experiences.  He  had  learned  to  be
independent  of  his  outward  state,  in  looking  to  the  sufficiency  of  his  inward  enjoyments
in  God's  favour  and  love  and  the  prospects  of  everlasting  bliss.  He  had  learned
further  to  be  independent  by  looking  to  his  outward  state,  whatsoever  it  was  for  th«
time  being,  as  appointed  him  by  God,  as  therefore  better  than  he  could  choose  for  him-
self, as  the  best  possible  for  him  in  view  of  his  discipline  and  usefulness.  3.  Contrasted
states.  "  I  know  how  to  be  abased,  and  I  know  also  how  to  abound :  in  everything
and  in  all  things  have  I  learned  the  secret  both  to  be  filled  and  to  be  hungry,  both  to
abound  and  to  be  in  want."  He  condescends  and  dwells  on  particular  states  with
variety  of  expression.  As  the  result  of  his  learning,  he  knew  how  to  be  abased,  i.e,
by  any  adverse  state,  and  not  merely  by  want.  And  he  knew  also  how  to  abound,
which  is  more  specific,  being  the  opposite  of  being  in  want.  The  knowing  is  next
amplified,  being  made  to  extend  to  everything  and  all  things  (distributively  and
collectively).  It  is  further  amplified  in  being  made  to  refer  to  acquired  knowledge
which  is  hidden  from  the  uninitiated.  He  had  learned  the  secret.  The  two  states  are
now  plainly  described  as  a  being  filled  and  a  being  hungry,  an  abounding  (in  the
means  of  subsistence)  and  a  being  in  want  (of  the  means  of  subsistence).  We  do  not
know  so  much  about  Paul  being  in  the  former  state,  but  about  the  latter  state  there
are  affecting  notices.  "  Even  unto  this  present  hour  we  both  hunger,  and  thirst,  and
are  naked,  and  are  buffeted,  and  have  no  certain  dwelling-place  "  (1  Cor.  iv.  11) ;  "  In
hunger  and  thirst,  in  fastings  often,  in  cold  and  nakedness  "  (2  Cor.  xi.  27).  He  knew
how  to  maintain  the  right  attitude  to  both  states,  and  we  are  to  imderstand  the  right
attitude  to  be  independence.  He  was  so  independent  that  he  was  "  neither  exalted  by
abundance  nor  crushed  by  want,"  as  Pelagius  properly  remarks.  There  is  a  content-
ment (to  use  the  narrower  word)  which  extends  even  to  a  state  of  abundance.  For
in  a  state  of  abundance  men  are  apt  to  make  themselves  poor  by  enlarging  their
desires.  The  apostle  had  "  stayed  affections,"  and  that  was  the  secret  of  his  content-
ment in  both  states.  4.  Source  of  support  generally.  "  I  can  do  all  things  in  him
that  strengtheneth  me."  The  apostle  rises  from  the  special  to  the  general,  and  points
triumphantly,  but  humbly,  to  what  supported  him,  not  only  in  want,  but  in  every
state.  The  Strengthener  here  is  the  same  who  is  said  to  make  us  more  than  conquerors,
viz.  Christ.  (1)  How  Christ  comes  to  have  strength  to  give  to  his  people.  We  are  not
to  conceive  of  this  strength  as  that  belonging  to  him  by  original  right  as  the  Son  of
God.  If  we  had  not  fallen  from  our  original  condition  that  would  have  been  the
source  of  strength  to  us,  as  it  is  to  unfallen  angels.  The  creature  naturally  finds
strength  in  the  Creator,  and  we  should  have  found  unfailing  strength  in  him  by  whom
God  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  by  whom  also  he  made  us.  But  Christ,  as  the
Saviour,  had  no  blessing  for  his  people  until  he  had  acquired  it.  All  the  strength
that  we  need  for  our  being  raised  out  of  sin  into  holiness  had  to  be  laboured  for,
struggled  for,  bled  for.  The  work  for  which  Christ  was  set  apart  needed  strength  for,
its  accomplishment.  And  this  he  was  constantly  augmenting  until,  at  the  last,  in  the
depths  of  suffering,  in  conflict  with  all  the  powers  of  darkness,  under  the  eclipse  of
the  Divine  countenance,  he  struggled  out  iido  perfect  spiritual  strength.  He  became
strong,  not  by  ease,  but  by  "  resisting  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin.''  His  own
strength  was  not  the  result  of  his  atoning  work ;  it  was  rather  that  which  accomplished
it.  But  that  he  should  give  strength  to  his  people,  that  follows  on  his  atoning  work,
and  does  not  go  before  it.  We  are  taught  to  think  of  it  as  part  of  the  reward  which
the  Father  gave  him  for  finishing  his  appointed  work.    Baised  to  the  right  hand  of


182  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANa        [oh.  nr.l— 2&

God,  he  received  gifts  for  men,  even  for  the  rehellious ;  and  one  of  these  gifts  is  strength
to  support  us  in  the  doing  of  God's  will.  He  has  acquired  for  us  that  strength  in
which  he  himself  overcame.  That,  then,  is  the  hard-won  manner  in  which  Christ  has
become  the  Source  of  strength.  He  has  risen  out  of  the  great  glorious  work  oJ
redemption  to  be  strength  to  his  people.  He  is  our  Strength,  because  our  Redeemer.
(2)  What  the  nature  of  the  strength  is  which  Christ  gives  to  his  people.  There  ia
ascribed  to  the  holy  a  kind  of  omniscience :  "  Ye  have  an  unction  from  the  Holy  One,
and  know  all  things."  That  does  not  mean  that  we  know  aU  things  in  the  sense  ic
which  God  knows  them,  but  that  we  know  them  so  far  as  oar  duties  are  concerned,
and  are  delivered  from  all  that  would  obscure  our  vision.  There  is,  in  the  same  way,
ascribed  to  us  here  a  leind  of  omnipotence :  "  I  can  do  all  things."  That  does  not  mean
that  we  can

"  Bift  the  hills  or  roll  the  waters.
Flash  the  lightning,  weigh  the  sun."

Such  an  omnipotence  is  not  like  us ;  it  is  only  like  One,  and  such  glory  he  cannot  give
to  another.  Besides,  it  would  not  make  us  better  beings  that  we  possessed  this  power,
while  the  possession  of  it  would  be  accompanied  with  tremendous  peril.  It  must  mean
that  we  can  do  all  things  such  as  are  like  us  or  can  be  expected  of  us.  We  have
omnipotence  within  the  range  of  our  duties.  We  can  feel  out  all  round  where  our
duties  lie,  and  realize  that  we  are  perfectly  equal  to  them.  " '  Impossible '  is  not  a  French
word,"  said  a  warrior  of  that  brave  nation  ;  with  much  more  truth  may  we  say  that
"  impossible  "  is  not  a  Christian  word.  We  have  strength  equal  to  our  believing  on
Christ  at  the  first,  even  in  the  inability  of  our  will.  We  have  strength  equal  to  the
most  dif&cult  duty  to  which  we  can  be  called.  We  have  strength  equal  to  the  most
trying  position  in  which  God  may  see  fit  to  place  us,  which  is  the  special  application
in  the  context.  (3)  How  Christ  strengthens  his  people.  He  does  not  do  it  miraculously,
as  thongh  we  should  retire  at  night  in  an  ordinary  state  of  mind,  and  rise  in  the  morn-
ing n.iraculously  strengthened  in  spirit.  The  Spirit  may  come  as  he  does  at  first,
without  seeking ;  but  he  who  would  sit  still  and  wait  for  a  miracle  shall  never  I)e
strengthened.  Where  the  Spirit  is,  there  will  be  a  seeking  spirit.  We  are  to  seek
6trenc;th  in  prayer,  according  to  the  direction,  "  Seek,  and  ye  shall  find."  We  are  to
seek  it  in  the  Word.  Such  a  word  as  this  before  us,  appropriated  by  faith,  is  fitted
to  strengthen  us  for  duty  and  trial.  But  we  are  also  to  seek  it  in  connection  with
providences.  Prepared  beforehand,  we  are,  in  the  actual  doing  or  bearing,  to  have  a
habit  of  reliance  upon  Christ.  That  is  the  secret  of  strength  in  working  and  in  suffer-
ing. We  are  only  promised  strength  according  to  our  day,  and  not  beyond  the  pre-
sent day,  in  order  that  we  may  have  a  habit  of  reliance  upon  Christ  for  each  day's
strength.  At  the  same  time,  it  should  be  true  that  we  are  ever,  in  holy  habit,
acquiring  strength  against  the  future.  The  way  to  be  prepared  for  the  future  is  to
live  well  in  the  present.  The  way  to  be  prepared  for  the  more  important  duties  of  life
is  to  do  well  the  humble  everyday  duties.  The  way  to  be  prepared  for  the  great
emergencies  of  life  and  especially  for  the  last  emergency  is  to  bear  well  our  lesser
trials  and  annoyances.

III.  Acknowledgment  op  thbib  kindness.  1.  Kindness  to  him  at  Borne.  "  IIow-
beit  ye  did  well,  that  ye  had  fellowship  with  my  afdiction."  Having  so  carefully
guarded  himself,  he  feels  that  he  must  now  guard  against  any  appearance  of  slighting
their  kindness.  Having  already  excluded  the  idea  of  mere  pecuniary  relief,  in  his
acknowledgment  he  looks  to  the  moral  excellence  which  they  had  displayed  in  their
contribution.  They  had  done  well  in  that  they  had  shown  sympathy  with  him,  not
in  his  poverty  (for  he  does  not  admit  the  existence  of  that),  but  in  his  affliction,  i.e.  in
the  sufferings  generally  to  which  he  was  subjected  for  the  gospel  in  Home.  They  had
fellowship  with  him  in  the  gospel.  Having  fellowship  with  him  in  greater  matters,
they  had  also  fellowship  with  him  in  lesser  matters.  Their  heart  was  open  to  all  that
the  Christian  preacher,  to  whom  they  as  well  as  others  had  been  so  much  indebted,
might  need  in  his  prison  in  Rome.  And  that  was  the  aspect  of  the  contribution  which
made  it  peculiarly  acceptable  to  the  afflicted  apostle.  2.  Early  kindness.  (1)  When
he  was  going  forth  from  Macedonia.  "  And  ye  yourselves  also  know,  ye  Philippians,
that  in  the  beginning  of  the  gospel,  when  I  departed  from  Macedonia,  no  Church  had


m.  IV.  1—23.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PMILIPPIANS.  183

fellowship  with  me  in  the  matter  of  giving  and  receiving,  hut  ye  only."  He  had
dwelt  upon  his  own  Independence ;  he  must  now  dwell  upon  their  kindness.  They,
the  Philippians,  whom  he  mentions  affectionately  hy  name,  knew  as  well  as  he  that
their  kindness  had  not  heen  of  late  growth.  It  had  dated  from  the  heginnincr  of  the
gospel.  For  "he  places  himself  in  their  situation,  dates  from  (so  to  speak)  their
Christian  era."  It  had  dated  from  the  time  when  he  was  going  forth  from  Macedonia.
Then  they  alone  of  the  Churches  had  fellowship  with  him  in  the  matter  of  giving
and  receiving.  We  are  here  supplied  with  a  general  name  for  finance,  from  the  two
sides  of  the  ledger — credit  and  debit.  In  the  Philippian  ledger  there  was  an  account
opened  with  Paul,  in  which  there  were  only  entries  under  the  head  of  giving ;  never-
theless (to  keep  purely  to  finance,  and  not  to  complicate  the  thought  by  bringing  in
spiritual  benefit  received  hy  the  Philippians),  it  was  eategoricaUy  an  account  of  giving
and  receiving.  In  our  ledger  (for  bnsiness  ideas  ought  to  be  carried  into  our  whole
income  and  expenditure)  there  should  never  be  wanting  a  missionary  account,  an
account  opened  with  those  who  are  in  need  of  the  gospel  of  Christ,  or  are  our  suffering
fellow-Christians.  (2)  When  he  was  still  in  Thessalonica.  "  For  even  in  Thessalonica
ye  sent  once  and  again  unto  my  need."  Before  the  going  forth  from  Macedonia,  while
he  was  still  labouring  in  Thessalonica  (within  the  bounds  of  Macedonia),  they  had
sent  once  and  again  unto  his  need.  The  exceptional  character  of  this  proceeding  is  to
be  explained,  on  the  one  hand  by  the  intensity  of  their  affection  for  the  apostle,  and  on
the  other  hand  by  his  consciousness  that  he  was  so  well  understood  by  them  that,
without  misinterpretation,  he  could  accept  of  their  gifts.

IV,  Unselfishness  of  the  ACKNOWLEDaMENT.  1.  Se  did  not  leeJe  gifts.  "Not
that  I  seek  for  the  gift :  but  I  seek  for  the  fruit  that^^increaseth  to  your  account."  By
enlarging  on  their  liberality  he  might  be  thought  to  be  coveting  their  gilts.  To  guard
himself  he  would  have  them  understand  that  he  did  not  seek  for  the  gift,  t.«.  gifts  of
that  kind.  But  he  sought  for  the  fruit  corresponding  to  the  gifts.  Every  time  that.
they  gave  they  were  sowing  ;  and  the  fruit  would  grow  up  for  them  in  the  next  world.
Every  time  that  they  gave  there  was  an  entry  made  in  their  name  and  to  their  account
in  the  ledger  of  God,  increasing  the  amount  which  God,  as  Debtor,  would  yet  make
good  to  them.  2.  Se  did  not  need  their  gifts.  "  But  I  have  all  things,  and  abound :
I  am  filled,  having  received  from  Epaphroditus  the  things  that  came  from  you,  an
odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well-pleasing  to  God."  There  is  a  climax.
He  had  all  things  he  needed ;  he  had  more  than  he  needed  ;  he  was  filled  to  abundance
beyond  what  he  needed.  It  was  the  contribution  of  the  Philippians  sent  by  Epaphro-
ditus that  had  put  him  in  this  position.  The  contribution  was  pleasing  to  him ;  but
what  was  A«  to  be  thought  of  in  the  matter?  It  was  rather  pleasing  to  Ood.  Given
to  God  in  him,  the  servant,  it  was  pleasing  to  God ;  nay,  it  was  peculiarly  pleasing.
Every  morning  and  evening  incense  was  burned  in  the  Jewish  temple.  Every  morning
and  evening  an  animal  was  slain.  That  symbolized  the  offering  and  sacrifice  of  Christ.
The  apostle  makes  bold  to  say  that  the  contribution  of  the  Philippians,  savouring  so
much  of  Christ,  was  "  an  odour  of  a  sweet  smell,  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  Wf  U-pleasing  to
God."  Let  us  take  encouragement  from  such  an  example.  "But  to  do  good  and  to
communicate,  forget  not :  for  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased."

V.  PaoMlBB.  "And  my  God  shall  fulfil  every  need  of  yours  according  to  his  riches
in  glory  in  Christ  Jesus."  He  makes  the  promise,  not  in  his  own  name,  but  in  the
name  of  his  God.  The  Philippians  had  supplied  Paul's  need;  Paul's  God,  in  turn,
would,  for  him,  supply  their  need.  He  would  supply  the  whole  extent  of  their  need,
temporal  and  spiritual.  He  would  do  this  according  to  his  riches.  A  rich  God,  he
would,  with  no  stintedness,  supply  their  need.  The  mark  up  to  which  he  would
supply  it,  and  which  would  best  manifest  his  wealth,  would  be  their  glorification.
And  all  this,  as  he  is  always  careful  to  note,  was  only  to  be  realized  within  Christ  as
the  ever-blessed  sphere.  Let  us,  then,  fulfil  the  condition  of  the  promise.  In  Old
Testament  form,  condition  and  promise  thus  run  ;  "  Blessed  is  he  that  considereth  the
poor:  the  Lord  will  deliver  him  in  time  of  trouble.  The  Lord  will  preserve  him  and
keep  hira  alive ;  and  he  shall  be  blessed  upon  the  earth :  and  thou  wilt  not  deliver
him  unto  the  will  of  his  enemies.  The  Lord  will  strengthen  him  upon  the  bed  of
languishing:  thou  wilt  make  all  his  bed  in  his  sickness."

VL  LoxoLOQY.    "  Now  unto  our  God  and  Father  he  the  glory  for  ever  and  ever.


184  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.         !<«•  !▼•  1— 23

Amen."  The  thought  of  the  rich  God  glorifying  his  people,  coincident  with  the  close
of  the  Epistle,  calls  forth  an  ascription  of  glory.  It  is  an  ascription  of  glory  to  him  aa
our  God  and  Fattier,  the  God  of  whom  the  brightest  feature  is  his  fatherhood,  and  to
whom  we  are  brought  into  the  closest  relation  by  adoption.  The  glory  would  be
ascribed  to  him  foi  the  ages  and  ages  that  would  loU  oa  after  his  people  wera  glorified.
— B.F.

Vers.  21 — 23. — Salutation  and  henediction.  I.  Salutatioit.  1.  Paul,  "Salute
every  saint  in  Christ  Jesus."  He  salutes  the  Philippians  individually.  With  a  know-
ledge of  many  of  them,  he  was  interested  in  every  one  of  them  as  contributing  to  the
strength  of  the  cause  of  Christ  at  Philippi.  Besides  this  general  salutation  by  letter,
to  be  read  before  the  assembled  congregation,  there  would  be  special  salutations,  to  be
delivered  privately  by  Epaphroditus.  2.  Personal  companions.  "  The  brethren  which
are  with  me  salute  you."  These  companions  are  not  mentioned  by  name.  Timothy
was  the  only  available  companion  for  Philippi.  Some  might  be  told  off  for  other  work.
Others,  although  they  showed  selfishness,  were  not  debarred  from  sending  fraternal
greetings.  3.  Christians  resident  in  Pome.  "  All  the  saints  salute  you."  Although
not  acquainted  with  the  Philippian  Christians,  they  belonged  to  the  same  Christian
brotherhood,  were  interested  in  the  common  cause,  looked  forward  to  the  common
home ;  and  therefore  they  too  sent  their  greetings.  4.  Of  Soman  Christians  one  class
tingled  out.  "  Especially  they  that  are  of  Caesar's  household."  "  Nero  (the  Cjesar  here
referred  to)  was  a  prince  that  as  far  surpassed  others  in  infamy  as  Augustus  did  in
royalty ;  a  man  who,  if  every  soul  beside  himself  in  his  household  had  been  a  saint,
concentrated  inhumanity  and  pollution  enough  in  his  person  to  have  darkened  all  their
virtue  by  the  blackness  of  his  unnatural  crimes ;  a  man  that  expended  more  ingenuity
in  contriving  new  modes  of  dishonouring  humanity  than  most  Christians  have  in
serving  it,  and  who  earned  the  reputation  of  introducing  into  history  as  facts  crimes  so
enormous  and  combinations  of  wickedness  so  revolting  that  but  for  him  they  would
have  been  held  too  fabulous  for  the  wildest  fancy ;  a  man  that  hunted  up  and  down
his  vast  domains  to  find  some  fresh  species  of  murder,  with  exquisite  and  aggravated
accompauiments  to  season  it  to  his  monstrous  appetite,  with  the  same  eagerness  that
gluttons  search  out  a  fresh  delicacy  for  a  sated  palate ;  a  man  that  tried  three  different
ways  of  butchering  his  own  mother,  and  at  last  despatched  her  by  a  vulgar  execution,
in  a  petulant  rage  at  being  baffled  so  often ;  and  who  added  the  tyrant's  caprice  to  the
incendiary's,  by  undertaking  at  once  to  throw  off  the  suspicion  of  his  own  agency  in
the  diabolic  conflagration  of  his  capital,  and  to  comfort  his  bloodthirsty  temper  by
imputing  the  fire  to  the  innocent  Christians;  who  tortured  his  Christian  subjects  by
Tinheard-of  torments,  dressing  them  in  the  skins  of  wild  animals  to  provoke  dogs  to
tear  them  to  pieces,  or  wrapping  their  bodies  in  clothing  smeared  with  pitch  and  then
setting  them  on  fire  to  light  up  the  Roman  night  with  their  burning ;  a  man,  in  short,
that  wrought  so  awful  an  impression  of  his  attributes  of  superhuman  atrocity  on  the
minds  of  the  believers  of  that  ago  that  a  common  rumour  went  abroad  among  them,
alter  his  horrible  death,  that  he  would  return  again  alive  to  vex  the  world  anew,  and
to  be  the  antichrist  of  prophecy."  In  the  household  of  Nero,  including  the  highest
functionaries  and  lowest  menials,  were  found  saints.  Their  saintliness  shone  out  all
the  more  against  the  neighbouring  blackness.  And,  with  such  blackness  in  their
neighbourhood,  there  were  sure  to  be  seen  burning  around  them  fires  of  persecution.
To  be  saints,  then,  in  Cnsar's  household  required  extraordinary  courage  and  modesty,
independence  and  constancy.  "  This  saintliness  is  possible  and  is  much  wanted  also
wherever  an  adverse  influence  frowns  on  Christian  purity  or  hinders  Christian  fidelity.
For  that  bad  influence  may  proceed  from  things  not  held  in  much  suspicion — from  a
false  social  standard,  from  a  set  of  surrounding  associations  hostile  to  holiness,  from  a
dominant  worldliness  in  a  nation,  or  a  city,  or  a  college,  or  a  literal  household.  Our
Nero  is  self-love.  The  senses  are  the  Casars  of  all  ages.  The  reigning  temper  of  the
world  is  the  imperishable  persecutor  and  tyrant  of  the  faithful  soul.  And  so  in  every
home  and  street,  seminary  and  dwelling,  there  are  chances  for  the  reappearing  of  saints
in  Cwsar's  household.  Wherever  a  fearless  man  deems  any  bribe  to  do  wrong  an  insult
to  his  clean  heart ;  wherever  an  incorruptible  merchant  refuses  to  conform  to  popular
deceptions ;  whererw  a  righteous  mechanic  refuses  to  let  down  his  performance  to  tha


OH.  IV.  1—23.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.  185

standard  of  superficiality;  wherever  an  honest  statesman  stands  above  his  party  tht
moment  his  party  cast  away  their  principles;  wherever  a  self-commanding  woman
dares  to  be  a  rebel  against  extravagance  and  insincerity;  wherever  a  disciple  of  Christ
is  not  asharfled  to  own  and  praise  that  holy  Lord,  by  whom  only  he  has  forgiveness,
though  unbelieving  associates  taunt  and  ridicule; — there  we  behold  saints  of  Caesar's
household."

IL  Benediction.  "  The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jeaus  Christ  be  with  your  spirit."  The
blessing  invoked  is  grace,  or  unmerited  favour.  It  is  invoked,  as  belonging  to  him
who,  from  his  saving  work,  has  the  right  to  dispense  it  to  his  people.  It  is  invoked
on  their  spirit ;  foi  from  the  spirit  as  the  centre  must  blessing  go  forth  upon  the  whole
nature. — R.  P.

Vera.  1 — 6. — Genuine  Ohurchlsm.  "Therefore,  my  brethren  dearly  beloved  and
longed  for,  my  joy  and  crown,  so  stand  fast  in  the  Lord,  my  dearly  beloved.  I  beseech
Euodias,  and  beseech  Syntyche,  that  they  be  of  the  same  mind  in  the  Lord.  And  I
entreat  thee  also,  true  yokefellow,  help  those  women  which  laboured  with  me  in  the
gospel,  with  Clement  also,  and  with  other  my  fellow-labourers,  whose  names  are  in  the
bo'ik  of  life.  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway :  and  again  I  say.  Rejoice.  Let  your  modera-
tion be  known  unto  all  men.  The  Lord  is  at  hand.  Be  careful  for  nothing ;  but  in
everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be  made
known  unto  God."  These  words  suggest  to  us  certain  ideas  concerning  genuine
Ghwchism.  Ohurchism,  of  course,  implies  a  Church  or  Churches,  i.e.  community  or
communities  of  men.  Here  in  England  we  have  what  is  called  the  Church,  which  iti
ministers  seemed  delighted  to  call  "our  Church."  Here  also  we  have  Churches  which
sectarian  leaders  somewhat  arrogantly  call  "  our  Ohurches."  Such  Churches  are  too
frequently  assemblages  of  men  characterized  often  by  ignorance,  exclusiveness,  and
intolerance.  JSTow,  neither  in  "our  Church"  nor  "our  Churches"  do  we  always  find
genuine  Ciiurchism.  But  the  text  suggests  certain  things  essential  to  genuine
Churchism.    It  suggests —

I.  How  the  members  should  be  esteemed  by  their  true  pastob.  They  should  have
the  deep  tender  love  and  strongest  and  devoutest  wishes  of  the  pastor.  "  Therefore,
my  brethren  dearly  beloved  and  longed  for,  my  joy  and  crown,  so  stand  fast  in  the
Lord,  my  dearly  beloved."  What  an  accumulation  of  strong  epithets  of  affection  are
here!  "Longed  for;"  yearned  after.  "My  joy;"  that  is,  the  source  of  my  joy;  his
chief  interest  was  in  them.  "And  crown;"  by  this  is  meant  that  he  gloried  in  them,
he  prided  himself  in  them,  'i'hen  follows  his  ardent  desires  for  their  higiiest  good.
That  they  should  "stand  fast  in  the  Lord,"  that  they  should  be  "of  the  same  mind  in
the  Lord,"  that  they  should  help  one  another,  etc.  An  affection  of  this  kind  implies
the  existence  of  two  things.  1.  The  existence  in  the  pastor  of  a  loving  nature.  There
are  men  who  claim  to  be  pastors  of  conventional  Churches,  not  always  blest  with  the
most  amiable  natures;  they  are  irascible,  splenetic,  etc.,  belonging  to  the  generation
elsewhere  called  the  "children  of  wrath  " — that  is,  their  nature  is  more  or  less  malign.
You  have  only  to  hear  the  querulous  tones  of  their  voice  and  the  ideas  they  express  in
their  discourses  to  feel  this.  Their  ideas  are  more  like  yelping  curs  scratching  the
earth  than  singing  birds  soaring  into  sunshine.  They  irritate  their  audience.  2.  The
existence  of  a  lovable  character  in  their  disciples.  The  audience  must  have  a  loving
nature ;  for  if  the  pastor,  however  lovable  himself,  is  amongst  people  of  a  morally
unlovable  character,  how  can  he  feel  affectionately  towards  them?  Genuine  Churchism,
then,  implies  a  spiritually  loving  pastor  and  a  morally  lovable  charge.

II.  How  the  members  should  act  in  relation  to  themselves.  Three  things
are  indicated  here.  1.  Moral  firmness.  "Stand  fast  in  the  Lord."  Moral  firmness
implies  not  only  deeply  rooted  convictions,  but  a  strongly  settled  love.  Moral  firmness
is  as  opposed  to  obstinacy  as  to  vacillation.  It  is  a  state  of  mind  settled  in  its  chief
faiths  and  loves ;  it  is  "  rooted  and  grounded  in  the  faith."  Where  there  is  not  moral
firmness  in  the  members  of  Churches  there  is  no  genuine  Churchism.  Genuine
Churchism  implies  moral  manhood  of  the  highest  type.  2,  Spiritual  unity.  "I
beseech  Euodias,  and  beseech  Syntyche,  that  they  be  of  the  same  mind  in  the  Lord."
These  names  in  all  likelihood  represent  women,  Paul  had  many  women  belonging  to
his  charge,  and  who  co-operated  with  him  in  his  work.    la  the  long  lint  of  greetiQgR


tS8  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.         [oh,  iv.  1— 2i

to  the  Church  at  Eome  (Rom.  xvi.)  we  have  the  names  Priscilla,  Phoebe,  Mary,  Try-
phena,  Tryphosa,  Persis,  etc.  It  is  not  improbable  that  the  two  women  menticjned
here,  Euoriias  and  Syntyohe,  had  fallen  out,  as  is  not  very  uncommon  with  the  sex.
The  apostle's  request  is  that  they  should  be  reunited,  that  they  should  be  harmonious
in  sentiment,  affection,  and  aim.  Unity  is  essential  to  genuine  Churchisra ;  all  must
be  one.  3.  Religious  happiness.  "Eejoioe  in  the  Lord  alway  :  and  again  I  say,
Eejoice."  Be  happy  in  your  religion.  Happiness  is  an  essential  element  in  genuine
religion.  "I  am  come  that  ye  might  have  life  [happiness],  and  that  ye  might  have
it  more  abundantly."  Christly  men  are  filled  with  all  "joy  and  peace  in  believing."
Happiness  is  not  only  a  privilege  of  the  disciples  of  Christ,  but  a  duty.  It  would  seem
that  it  is  as  wrong  for  the  disciple  of  Christ  to  be  unhappy  as  for  him  to  break  any  of
the  ten  commandments;  for  the  command  to  rejoice  is  founded  on  the  same  authority
fts  "Thou  shalt  not  steal."  A  community  that  is  sad  and  gloomy  is  destitute  of
genuine  Churchisra.

III.  How  the  members  should  act  in  relation  to  each  other.  1.  They  should
exercise  mutual  helpfulness.  "  I  entreat  thee  also,  true  yokefellow,  help  those  women
which  laboured  with  me  in  the  gospel,  with  Clement  also."  Who  the  "  true  yoke-
fellow "  was,  whether  Luke,  or  Lydia,  or  Epaphroditus,  no  one  knows.  It  matters  not.
It  was  some  one  who  was  well  known  to  be  a  co-worker  with  Paul,  and  he  asks,  on
behalf  of  the  women  who  laboured  with  him  and  others,  for  co-operation.  Genuine
Churchism  implies  mutual  co-operation :  "  Bear  ye  one  another's  burdens,  and  so  fulfil
the  Law  of  Christ."  2.  They  should  exercise  social  forbearance.  "  Let  your  modera-
tion [forbearance]  be  known  unto  all  men."  Inmost  social  circles  there  is  much  to
try  men's  patience  one  with  another.  All  are  more  or  less  imperfect ;  hence  the  need
of  forbearance,  magnanimous  self-control.  Pray  ever  for  our  enemies ;  do  good  to  them
that  spitefully  use  us.

IV.  How  the  members  are  connected  with  the  empire  op  Christ.  "Whose
names  are  in  the  book  of  life."  (For  the  "  book  of  life,"  see  Dan.  xii.  1 ;  Eev.  iii.  5 ;
xiii.  8;  xvii.  8 ;  xx.  12 ;  xxi.  27.)  Prom  that  book  the  name  may  be  blotted  out  now
(Eev.  iii.  5 ;  Exod.  xxxii.  33)  till  the  end  fixes  it  for  ever.  There  is  a  peculiar  beauty  in
the  allusion  here.  The  apostle  does  not  mention  his  fellow-labourers  by  name;  but  it
matters  not — the  names  are  written  before  God,  in  the  book  of  life.  If  they  continue  in
his  service  those  names  shall  shine  out  hereafter  when  the  great  names  of  the  earth
fade  into  nothingness.  The  names  of  all  the  citizens  in  a  city  have  a  regibtration ;  so
metaphorically  the  names  of  all  the  citizens  of  the  heavenly  Jerusalem  are  duly
enrolled.  God  registers  the  names  in  this  book.  He  omits  none  who  are  entitled  to  it,
makes  no  mistake  in  the  record.  The  "book  of  life."  Ah,  what  names  are  there!
How  illustrious,  how  multitudinous,  how  increasing  I  Genuine  Churchism  implies  the
registration  o!  names  in  this  "  book."

V.  How  the  members  should  act  in  relation  to  the  great  God.  "  Be  careful  for
nothing  [in  nothing  be  anxious] ;  but  in  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with
thanksgiving  let  your  requests  be  made  known  unto  God."  1.  All-confiding.  "  Be
careful  for  nothing."  "  Take  no  anxious  thought  for  the  morrow."  Unbounded  con-
fidence in  the  paternal  government  that  is  over  all.  2.  Ever  prayerful.  "  In  every-
thing by  prayer."  Prayer  is  not  words,  it  is  a  life ;  not  a  service,  it  is  a  spirit.  "  Pray
without  ceasing."  An  abiding,  practical  realization  of  dependence  on  God  is  prayer,
and  this  should  be  constant  as  life — the  very  breath  of  the  soul.  3.  Always  thankful.
"  With  thanksgiving."  Being  the  recipients  of  mercies,  unmerited,  priceless,  and  ever
increasing  every  minute,  the  spirit  of  thanksgiving  should  throb  with  every  beating
pulse.

Conclusion.  Brothers,  have  you  genuine  Churchism  ?  Talk  not  to  me  about  your
Churches.  You  must  have  genuine  Churchism  in  order  to  be  identified  with  the
"  Church  of  the  Firetborn  written  in  heaven." — D.  T.

Vers.  7, 6,'— Divine  peace.  "And  the  peace  of  God,  which  passeth  all  understanding,
shall  keep  your  hearts  and  minds  through  Christ  Jesus.  Finally,  brethren,  whatsoever
things  are  true,  whatsoever  things  are  honest,  whatsoever  things  are  just,  whatsoever
things  are  pure,  whatsoever  things  are  lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  of  good  report ;  if
there  be  any  virtue,  and  if  there  be  any  praise,  think  on  these  things."    These  words


Oft.  IV.  1—23.]        THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  187

direct  attention  to  the  highest  good  in  the  universe — peace;  highest  because  it  impues
the  existence  and  development  of  every  conceivable  moral  virtue.  These  words  suggest
three  remarks  concerning  Divine  peace.

I.  Its  natorb  is  of  difficult  interpretation.  "  The  peace  of  God,  which  passeth
all  understanding."  "  That  is,  which  surpasses  all  that  men  had  conceived  or  imagined.
The  expression  is  one  that  denotes  that  the  peace  imparted  is  of  the  highest  possible
kind.  The  Apostle  Paul  frequently  used  terms  which  had  somewhat  of  a  hyperbolical
cast,  and  the  language  here  is  that  which  one  would  use  who  designed  to  speak  of  that
which  was  of  the  highest  order."  Elsewhere  Paul  says,  concerning  the  love  of  Christ,
"  it  surpasseth  knowledge ; "  that  is,  the  knowledge  of  the  understanding.  You  cannot
put  it  into  propositions.  1.  Who  can  interpret  peace  as  it  exists  in  the  mind  of  Ood  ?
We  may  have  negative  conceptions  of  it,  exclude  from,  it  that  which  cannot  possibly
belong  to  it  and  which  is  opposite  to  its  nature.  It  is  not  stagnation.  Not  the  peace
of  the  lake  that  has  no  ripple.  He  is  essentially  active.  It  is  not  insensibilUy.  Not
the  quiescence  of  the  rock  which  feels  not  the  greatest  violence  of  storms.  He  is  feeling,
the  infinite  Sensorium  of  the  universe.  But  what  is  it?  It  transcends  all  intellectual
understanding.  We  cannot  measure  the  measureless,  we  cannot  fathom  the  fathom-
less. 2.  Who  can  interpret  Divine  peace  as  it  exists  in  the  mind  of  the  GhrMly  ?
The  peace  of  God  comes  from  God;  it  is  the  gift  of  Christ.  "  My  peace  I  give  unto
you :  not  as  the  world  giveth,  give  I  rmto  you."  In  truth  the  highest  states  of  mind,
such  as  love,  joy,  peace,  cannot  be  explained.  These  are  matters  of  consciousness,  not
logic.  You  can  no  more  put  the  divinest  and  deepest  emotions  of  the  heart  into  a
proposition  than  you  could  put  the  ocean  into  a  nutshell.  They  are  things  that  "can-
not be  uttered."

II.  Its  existence  in  man  is  a  transcendent  good.  "  Shall  keep  [guard]  your
hearts  and  minds  [your  thoughts]  through  [in]  Christ  Jesus."  It  keeps  the  heart  and
mind,  it  garrisons  the  soul  from  every  distressing  element.  What  are  the  disturbing
elements  of  the  soul  ?  The  three  chief  may  be  mentioned.  1.  There  is /ear.  Fore-
boding fears  are  agitating  elements.  Under  the  influence  of  fear  all  the  powers  of  the
soul  often  tremble  and  shake  like  the  leaves  of  a  forest  in  a  storm.  But  "  perfect  love
casteth  out  fear,"  and  peace  is  the  fruit  of  love.  2.  There  is  remorse.  Sense  of  guilt
fills  the  soul  with  those  feelings  of  self-loathing  and  self-denunciation  which  lash  into
fury.  But  in  the  case  of  Christly  men  this  sense  of  guilt  is  gone.  Being  made  right,
or  justified,  "  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  3.  There  are
conflicting  tendencies.  In  every  soul  there  are  instinctive  tendencies  towards  God  and
the  true.  In  every  unregenerate  soul  there  are  tendencies  towards  the  devil  and  the
false.  These  are  ever  in  battle  on  the  arena  of  un-Christly  minds.  Hence  the  wicked
are  like  the  troubled  sea.  He  who  is  Christly  is  delivered  from  this  conflict.  The
corrupt  tendencies  are  exorcised,  and  all  -the  corrupt  passions  and  forces  of  the  soul  are
brought  into  one  grand  channel,  and  will  flow  on  translucently  and  harmoniously  with
ever-increasing  volume  to  the  great  ocean — God.

III.  It  can  only  be  beached  by  the  practice  op  goodness.  "Finally,  brethren,
whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatsoever  things  are  honest  [honourable],  whatsoever
things  are  just,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever  things  are  lovely,  whatsoever
things  are  of  good  report."  Whatever  minute  definition  we  may  give  of  these  terms,
they  all  stand  for  the  elements  of  moral  goodness ;  and  to  these  elements  we  are  bidden
to  give  a  practical  regard.  "  If  there  be  any  virtue,  and  if  there  be  any  praise,  think
on  these  things."  The  practice  of  the  morality  of  Christ  is  the  ladder  by  which  alone
we  can  climb  through  all  that  is  dark  and  tumultuous  in  the  atmosphere  of  the  soul
into  the  pure  heavens  of  peace.  It  is  the  "  doer "  of  the  Word  that  is  blessed,  not
the  hearer.  There  are  some,  alas !  who  recommend  other  means  to  this  glorious  end,
but  they  are  utterly  worthless.  Some  recommend  ritualistic  observances  and  sacerdotal
services.  Some  recommend  faith  in  an  event  that  transpired  on  Calvary  eighteen
centuries  ago.  They  say  you  have  only  to  believe  on  this  and  peace  will  come  at
once.  A  philosophic  absurdity  and  a  monstrous  delusion  1  Some  recommend  a
mechanical  religiousness.  They  say,  "  Go  to  church  regularly,  join  in  the  liturgy,  listen
to  sermons,  partake  of  the  communion,  and  all  will  be  right."  Ah  me  1  The  peace
which  such  things  give  is  like  that  peace  in  nature  whith  cradles  the  thunder-stcrm.
T  tell  you  peace  is  only  reached  by  the  practice  of  that  morality  proclaimed  in  that


188  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.        [ch,  it.  1—91


grand  sermon  on  the  mount  and  embodied  in  the  life  of  its  matchless  Proacher,  and
this  requires  faith  in  him.

Though  my  means  may  be  small  and  name  quite  obscure^

Live  only  by  labour  and  dwell  'mid  tbe  poor,

I'm  resolved  upon  this,  and  I'll  follow  it  through,

To  love  and  to  practise  the  "  tilings  that  are  true."

The  things  that  are'sliowy  are  things  in  request,

The  empty  and  thoughtless  regard  them  as  best.

I've  pondered  the  mattor,  and  I  will  pursue.

Despite  of  all  customs,  the  "things  that  are  true."
I'm  resolv'd  upon  this,  and  I'll  follow  it  through.
To  love  and  to  practise  the  "  things  that  are  true."

The  things  most  imposing  are  things  for  the  proudt
The  pomp  and  the  glitter  enamour  the  crowd ;
Pretences  and  shams  I'm  resolved  to  eschew.
And  walk  in  the  light  of  the  "  thiugs  that  are  true."
Though  things  most  in  vogue  are  the  things  to  ensure
Most  gold  for  the  pocket,  most  fame  for  the  hour ;
The  vain  and  the  greedy,  for  tliem  they  may  do.
To  me  all  is  worthless  but  "  things  that  are  true."
I'm  resolved,  etc

The  "things  that  are  true"  are  the  things  that  will  last)
All  seemings  will  vanish  as  dreams  tliat  are  past;
Like  clouds  that  are  swept  from  the  face  of  tlie  sky.
All  falsehoods  of  life  they  shall  mult  by-and-by.
The  things  of  a  party  Heav'n  knows  how  I  hate !
Tlie  blight  of  the  Church  and  tlie  cuise  of  the  statej
Ti  e  minions  of  cliqueship,  what  mischief  they  dol
Avaunt  to  all  canting  I    All  hail  to  the  true  1
I'm  resolved,  eto.

D.T.

Ver.  fl  — T!ie  transmission  of  the  hnowhdge  of  Christ.  "Those  thin<;s,  which  ye
haic  I  uia  learned,  and  received,  and  heard,  and  seen  in  me,  do:  and  the  God  of  peace
shall  be  with  you."  'Ihis  verse  is  supposed  by  some  to  close  the  letter.  The  remaining
verses  are  considered  to  be  the  postacri])t  in  which  the  apostle  CTiacefully  acknowledges  the
generous  contributions  he  had  received  from  thom  through  the  hands  of  Epaphroditus.
The  text  directs  attention  to  the  transmission  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ.    Observe —

I.  This  knowledge  of  Christ  is  to  be  transmitted  fbom  man  to  man.  "Those  things,
which  ye  have  both  learned,  and  received,"  etc.  It  is  suggested  that  the  transmission
of  this  knowledge  includes  two  things.  1.  Teaching  on  the  part  of  the  minister,
Paul  had  received  the  gospel  (1  Cor.  xv.  3 ;  Gal.  i.  12),  and  received  it  as  a  message,
received  it  to  communicate.  This  he  did — did  to  the  Philippians  as  well  as  to  others.
He  did  it  in  two  ways.  (1)  By  words.  "And  heard."  After  his  commission  Paul
used  all  his  oratorio  force  for  this  purpose.  He  spoke  to  men  rationally,  devoutly,
intelligently,  earnestly,  and  with  invincible  persist'  uce.  The  story  of  Christ  is  to  be
handed  down  from  man  to  man  by  human  lips.  The  pen  can  no  more  do  the  work
of  the  tongue  in  this  respect  than  the  moon  can  do  the  work  of  the  sun.  Under  the
influence  of  the  former  the  landscape  will  wither  and  the  rivers  will  freeze.  (2)  By
example.  "And  seen  in  me."  Paul  embodied  the  gospel.  His  life  confirmed  the
doctrine  that  his  lips  declared.  In  him,  as  in  his  Master,  the  "word  bucauie  flesh."
Here,  then,  is  the  Divine  way  of  transmitting  from  generation  to  generation  the  story
of  Christ.  Men  have  tried  other  ways  and  have  si;^ually  failed ;  hence  the  wretched
moral  condition  of  the  world  to-day.  This  way  is,  to  a  great  extent,  practically
ignored.  2.  Learning  on  the  part  of  the  hearer.  "  Ye  have  both  learned,  and  received,
and  heard."  A  man  may  tell  tbe  story  of  Christ  witii  the  utmost  accuracy  and
fulness.  The  spirit  of  the  story  he  may  breathe  in  his  life  and  embody  in  his  conduct,
but  it  is  only  vitally  transmitted  so  far  as  it  is  learnt  by  the  auditors.  We  live  in  an
■ge  when  people,  through  a' vitiated  moral  taste,  theological  prejudices,  and  sectarian


cH.iv.  1— 23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  189

proclivities,  turn  away  their  ear  from  the  true  teachers  of  their  time.    They  resort  to

places  where  they  can  be  tickled,  not  taught,  flattered,  not  corrected.

II.  This  knowledge  of  Christ  is  to  be  transmitted  IN  obdeb  to  be  pbaotisbd.
'  Those  things  which  ye  have  both  learned,  and  received,  and  heard,  and  seen  in  me.
Ho."  A  gospel  sermon  should  never  be  regarded  as  a  lecture  on  philosophy,  literature,
»r  art — a  mere  subject  for  speculative  thought  or  a  subject  of  discussion.  The  gospel
is  a  law,  it  comes  from  the  hijihest  authority  and  with  a  binding  force.  What  is  said
is  to  be  done,  not  merely  approved,  criticised,  thought  on,  or  sighed  about,  but  done.
The  ideas  communicated  are  to  be  translated  into  actions,  and  such  actions  will  ever
be  Christly  in  spirit  and  tendency.  But  into  what  actions  are  the- conventional  sermons
of  England  translated?  Turn  to  the  columns  of  our  daily  journals  and  read  of  the
mercantile  swindlings,  the  courtly  depravities,  idlenesses,  and  sports,  the  political
intrigues,  senatorial  slanderings  and  quarrellings,  the  barbaric  execntions,  the  bloody
■wars,  and  other  nameless  iniquities  sanctioned  and  enacted  by  the  hearers  of  what  are
called  gospel  sermons.     Ah  me  1     What  boots  preaching  ?

III.  'I'he  practice  of  this  knowledge  of  Christ  ensdbeb  the  sublimest  good.  "  The
God  of  peace  shall  be  with  you."  In  ver.  7  we  read  of  having  the  "  peace  of  God,"
here  of  having  the  "  God  of  peace.''  To  have  his  peace  is  something  glorious;  but  to
have  himself  ia  something  transcendently  greater.  "The  God  of  peace."  Elsewhere
he  is  called  the  "  God  of  salvation,"  the  "  God  of  consolation,"  the  "  God  of  hope,"  etc. ;
but  this  title  seems  to  transcend  all  others.  1.  He  is  at  peace  with  himself.  A  moral
intelligence  to  possess  peace  must  be  absolutely  free  from  the  following  things — malice,
remorse,  forebodings.  The  mightiest  revolutions  through  all  the  millenniums  and  the
hostilities  of  all  the  hells  of  the  universe  awake  no  ripple  upon  the  boundless  sea  of
his  ever-flowing  love.  2.  He  is  at  peace  with  the  universe.  He  has  no  unkind  feeling
to  any  sentient  being;  he  contends  with  no  one;  he  is  at  peace  with  all.  He  contend,
forsooth!  Does  the  immovable  rock  contend  with  the  waves  that  break  at  its  feet?
Does  the  sun  contend  with  the  fleeting  clouds?  Now,  they  who  translate  the  gospel
into  their  life  shall  have  the  "  God  of  peace  "  ever  with  them — with  them  as  the  sunny
heavens  are  with  the  earth. — D.  T.

Vers.  10 — 17. — Man  in  model  aspects,  "But  I  rejoiced  in  the  Lord  greatly,  that
now  at  the  last  your  care  of  me  hath  flourished  again ;  wherein  ye  were  also  careful,
but  ye  lacked  opportunity.  Not  that  I  speak  in  respect  of  want :  for  I  have  learned,
in  whatsoever  state  I  am,  therewith  to  be  content.  I  know  both  how  to  be  abased,
and  I  know  how  to  abound :  everywhere  and  in  all  things  I  am  instructed  both  to  be
full  and  to  be  hungry,  both  to  abound  and  to  suffer  need.  I  can  do  all  things  through
Christ  which  strengtheneth  me.  Notwithstanding  ye  have  well  done,  that  ye  did
communicate  with  my  affliction.  Now  ye  Philippians  know  also,  that  in  the  beginning
of  the  gospel,  when  I  departed  from  Macedonia,  no  Church  communicated  with  me
as  concerning  giving  and  receiving,  but  ye  only.  For  even  in  Thessalonica  ye  sent
once  and  again  unto  my  necessity.  Not  because  I  desire  a  gift:  but  I  desire  fruit  that
may  abound  to  your  account."  The  apostle  now  turns  his  attention  to  a  new  subject,
and  the  verses  that  follow  to  the  close  of  the  chapter  seem  to  be  a  kind  of  postscript,
acknowledging  in  a  very  graceful  manner  the  various  offerings  which  he  had  received
from  the  Philippians  by  the  hands  of  Epaphroditus.  The  passage  before  us  may  be
regarded  as  presenting  man  in  certain  model  aspects.

I.  Here  is  a  man  represented  as  an  object  of  Chbistian  beneficence.  "But  I
rejoiced  in  the  Lord  greatly,  that  now  at  the  last  your  care  of  me  hath  flourished
again."  1.  He  received  their  beneficence  with  religious  gratitude,  "  I  rejoiced  in  the
Lord,"  etc.  "There  is,"  says  Dr.  Barry,  "in  these  words  an  expression  of  some
hitherto  disappointed  expectation,  not  wholly  unlike  the  stronger  expression  of
wounded  feeling  in  2  Tim.  iv.  9,  10,  16.  At  Csesarea  St.  Paul  would  have  been  neces-
sarily cut  off  from  the  European  Churches ;  at  Eome,  the  metropolis  of  universal
concourse,  he  may  have  expected  some  earlier  communication.  But  fearing  to  wound
the  Philippians  by  even  the  semblance  of  reproof,  in  their  case  undeserved,  he  adds  at
once,  'in  which  ye  were  also  careful,  but  ye  lacked  opportunity.'  Epaphroditus  would
seem  to  have  arrived  early,  almost  as  soon  as  St.  Paul's  arrival  at  Eome  gave  them  the
opportunity  which  they  previously  lacked,"     The  contributions  which  came  from  the


190  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.        [oh.  it.  1—23.

Philippians  to  him  he  traced  to  (he  Lord.  He  saw  the  hand  and  felt  the  love  of  God
in  their  gifts.  There  is  not  a  man  on  earth  who  is  not  in  some  measure  the  object  of
human  beneficence.  We  are  all  receiving  from  others,  every  day  in  our  life,  some  kind
of  good — physical,  intellectual,  social,  or  spiritual.  All  this  good  we  should  devoutly
ascribe  to  the  Father  of  hghts,  from  whom  cometh  "every  good  and  perfect  gift."
Whether  those  of  our  fellow-men,  who  confer  on  us  good,  do  it  with  their  will  or
against  their  will,  selfishly  or  disinterestedly,  it  matters  not  so  far  as  our  obligation
to  Heaven  is  concerned.  Prom  him  all  the  good  of  all  kinds  and  through  all  channels
proceeds.  2.  He  received  their  beneficence  with  hearty  appreciation.  "Notwith-
standing [howbeit]  ye  have  well  done,  that  ye  did  communicate  [had  fellowship]  with
my  affliction."  "  Ye  have  well  done."  Your  beneficence  was  dictated  from  a  generous
sympathy  with  my  affliction,  and  it  was  timely  withal.  True  beneficence  is  a  blessed
virtue.  "  It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  His  appreciation  seems  to  have
been  deepened  by  the  fact  that  their  beneficence  preceded  that  of  other  Churches.
"  Now  ye  Philippians  know  also,  that  in  the  beginning  of  the  gospel,  when  I  departed
from  Macedonia,  no  Church  communicated  [had  fellowship]  with  me  as  concerning  [in
the  matter  of]  giving  and  receiving,  but  ye  only."  The  time  referred  to  is  the  period
of  his  leaving  Macedonia  and  Athens  for  Corinth  (Acts  xvii.  14).  They  rendered  him
helpj  not  only  after  he  had  left  Macedonia,  but  before  that  time,  when  he  had  just
passed  from  Philippi  to  Thessalonica.  "At  Thessalonica,  as  at  Corinth — both  very
rich  and  luxurious  communities — he  refused  maintenance  and  lived  merely  by  the
kibour  of  his  own  hands  (1  Thess.  ii.  9;  2  Thess.  iii.  8).  But  it  appears  from  this
passage  that  even  then  he  received,  once  and  again  (that  is,  occasionally,  once  or  twice),
some  aid  from  Philippi  to  supply  his  need,  that  ig  (ae  in  all  right  exercise  of  liberality),
to  supplement,  and  not  to  supersede  his  own  resources."  In  this  also  he  acts  in  a
model  way.  There  are  those  ingrates  in  society  who  receive  help  from  others  as
a  matter  of  course,  attach  little  or  no  value  to  the  good  which  they  are  constantly
receiving.  Ay,  and  moreover,  there  are  those,  too,  who,  instead  of  becoming  bound  to
the  benefactor  as  friends  through  gratitude  for  the  favours,  not  unfrequently  become
enemies.  Ah  me !  this  worst  of  human  vices  is,  perhaps,  the  most  common.  "  As
there  are  no  laws  against  ingratitude,"  says  Seneca,  "so  it  is  utterly  impossible  to
contrive  any  that  in  all  circumstances  shall  reach  it.  If  it  were  actionable,  there
would  not  be  courts  enough  in  the  whole  world  to  try  the  causes  in.  There  can  be  no
setting  a  day  for  the  requiting  of  benefits,  as  for  the  payment  of  money ;  nor  any
estimate  upon  the  benefits  themselves ;  but  the  whole  matter  rests  in  the  conscience  of
both  parties ;  and  then  there  are  so  many  degrees  of  it,  that  the  same  rule  will  never
serve  all."  3.  He  received  their  beneficence  with  entire  unselfishness.  "  Not  because  I
desire  a  gift :  but  I  desire  fruit  that  may  abound  [increaseth]  to  your  account."  He
means  to  say,  I  do  not  "  desire  a  gift "  for  my  own  sake  as  much  as  for  yours.  I  value
the  gift  as  an  expression  and  evidence  of  your  faith  in  Christ.  An  old  writer  says,
"  It  is  not  with  any  design  to  draw  more  from  you,  but  to  encourage  you  to  such  an
exercise  of  beneficence  as  will  meet  with  a  glorious  reward  hereafter."  True  men
always  value  a  gift,  not  simply  because  of  its  intrinsic  value,  or  even  because  it  will
serve  their  temporal  interest,  but  because  of  the  priceless  sentiments  of  the  heart,
love,  disinterestedness,  and  friendship,  which  it  represents.  We  are  all  objects  of  bene-
ficence. Let  us  act  as  Paul  did  in  this  character,  accept  all  human  favours  with
religious  gratitude,  with  hearty  appreciation,  and  with  entire  unselfishness.

II.  Here  is  a  man  represented  as  a  bcbjeot  op  providential  vicissitudes.  "1
have  learned,  in  whatsoever  state  I  am,  therewith  [therein]  to  be  content."  "  Whatever
state."  How  constantly  changing  are  our  states  1  Life  is  in  truth  a  checkered  scene.
Every  hour  we  pass  from  one  condition  or  mood  to  another.  We  change  in  mind,
body,  and  circumstances.  We  alternate  between  friendship  and  bereavement,  pros-
perity and  adversity,  sunshine  and  storms.  Now,  the  aspect  in  which  Paul  is  seen  in
passing  through  these  changes  is  that  of  contentment,  and  in  this  respect  he  is  a  model
to  us  all.  His  contentment  does  not  mean  insensibility,  a  kind  of  Stoicism ;  does  not
mean  indifference  to  the  condition  of  others,  or  a  satisfied  complacency  either  with  his
own  moral  condition  or  that  of  the  world.  It  i»  a  cordial  acquiescence  in  the  arrange-
ments ^  Heaven.  "  Not  my  will,  but  thine,  be  done."  This  state  of  mind  is  not
innate,  it  is  attained.    Paul  "  learnt "  it.   This  is  moral  acholarship  of  the  highest  kind.


OH.IV.  1— 23.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO   x'HB  PHILIPPlANa  191

"Some  murmur  when  their  sky  is  oleal
And  NvhoUy  bright  to  view,
If  one  small  speck  of  dark  appear

In  their  great  heaven  of  blue.
And  some  with  thankful  love  are  filled.

If  but  one  streak  of  light,
One  ray  of  God's  great  mercy,  gild
The  darkness  of  their  night."

(French.)

m.  Here  is  a  man  represented  as  a  genuine  eeformeb.  "  I  can  do  all  things  through
Christ  [in  him]  which  strengtheneth  me."  Paul  was  a  genuine  reformer.  The  reforma-
tion he  sought  was  not  in  corrupt  legislation,  in  outward  institutions — social,  political,
or  ecclesiastical — in  theological  systems,  or  in  external  behaviour.  Such  reformations
are  of  little  worth.  He  wrought.  1.  In  the  realms  of  motive,  the  springs  of  action,  to
change  the  moral  heart  of  the  world.  Every  man  on  earth  should  act  in  this  character
and  become  a  moral  reformer.  All  should  study  and  imitate  Paul  in  this  aspect.  How
did  he  act  as  a  reformer?  2.  In  conscious  dependence  on  Christ.  "I  can  do  all  things
through  Christ."  "All  things"  pertaiuing  to  this  work  as  a  reformer,  not  by  my  own
talents,  skill,  or  industry,  not  in  my  own  strength,  but  in  "Christ  which  strengtheneth
me."  Indeed,  in  Christ's  sti»ngth  what  cannot  a  man  do?  He  can  work  miracles  as
the  apostles  did,  he  can  turn  the  moral  world  upside  down,  he  can  create  men  "anew
in  Christ  Jesus,"  he  can  sound  a  trumpet  whose  blast  shall  penetrate  the  ears  of
slumbering  souls  and  awake  the  teeming  millions  that  are  sleeping  in  the  dust  of
worldliness  and  depravity.  "  Through  Christ  which  strengtheneth  me."  Strengthens
me  by  turning  me  away  from  things  that  are  temporal  to  things  that  are  spiritual,
rooting  my  faith  in  eternal  realities,  filling  and  firing  me  with  the  love  which  he  had
for  human  souls  and  for  the  everlasting  Father.

Conclusion.  Study  well  these  model  aspects  of  a  man  who,  as  an  object  of  Christian
leneficence,  is  always  religiously  grateful,  heartily  appreciative  of  the  favours  he  receives,
and  entirely  unselfish ;  as  a  subject  of  providential  vicissitudes,  magnanimously  con-
tented in  every  condition  and  mood  of  life ;  and,  as  a  genuine  reformer,  does  his  work,
not  in  his  own  strength,  but  in  the  power  of  Christ. — D.  T.

Vers.  2,  3. — The  healing  of  dissensions.  A  dissension  hetween  two  women,  probably
persons  of  prominence  in  the  Church.  Women  occupy  an  important  position  in  the
Church  at  Philippi  (Acts  xvi.  13 — 18).  This  fact  may  accoimt  somewhat  for  its
orthodoxy,  its  fervent  devotion,  and  its  special  temptation  to  want  of  unity.  This
particular  dissension  is  regarded  by  St.  Paul  to  be  of  sufficient  importance  to  demand
a  notice  in  this  Epistle,  and  to  call  for  his  personal  interposition.  1.  The  only  method
of  healing  dissension.  Persons  alienated  from  one  another  must  be  brought  to  be  of
one  mind  in  the  Lord.  No  reconciliation  is  abiding  except  it  be  in  him  who  is  the
Peace-maker.  2.  To  heal  dissension  is  a  work  worthy  of  the  highest  ministry  of  the
Church.  St.  Paul  calls  to  his  aid  their  chief  pastor,  Clement,  who  was  afterwards
Bishop  of  Rome,  and  others  whose  names  are  in  the  book  of  life.  No  error  in  the
Church  is  worse  thiin  the  error  of  uncharitableness  and  envy,  3.  To  remove  such
dissensions  is  truly  to  help  (ver.  3)  those  who  are  the  victims  of  them.  Note  that
even  they  who  laboured  with  St.  Paul  were  not  free  from  human  infirmities.  They
who  could  stand  by  him  in  his  work  now  need  all  his  entreaties  and  endeavours  to
bring  them  into  reconciliation.    A  warning  to  all  Church  workers. — ^V.  W.  H.

Vers.  4,  5. — Befoicing  always.  I.  The  possibiiitt  of  it.  The  command  to  rejoice
always  appears  to  be  one  which  it  is  impossible  that  we  should  obey.  This  impossi-
bility vanishes  when  we  remember  that  we  are  to  rejoice  "in  the  Lord."  Note  the
frequency  of  this  expression  in  this  Epistle,  St.  Paul  profoundly  realizes  that  the
Christian  soul  is  living  in  a  sphere  not  recognizable  by  the  outward  senses,  but  which
is  ever  present  to  the  eye  of  faith.  If  we  are  living  in  the  Lord  we  can  always  rejoice,
because  in  him  all  things  work  together  for  good,  and  even  our  sorrows  he  turns
into  joy,

IL  Thb  method  or  it.    By  letting  oui  forbearance  be  known  unto  all  men.    Qc


192  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  [oh.  iv.  1—23,

who  is  living  in  the  Lord  is  always  rejoicing,  not  with  the  joy  which  triumphs  over
the  sorrows  of  others,  hut  with  the  self-restrained  joy  which  recognizes  that,  heing  yet
in  travail,  we  must  yet  have  sorrow  mingled  with  our  joy.  This  sense  of  self-restraint
is  the  truest  preventive  of  dissension  and  dispute.

IJL  The  reason  fob  it.  "The  Lord  is  at  hand."  He  is  ever  ready  to  appear
visibly  in  our  midst,  and  for  this  appearing  we  are  constantly  to  watch.  How  can  we
be  doing  so  unless  we  are  rejoicing  in  him,  and  rejoicing  in  him  with  gentle  forbearance
towards  our  fellow-Christians?  He  is,  indeed,  always  at  hand,  even  if  he  yet  appear
not  in  visible  form ;  for  where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  his  Name  he  is  in
the  midst  of  them.     Is  not  this  a  reason  for  joy  and  for  forbearance  ? — V.  W.  H.

Vers.  6,  7. — God's  peace.  I.  What  it  is.  God's  own  peace ;  that  which  he  himself
possesses.  It  is  the  peace  which  our  Lord  had  and  which  he  promised  to  his  disciples :
"  My  peace  I  give  unto  you."  It  is,  therefore,  no  mere  superficial  freedom  from  external
troubles,  but  a  deep-seated  harmony  with  God  the  Source  of  all  peace.  Thus  it
transcends  human  understanding  and  human  expression.

II.  What  peevbntb  oob  possessino  it?  Over-anxiety  and  worry.  These  are  a
kind  of  practical  atheism,  since  they  prevent  us  from  leaving  all  things  to  him  who  is
supreme  over  all  circumstances.

III.  How  TO  OBTAIN  IT.  ^y  prayer,  which  rests  upon  him  for  all  things;  by  suppli-
cation, which  brings  our  own  special  causes  for  anxiety  into  his  piesence ;  by  thanks-
yivitig,  which  recognizes  that  his  will  must  be  full  of  blessing.  By  thus  turning  our
cares  into  prayers  we  throw  them  upon  him  who  gives  us  in  return  his  peace.

IV.  What  it  does  for  cs.  It  keeps  our  hearts  and  minds,  preserving  them  from
undue  anxiety,  and  making  them  realize  the  strength  of  the  peace  which  Christ
bestows.  How  do  these  words  come  home  with  sublime  force  at  the  end  of  our  Com-
muoion  Service  1  Having  received  him  who  is  our  Peace  (Bph.  ii.  14),  we  have  entered
into  and  taken  possession  of  the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding,  —
V.  W.  H,

Vers.  8,  9.— Meditation  and  action.  Having  insisted  on  the  duties  of  prayer  and
thanksgiving  and  the  reward  which  accompanies  them,  St.  Paul  proceeds  to  point  out
the  need  of  meditation  on  all  that  is  of  God,  and  of  practically  living  out  the  God-like
life  upon  earth.     To  such  also  is  attached  a  special  reward.

I.  The  need  of  meditation.  This  is  universal.  All  persons  meditate  on  that
which  is  to  them  of  absorbing  interest.  By  meditation  the  stock  of  our  ideas  is
increased  and  a  mental  atmosphere  is  formed  in  which  we  live  and  move.  Every  great
work  and  every  great  life  has  been  produced  by  much  meditation.

II.  The  best  subjects  fob  meditation.  "  Whatsover  things  are  true,"  etc.  We
need  not  limit  these  to  the  subject-matter  of  the  Christian  revelation,  although
undoubtedly  each  of  these  forms  of  goodness  will  find  its  highest  expression  in  that.  But
since  all  good  things  are  of  God,  we  may  find  him  reflected  in  every  act  of  virtue,  in
every  prompting  of  love,  in  every  aspiratinn  after  a  liii;her  life,  in  whatever  way  these
may  be  manifested.  The  terms  selected  include  all  that  is  noule  towards  God,  all  that
is  purifying  to  ourselves,  and  all  that  commends  itself  lo  the  better  instincts  of  men.
Meditating  on  such  an  exhaustive  catalogue  of  high  ideas,  how  can  we  become  anything
else  than  filled  with  all  that  is  true  and  Divine  ?

III.  True  meditation  will  produce  action.  If  it  does  not  do  this  it  enervates  the
will  and  dissipates  the  motive  forces  of  the  character.  A  truth  acted  upon  provides  us
with  an  unanswerable  evidence  that  it  is  a  truth.  It  becomes  worked  into  our  nat>:f9
and  forms  part  of  ourselves.

IV.  TeUE  action  IB  LEARNED  FROM  EXAMPLE  RATHER  THAN  FROM  PRECEPT.      *  That

which  ye  have  . . .  seen  in  me,  do."  Action  is  in  life  and  not  in  theory.  Note  how  the
.same  truth  is  to  be  found  in  the  Beatitudes.  They  begin  with  a  description  of  abstract
blessedness,  such  as  is  to  be  found  in  poverty  of  spirit;  they  end  by  translating  this
idea  of  blessedness  into  a  living  reality  in  the  case  of  the  disciples  who  were  being
taught.  "Blessed  are  they  "turns  into  "Blessed  are  ye,"  and  their  l.lcssedness  is  to
be  found  in  such  an  active  life  of  righteousness  as  is  to  involve  persecution  for  Christ's


oh.it.  1—23.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PH1LIPPIAN3.  193

V.  The  reward  of  true  action  procbediko  oijt  of  PROFOinn>  hedftatiok.  "  The
God  of  peace  shall  be  with  you."  The  peace  of  Ood  is  the  reward  of  prayer  and
trustfulness ;  this  is  an  inward  gift  bringing  God  into  the  souL  But  true  action  secures
the  presence  of  the  Qod  ofpeaoe,  externally  defending  and  guiding,  as  well  as  internally
teaching  and  blessii^— V.  W.  H.

Ver.  11< — Contentmeni.  To  be  contented  with  one's  lot  Is  a  thing  to  Iw  desired ;  to
be  contented  with  one's  self  is  a  thing  to  be  dreaded.  Our  lot  is  that  which  God  has
been  pleased  to  choose  for  us.  Our  self  is  that  character  or  disposition  which  is  being
daily  built  up  by  onr  co-operation  with  God's  grace.

I.  &r.  Paiil's  discontent  WITH  HIMSELF,  (ijce  ch.  lii.  12 — 14.)  It  is  his  sense  of  need
which  aroused  the  desire  for,  and  therefore  secured  the  ijossession  of,  spiritual  growth.
To  be  contented  with  one's  own  spiritual  state  is  to  prevent  the  possibility  of  spiritual
progress.  All  progress  springs  out  of  a  sense  of  insufficiency.  "  Blessed  are  the  poor
in  spirit :  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."

II.  St.  Paul's  content  with  his  lot.  So  far  as  worldly  advantages  we  concerned
It  was  not  an  enviable  one.  But  he  had  received  sufficient  of  his  Master's  Spirit  to
know  that  man's  life  consisteth  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  that  he  possesseth.
This  contrast  between  Divine  discontent  and  Divine  content  is  paralleled  by  the
"  Thou  shalt  not  covet"  of  the  Decalogue  and  the  "  Coret  earnestly  the  best  gifts"  of
St.  Paul— T.  W.  H.

Vers.  12, 13.— TAe  difficulties  of  prosperity.  \.  Contentment  needs  to  be  cultivated,
not  only  when  we  possess  little,  but  likewise  when  we  possess  much.  It  may  be
thought  that  to  be  contented  with  plenty  is  an  easy  task.  But  this  is  not  so.  It  is
often  easier  to  know  how  to  be  abased  than  to  know  how  to  abound.  We  may  be  in
greater  danger  when  our  prayers  are  answered  than  when  the  answer  is  withheld.  2.
St.  Paul,  having  learned  many  things,  can  teach  us  many  things.  Not  only  does  ha
know  theoretically  how  difficult  it  is  to  abound,  but  he  knows  it  experimentally,  and
experimentally  he  has  overcome  the  difficulty.  He  has  been  initiated  in  the  experience
of  both  need  and  abundance,  and  has  known  how  to  bear  either  lot  with  safety.  3.
This  he  had  been  able  to  do,  not  through  any  Stoical  superiority  to  the  things  of  this
life,  nor  yet  through  any  force  of  natural  character,  but  in  the  power  in  which  his
whole  life  was  now  being  lived,  the  strength  given  by  union  with  Jesus  Obrist—
V.W.H.

Vers.  14 — 19. — Almsgiving  apart  of  Christian  life  and  worsMp.  L  The  relatioiT'
ship  between  those  who  give  and  those  who  receive  alms  is  one  of  communion.
(Ver.  15.)  It  is  a  mistake  to  suppose  that  the  benefit  of  almsgivii^  is  all  on  the  side
of  the  recipients.  They  who  possess,  possess  in  order  that  they  may  show  their
brotherhood  with  those  who  possess  not.  To  receive  is  just  as  much  an  act  of
brotherhood  as  to  give.  Never  regard  the  bestowing  of  alms  as  an  act  of  patronage,  or
the  receiving  of  them  as  an  act  of  homage.

II.  The  benefit  of  almsgiving  to  the  almsgiveb.  It  is  fruit  (ver.  17),  whlcn
abounds  to  his  account.    Fruit  is  the  production  of  life.

IIL  Almsoivino  in  the  sight  of  God.  A  sacrifice  well-pleasing  to  him  (ver.  18).
He  sees  in  every  act  of  self-denial  a  reflection  of  the  sacrifice  of  Ills  dearly  beloved  Son
in  whom  he  is  well  pleased.

IV.  Almsgiving  a  part  of  Christian  worship.  Worship  is  the  ofiering  of  om-
selves  and  our  substance  to  God.  We  can  only  do  this  through  receiving  of  his  grace.
We  give  him  back  in  offerings  what  he  gives  us  in  bounty  He  returns  our  offerings
multiplied  with  his  blessing  and  full  of  his  grace  (ver.  19).  There  is  a  Divine  circula-
tion of  grace  as  there  is  a  natural  circulation  of  the  blood.  So  long  as  we  are  true  to
Jesus,  who  is  the  very  heart  of  God,  so  long  does  he  pour  forth  his  grace  into  us  the
living  members  of  his  body.  We  return  that  grace  to  him  in  the  shape  of  our  poor
prayers  and  deeds  of  service,  and  we  are  again  quickened  by  him  from  the  Iwandleas
riches  of  his  grace. — Y.  W.  H.

Ver.  l.—Steadfastnet».    I.  Thb  dutt.    1.  It  is  importamt.    Giristian  &ithfalness

PHILIPFIANS.  O


194  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANSb        [oh.  it.  1—23.

does  not  consist  in  a  few  occasional  heroie  acts  done  In  tlie  excitement  of  temporary
enthusiasm.  It  is  a  constant  faithful  liviMg ;  it  is  holding  the  citadel  throughout  Ufa
•gainst  the  assaults  of  temptation.  Though  great  deeds  have  been  done  and  a  con-
siderable time  well  speut,  all  is  vain  if  we  give  up  at  the  last  and  make  shipwreck  at
the  end  of  the  voyage.  2.  It  is  difficult.  It  is  easier  to  be  the  faithful  martyr  of  a  day
than  the  faithful  servant  of  a  lifetime.  To  stand  fast  when  we  are  weary,  to  hold  on
through  a  long  cheerless  night  of  adversity,  to  have  patience  with  the  fretting  of  email
trials,  and  to  endure  to  the  end,  are  the  hard  tasks.

II.  The  condition.  We  are  to  "  stand  fast  in  the  Lord."  Steadfastness  in  our  own
condition,  ojiinion,  arid  habit,  is  stagnation.  We  may  be  in  a  state  when  anything  but
steadfastness  is  necessary,  when  to  be  upset  is  to  be  saved.  There  are  men  who  need
to  be  made  to  doubt.  Christ  was  a  most  unsettling  preacher,  and  true  Christian  teach-
ing must  aim  at  disturbing  those  who  are  holding  on  in  a  wrong  way.  Let  us  not  con-
found a  right  steadfasttness  with  obstinate  self-will.  The  first  essential  is  that  we  are
"  in  the  Lord,"  and  the  one  steadfastness  commended  is  abiding  in  him,

IIL  The  method.  "  Wherefore  ...  so  stand  fast,"  etc.  These  words  carry  us  back
to  the  preceding  thoughts.  There  we  have  a  description  of  the  Christian's  heavenly
citizenship,  and  his  hope  of  the  second  advent  of  Christ.  A  persistent  hope  is  a  security
for  steadfastness,  an  anchor  of  the  soul  (Heb.  vi.  19).  Just  in  proportion  as  we  live  in
heaven,  with  thoughts,  affections,  motives,  and  efforts  centred  in  Christ  and  his  king-
dom, shall  we  be  able  to  hold  out  on  earth  firmly  against  the  storms  of  trouble  and
temptation,

IV,  Thb  MonvB.  The  motive  which  inspires  St.  Paul  to  urge  the  duty  of  steadfast-
ness upon  the  Fhilippians  is  his  personal  affection  for  them.  The  expression  of  this
must  have  been  felt  by  them  as  a  strong  incentive  to  a  true  response.  The  apostle
seems  to  have  regarded  his  Macedonian  converts  at  Philippi  and  Thessalonica  as  the
choicest  of  his  friends.  They  were  his  brethren,  beloved,  longed  for  in  absence,  still  a
source  of  joy  to  the  imprisoned  apostle  as  he  thought  of  them,  and  regarded  as  a  crown
of  victory  and  proof  of  the  glorious  success  of  his  labours  for  the  day  of  the  Lord.  We
can  wish  nothing  better  for  those  we  love  than  their  Christian  fidelity.  Ministers  have
a  strong  hold  upon  their  people  when  they  can  urge  personal  affection  and  joyous
recognition  of  good  done  as  a  motive  for  further  progress.  The  love  and  honour  of  those
who  have  laboured  and  suffered  for  the  Church  are  great  motives  to  inspire  faithful
steadfastness  in  all  Christians. — W,  F.  A.'

Ver.  i,— Christian  Joy.  No  doubt  the  apostle  used  a  common  expression  of  parting
salutation,  similar  to  our  "farewell,"  when  he  wrote  the  word  which  we  translate
"  rejoice."  But  it  is  certain  that  he  was  not  one  to  employ  conventional  language  as  an
empty  form.  Old  familiar  words,  often  repeated  quite  thoughtlessly,  were  taken  by
him  in  their  full  original  signification.  So  when  Christ  said,  "  Peace  be  with  you,"  he
uttered  a  familiar  phrase  of  parting ;  but  he  breathed  into  it  a  deep  meaning,  and  gave
peace  with  the  words.  Christ's  salutation  was  a  benediction ;  St,  Paul's  salutation
was  at  least  an  utterance  of  a  heartfelt  desire  for  the  joy  of  his  friends,

L  We  ABE  ENCOUBAQED  TO  BEJOicE.  Christianity  grows  out  of  a  gospeL  It  was
heralded  by  angel-songs  of  gladness.  The  funeral  dirge  is  not  the  suitable  expression
of  our  worship.  Hosanna  shouts  and  hallelujahs  more  become  its  glad  character.  We
are  encouraged  to  rejoice  on  many  grounds.  1,  For  our  own  sakes.  If  there  is  no
virtue  in  melancholy,  it  is  foolish  to  refuse  the  gladness  offered  by  God.  2.  For  ths
sake  of  our  work.  Joy  is  invigorating.  "  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  your  strength."
Needless  melancholy  is  sinful  when  it  paralyzes  our  energies.  3.  For  the  sake  of  othera.
Our  joy  will  be  sunshine  to  others  if  it  be  a  true,  generous.  Christian  gladness.  Our
gloom  will  make  others  miserable.  Moreover,  by  manifesting  Christian  joy  we  invite
others  to  share  in  the  benefits  of  the  gospeU  4.  For  Ckrisfs  sake.  It  pleases  him
and  honours  him,

IL  Cub  jot  should  spbing  fbom  Cbbist.  We  are  to  "rejoice  in  the  Lord."  Other
innocent  joys  are  permitted  and  consecrated  by  Christ ;  for  was  he  not  a  helpful  Cruest
at  the  marriage  feast  ?  and  did  he  not  scandalize  some  gloomy  hypocrites  by  taking  a
Tsry  different  course  from  his  ascetio  forerunner  ?  Indeed,  many  earthly  joys  are  safe
te  the  Christian  which  are  perilous  to  others,  because  the  Christian  enters  them  with


BH.  IT.  1—23,]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHUilPPIANS,  195

Divine  safegnards.  "  All  things  are  yours  "  is  said  to  Christians,  partly  becanse  "  to
the  pure  all  things  are  pure."  But  a  peouliaily  Christian  joy  is  derived  directly  from
Christ.  1.  The  joy  of  his  love,  receiving  and  returning  it.  Love  is  the  source  of  the
greatest  joy.  2.  The  joy  of  his  service,  delighting  to  do  his  will.  3.  The  joy  oi
his  blessing.    The  heavenly  citizenship  and  its  inheritance  are  ours  in  Christ.

III.  Cub  jot  in  Chbist  should  be  oontinuoub.  The  difficulty  is  to  rejoice  alway.
It  requires  much  faith  and  nearness  to  Christ.  It  is  only  possible  to  those  who  live
in  the  unseen  and  eternaL  But  if,  believing  in  our  heavenly  citizenship,  we  set  our
affections  above,  with  our  heart  and  our  treasure  in  heaven,  and  with  the  heaven  of
Christ's  presence  in  our  soul  here,  there  will  spring  up  a  joy  in  the  midst  of  earthly
trouble.  It  is  remarkable  that  this  Epistle  to  the  Philippians,  written  under  the  most
adverse  earthly  circumstances,  by  the  worn  and  aged  apostle  in  prison,  is  the  fullest  of
gladness.  The  secret  is  the  richness  of  the  inner  life  of  St.  Paul,  as  this  was  made
bright  by  his  close  fellowship  with  Christ. — W.  P.  A.

Ver.  6. — 7%e  cure  for  anxiety.  L  The  disease.  We  must,  of  course,  be  careful  for
many  things,  in  the  sense  of  taking  thought  abuut  them  or  taking  pains  in  woiking  on
them.  Christianity  does  not  favour  indolent  improvidence ;  for  it  teaches,  "  If  a  man
will  not  work  neither  let  him  eat."  Nor  does  it  encourage  reckless  carelessness ;  for  it
everywhere  instils  a  thoughtful^  conscientious  sense  of  responsibility.  What  it  does
discourage  is  anxiety.  1.  This  is  painful.  How  painful  most  of  us  know  only  too
well.  The  wear  and  fret  of  care  sometimes  make  the  advice  to  rejoice  alway  read
like  a  mockery,  2.  This  is  injurious.  Men  rarely  die  of  hard  work,  but  often  of  vexing
anxiety.  It  is  not  toil,  but  trouble,  that  turns  the  hair  grey  before  its  time.  3.  This
hinders  spiritual  energy.  The  "  cares  of  this  world  "  choke  the  good  seed  as  much  as
its  pleasures  and  riches.  When  absorbed  in  worldly  anxiety,  men  have  no  energy,
heart,  nor  time  for  spiritual  concerns.  In  the  petty  cares  of  a  day  they  drown  th«
grand  claims  of  eternity.

XL  HuUAB  KEMBDiES.    1.  Seoson.    Care  is  foolish  and  useless

"Care  is  no  cure,  but  rather  corrosive.
For  things  that  are  not  to  be  remedied."

Often  it  Is  groundless,  a  shadow  of  our  own  imagination,  and  of  no  real  trouhl«L  Thus
Bums  says—

"But  human  bodies  are  do  fools.

For  a'  their  colleges  and  schools.

That  when  nae  real  ills  perplex  them.

They  make  enow  themsel's  to  vex  them,"

But  anxiety  is  too  strong  for  reason.  It  persists  against  reason.  2.  FhHosophie  com-
placency in  the  hest  of  all  possible  worlds.  We  cannot  think  that  "  whatever  is  is  best."
Philosophers  may  say  so  in  theii  calm  seclusion ;  toilers  and  sufferers  will  never  believe
it  in  the  rough  experience  of  real  life  (Christianity  does  not  require  this  optimism,  or  it
would  not  encourage  prayer  for  changes).  3.  Stoical  indifferences.  Here  and  there
this  may  be  possible ;  but  it  is  not  natural,  and  it  is  only  got  with  the  loss  of  much
human  tenderness.  4.  Cynical  carelessness.  This  may  come  with  despair.  It  is  not
the  cure  of  anxiety,  but  its  fatal  victory  over  a  rained  life.

III.  TuE  DiviNB  CUBE.  Christ  taught  us  to  conquer  earthly  anxiety  in  two  ways,
by  trusting  in  our  heavenly  Father  (Matt.  vL  32),  and  by  transferring  our  care  to
more  worthy  objects,  by  which  means  it  becomes  itself  transformed  into  a  noble
concern  for  the  kingdom  of  God  (Matt.  vi.  33),  St.  Paul  follows  on  the  same  lines.
1.  Prayer  is  the  remedy  for  care.  We  are  distinctly  invited  to  bring  our  anxieties  to
(Jod.  We  are  to  be  anxious  about  nothing,  by  making  supplication  about  everything.
Thus,  as  the  area  of  prayer  advances,  that  of  care  recedes.  The  conventional  limitation
of  prayer  is  the  secret  of  much  unconquered  anxiety.  2.  Thanksgiving  perfects  the
remedy.  This  is  a  ground  of  encouragement  in  prayer  for  future  help  and  a  direct
relief  from  pressing  anxiety.  Care  has  a  bad  memory.  Grateful  recollections  of  ibe
past  will  greatly  aUay  anxieties  about  the  future, — W.  F.  A.


IW  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIAN8.         [oh.  iv.  1—21

Ver.  7. — The  peace  that  it  better  than  intellectual  satiafaction.  L  God  answebs  thh
WATEB  OF  ANXIETY  WITH  A  GIFT  OF  PEACE.  The  promise  of  peace  follows  close  upon
the  exhortation  to  convert  our  anxieties  into  prayers.  The  result  of  such  conduct  is
sot  the  immediate  removal  of  the  source  of  care ;  the  old  trouble  may  still  be  with  us,
and  the  dreaded  danger  may  not  yet  be  averted ;  but  we  have  an  inward  peace  and
acquiescence  in  the  assurance  that  all  must  be  well  in  our  Father's  hands.  Thus  the
prayer  is  answered,  though  not  exactly  as  we  expected.  1.  This  peace  is  given  hy  Ood.
It  is  not  the  product  of  our  own  reasonings,  nor  of  altered  circumstances,  but  of  Divine
grace.  2.  It  is  directly  dependent  on  communion  with  Ood ;  for  it  is  not  so  much  a
blessing  bestowed  in  response  to  prayer  as  the  natural  consequence  of  approaching  God
in  prayer.  As  we  turn  from  the  fretting  cares  of  life  to  talk  with  God,  we  enter  a  new
serene  atmosphere  above  the  tumults  of  earth,  and  the  peace  of  it  steals  into  our  souls.
3.  It  is  a  peace  like  that  of  God  himself.  Given  by  God,  growing  out  of  communion
with  God,  it  has  the  character  of  God.  It  is  a  solid,  deep,  pure,  true,  lasting  peace,
quite  different  from  any  peace  the  world  can  give  (John  xiv.  27).

II.  This  peace  is  betteb  than  ant  iSTEttECTUAL  SATISFACTION.  We  are  impa-
tient for  an  explanation  of  the  mysteries  of  providence.  We  would  know  why  God
has  dealt  with  us  so  differently  from  what  we  had  expected.  We  would  have  the  veil
of  the  future  uplifted  that  our  anxious  hearts  might  be  set  at  rest.  But  it  is  not
possible.  We  are  left  to  grope  among  many  dark  secrets  while  we  learn  to  walk  by
faith.  Xerertheless,  if  we  have  not  the  understanding,  the  peace  is  better.  If  we
cannot  know  all,  we  can  live  trustfully  with  an  inward  quiet.  Better  a  calm  in  mid-
night darkness  than  a  storm  in  the  glare  of  noon.  For  our  training  it  is  well  not
to  know  many  things  that  God  has  mercifully  hidden  from  our  imperfect  compre-
hension. If  we  can  trust  God  in  the  darkness  and  be  at  peace  in  our  own  souls,  we
have  the  highest  blessing.

III.  This  Divine  peace  pbetents  odb  minds  fboh  wandekino  from  Christ.  It
is  represented  as  a  sentinel  on  the  watch,  guarding  our  hearts  and  thoughts,  and
keeping  them'  in  Christ.  The  cares  of  this  world  tempt  us  from  Christ  with  vexing
doubts  and  distracting  claims.  In  peace  of  heart  our  thoughts  return  to  him.  No
understanding  of  providence  and  its  mysteries  would  thus  settle  the  soul  on  the  true
foundation  of  its  rest.  That  would  not  guard  our  hearts  and  thoughts  because  it  is
not  the  ideas  of  our  minds  but  the  spirit  of  our  lives,  the  tone  and  temper  and  character
of  them,  that  dissuades  our  affections  and  thoughts  from  wandering  from  Christ,  This,
therefore,  is  the  great  commendation  of  the  Divine  peace  which  is  given  in  response  to
the  prayer  of  anxiety.  It  does  not  remove  the  trouble  that  causes  the  anxiety,  but  it
nrevents  that  trouble  from  driving  us  from  Christ,  and  so  secures  to  us  the  supreme
blessedness  of  abiding  in  him.-^W.  F.  J^

Ver.  8. — The  contemplation  rf  goodness.  L  Cub  minds  shottld  bb  oooufied  with
THE  contemplation  OF  oooD  THINGS.  1.  It  is  uot  cnough  that  our  deeds  are  pure,
our  thoughts  must  be  pure  also,  (1)  because  the  inner  life  is  the  true  life,  and  (2)  because
our  ideas  will  ultimately  colour  our  actions.  2.  Oood  thoughts  spring  from  the  study
if  good  things.  We  cannot  touch  pitch  and  remain  undefiled.  But  the  consideration
of  worthy  characters  and  actions  will  insensibly  fill  our  minds  with  a  kindred  spirit.
This  fact  should  govern  our  choice  of  literature,  Iriends,  scenes,  and  occupations.  It  is
particularly  important  to  study  objective  goodness  outside  ourselves.  This  is  a  cure
for  dreamy  subjectivity,  for  self-conceit,  and  for  narrow  notions.

II.  The  good  chabacteristics  of  men  of  the  world  should  bb  geneeouslt
ADMITTED.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  list  of  good  things  here  drawn  out  by  St  Paul
consists  chiefly  of  pagan  virtues.  He  appears  to  be  calling  upon  Christians  to  consider
the  goodness  that  is  to  be  found  outside  the  pale  of  the  Church.  1.  These  good
characteristics  exist.  The  world  is  not  wholly  depraved.  It  was  not  even  so  in  the
dark  days  of  the  Eoman  empire.  One  who  had  a  keen  sympathy  with  goodness  was
able  then  to  detect  the  genuine  indications  of  light  amidst  the  gloom.  The  life  of  (iito
and  the  writings  of  Seneca,  for  example,  contain  much  that  commands  our  profound
admiration.  "  There  is  a  soul  of  goodness  in  things  eviL"  2.  These  good  characteris-
tics should  be  ungrudgingly  recognized  (1)  in  justice  to  men ;  (2)  for  the  glory  of  God,
who  it  the  Source  of  all  goodness  in  the  world  as  well  as  in  the  Church,  pagan  as  well


oh.it.  1—23.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.  197

M  Christian ;  (3)  for  our  own  sakes.  A  narrow  censorious  spirit:  is  most  unchristian.
A  follower  of  the  innocent  Christ  should  he  a  lorer  of  all  things  good.

III.  ChBIBTIANS   hat   OBEATLT  FBOriT    BT   THB   CONTEMPLATION  Or    THE   OOODinSS*

OF  MEN  or  THE  woBLD.  It  might  be  thought  that,  if  this  is  a  lower  form  of  goodness,
it  would  be  useless  to  study  it.  But :  1.  The  consideration  of  it  will  widen  our  sympii-
thia.  It  will  help  us  better  to  appreciate  and  love  our  brother  man.  Approaching
them  through  their  good  points,  we  shall  the  better  influence  them  (e.g.  see  Acts  xyii.
22).  Compare  Clement  and  Origen  in  their  recognition  of  what  was  good  in  paganism,
with  Tertullian  and  his  denunciation  of  heathen  religion  and  philosophy  as  diabolical,
and  with  Amobius  and  his  railing  against  human  nature  itself.  Surely  the  Alexan-
drian apologists  were  wisest  as  well  as  most  charitable.  2.  The  contemplation  of  these
good  things  will  reveal  virtuei  not  sufficiently  studied  hy  Christians.  The  Church  has
sot  the  monoply  of  the  virtues.  If  she  excels  in  the  higher  graces  men  who  do  not
own  her  name  may  sometimes  shame  her  with  their  excellence  in  other  respects.
Christians  may  learn  much  from  Plato  and  Epictetus  and  from  Goethe  and  Carlyle.

IV.  Details  or  goodness  mat  be  usefdllt  considered.  8t  Paul  makes  a  list
of  good  things.  He  was  in  the  habit  of  drawing  out  such  lists.  We  must  begin  with
the  inward  spirit  of  holiness  in  lore  to  God  and  man,  but  we  must  develop  our  character
by  attention  to  details.  1.  This  excites  our  attenUon.  Oar  imagination  flags  at
generalities.  Objective  details  please  it  best.  2.  This  prevents  our  goodness  from  evapo-
rating in  vague  sentiment,  3.  This  gives  hreadth  and  variety  to  our  character.  Good
things  are  numerous  and  of  varied  types.  We  must  beware  of  a  narrow  morahty.
"  Whatsoever  things  are  good,"  etc.,  are  worthy  of  study,  in  order  that  every  possible
attainment  of  character  may  be  reached  in  every  possible  direction. — W.  F.  A>

Vers.  11, 12. — The  secret  of  contentment.  I.  Contentment  n  a.  eabb  and  pkecioub
Cheistian  gbace.  It  must  be  distinguished  from  spiritual  self-satisfaction,  which  is
sinful  and  fatal,  and  is  concerned  with  our  own  inner  condition,  while  true  contentment
has  regard  to  our  external  circumstances.  It  must  also  be  distinguished  from  the
recklessness  of  folly  and  from  the  apathy  of  despair.  It  is  a  quiet  restfulness  in  the
midst  of  all  kinds  of  changing  events.  1.  It  is  ra/re  and  difficult  of  attainment,  because
(1)  outside  events  are  frequently  untoward ;  (2)  our  own  hearts  are  unhealthily  restless  ■
and  (3)  we  live  too  much  in  dependence  on  this  world  and  its  fortunes.  2.  Content-
ment is  most  desirable.  For  without  it  the  most  propitious  circumstances  can  minister
little  pleasm-e,  and  with  it  the  hardest  privations  can  produce  little  distress.  The
important  question  in  regard  to  our  happiness  is  not — What  things  do  we  possess?  but
— ^What  kind  of  thoughts  and  feelings  do  we  experience  ?  3.  Contentment  is  requisite  in
every  condition  of  life.  It  is  not  only  the  virtue  of  the  poor  and  the  solace  of  the  dis-
appointed. Bich  and  prosperous  people  are  too  often  also  discontented  people.  It  is
harder  for  some  to  know  how  to  abound  than  to  know  how  to  suffer  want.  Wealth
brings  the  thirst  for  more  wealth.  Pleasure  palls.  Prosperity  wearies.  It  is  a  grand
attainment  to  be  able  to  pass  up  and  down  the  whole  gamut  of  social  change  and  to
behave  one's  self  with  equanimity  and  contentment  in  every  stage  up  from  abasement  to
abundance  and  then  dovim  again  from  fulness  to  need.

II.  The  sbcebt  or  contentment  is  to  be  learned  fbom  Christ.  There  is  •  secret.
Some  have  not  yet  found  it  out.  But  it  exists  and  it  is  well  worth  seeking.  To  be
fully  understood  and  enjoyed  it  must  be  learned  as  a  long,  difficult,  painful  lesson.  St.
Paul  had  learnt  it,  and  his  example  should  win  fresh  pupils  to  study  the  same  great
lesson.  1.  Christ  gives  us  strength  to  bear  varying  fortunes.  St.  Paul  could  speak  of  his
contentment  because  he  could  also  say,  "  I  can  do  all  things  in  him  that  strengtheneth
me."  If  we  know  and  feel  nothing  beyond  this,  there  is  a  certain  satisfaction  to  be  got
from  the  mere  sense  of  new  power  given  to  bear  that  which  before  seemed  to  be
unbearable.  2.  Christ  enables  us  to  live  in  faith.  Thus  believing  that  even  now  all
things  are  ordered  wisely  and  kindly  by  our  heavenly  Father,  that  they  are  working
together  for  good  not  yet  seen,  working  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight
of  glory,  we  Team  to  bear  the  present  mystery  of  trial  in  hope  of  the  future  revelatwrn
of  blessedness.  3.  Christ  leads  us  to  live  in  the  spiritual.  'ITiis  is  the  real  secret
External  circumstances  are  constantly  changing.  At  best  they  will  not  satisfy  th«
wul's  deep  hunger.    While  we  live  in  them  wo  are  necessarily  often  disappointed  and

03


198  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.        [oh.  it.  1—23.

discontented.  In  the  inner  world  of  spiritual  things  we  must  find  our  best  experience^
and  when  this  opens  up  to  the  higher  world  of  Divine  and  heavenly  tilings  we  have  a
source  of  unfailing  peace.  Besting  ia  God  we  shall  be  content  in  every  variety  of
earthly  affairs. — W.  P.  A.

Ver.  13. — Christian  omnipotence.  The  language  of  faith  resembles  in  form  the
language  of  lx)astful  presumption.  But  the  two  are  essentially  dissimilar.  So  long  as
our  ground  of  confidence  is  not  in  ourselves,  but  in  Christ,  it  is  no  mark  of  humility,  but
rather  a  sign  of  unbelief  and  ingratitude,  for  one  to  make  little  of  it.  There  is  a  legiti-
mate boasting  in  Christ  which  is  quite  different  from  the  boasting  of  the  braggart  in
his  own  resources.  "  My  soul  will  make  her  boast  in  the  Lord  " — this  the  humblest
may  say.

L  TuE  TBUii  Christian  is  a  btrono  soul.  He  is  not  simply  pardoned  the  failures
of  past  weakness ;  he  is  prepared  to  be  more  successful. in  future  trials.  For  those  trials
he  is  not  merely  protected  by  Divine  armour ;  he  is  also  girded  by  Divine  strength.
Gx>d  does  not  simply  hide  his  child  in  the  cltft  of  a  rock  while  the  storm  passes;  he
also  inspires  him  with  might  wherewith  to  face  and  brave  and  conquer  the  storm  even
out  in  the  open.  He  who  protects  the  feeble  fledglings  in  their  warm  nest  also  braces
the  strung  branches  of  the  oak  to  wrestle  with  the  gale.  Moreover,  if  strength  is  pos-
sible to  the  Christian,  weakness  is  culpable.  No  one  can  plead  his  feebleness  as  an
excuse  for  falling  when  he  might  have  been  strong  in  the  energy  of  God.

IL  Christ  is  the  source  of  Christian  strength.  We  are  made  strong  in  Christ,
not  in  ourselves.  By  himself  the  Christian  is  as  weak  as  any  one  else.  It  is  union
with  Christ  that  supplies  Christ's  strength  made  perfect  in  our  weakness.  1.  Christ
strengthens  with  an  inspiration  of  Divine  energy.  The  language  of  the  apostle  points
to  a  real  supply  of  strength,  not  a  mere  sense  of  courage,  etc.  There  is  a  positive  out-
flow of  God's  might  into  a  soul  that  is  united  to  Christ.  2.  Christ  strengthens  by  hit
union  with  us.  We  must  be  in  him  and  he  in  us.  Then  his  life-power  flows  through
us.  3.  Christ  strengthens  through  our  faith.  We  are  able  to  receive  Christ's  energy  just
in  proportion  as  we  trust  him,  as  they  who  were  cured  by  him  had  blessings  according
to  their  faith.  The  energy  is  not  in  our  faith,  but  in  Christ.  Still,  faith  is  the  channel
of  communication.  Faith  can  move  monntains,  not  by  reason  of  its  own  inherent
virtue,  but  because  it  invokes  the  omnipotence  of  God,  as  the  engiaeer  starts  the  train
when  he  turns  on  the  steam.

IIL  There  are  great  claims  on  Christian  strength.  It  is  not  allowed  to  rust
in  idleness.  St.  Paul  writes  of  "  all  things,'"  as  though  there  were  many  things  to  be
done  in  the  power  of  Christ.  1.  Troubles,  temptations,  and  changing  circumstances  of  life
must  be  borne  with  contentment.  It  is  in  regard  to  this  requirement  that  tlie  apostle
more  immediately  records  this  assurance  of  sufficiency  of  strength.  2.  Duties  have  to
be  fulfilled.  Christ  gives  strength  for  work  as  well  as  strength  'for  endurance.  The
Christian  must  not  only  stand  firmly  like  a  rock ;  he  must  put  forth  active  power  like
a  Samson.  The  calls  for  strength  are  many  and  various,  flesh  and  heart  fail  before
them ;  but  "  they  that  wait  on  the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength,"  so  that  in  Christ
the  heaviest  burden  may  be  borne  and  the  hardest  task  accomplished  and  the  weakest
soul  win  the  victory  over  the  most  powerful  foe,  with  a  strength  which  is  practically
omnipotent,  because  it  is  derived  from  an  almighty  source. — ^W.  P.  A.

Ver.  19. — A  full  supply.  The  Philippians  had  "sent  once  and  again  unto"  St
Paul's  need  (ver.  16).  In  return  the  apostle  assures  them  that  the  recompense  which
is  beyond  his  power  will  be  made  for  him  by  his  God,  who  will  supply  all  their  need.
We  are  most  enriched  when  we  most  sacrifice  ourselves  (Prov.  xi.  24).  What  we  give
to  the  work  of  ('hrist  we  shall  receive  back  with  far  more  than  the  worth  of  our
offerings.

L  W  E  ALL  have  great  nkeds  THAT  ONLY  GoD  CAN  vvvfOm  "  Every  need  of  yours."
What  a  vast  field  this  expression  covers  1  1.  Earthly  need.  Few  but  are  pressed  by
such  need  in  some  direction,  and  often  to  an  extent  that  no  human  aid  can  satisfy.
But  we  must  observe  that  what  God  will  supply  is  the  need,  not  the  desire;  the  two
cover  very  different  ground.  God  will  not  give  what  we  wish,  but  what  is  requisite
for  us,    Moreover,  we  cannot  distinguish  between  the  real  need  and  our  idea  of  what  we


OH.  IT.  1—23.]         THE  ErlSTLB  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANi  199


need.  It  is  the  former  only  that  God  will  supply.  8.  Spiritual  need.  This  is  far
larger  and  more  important  than  all  material  wants.  We  need  forgiveness,  purification,
strength,  knowledge — great  and  gkirious  graces  that  no  man  can  give.

II.  God  will  fulfil  evert  need  of  hk  faithful  sbbvants.  1.  He  vM fulfil
the  need.  The  fulfilment  will  not  be  as  we  expect  it ;  perhaps  because  the  need  is  not
exactly  what  we  imagine  it  to  be.  As  God  only  knows  the  real  wants  of  our  lives,
he  only  can  rightly  supply  them.  But  not  one  true  need  will  he  ultimately  leave
unsatisfied.  There  is  a  royal  abundance  in  the  treasury  of  Divine  grace  and  an  unstint-
ing generosity  in  the  gifts  from  it.  2.  This  assurance  is  only  for  those  who  are  faith-
/«!.  St.  Paul  gives  it  to  the  Philippians  after  they  have  given  abundant  evidence  of
their  devotion.  It  is  not  every  one  who  can  rightly  be  promised  that  his  every  need
shall  be  fulfilled,  nor  to  the  nnspiritnal  will  the  Divine  supply  of  the  soul's  true  needs
seem  to  be  such,  as  they  will  be  blind  to  these  wants  and  at  the  same  time  much  con-
cerned with  fancied  needs  of  no  real  importance  which  God  will  certainly  not  supply.

III.  The  80UBCIB  of  the  Divinb  supply  is  in  Chbist  Jesus.  1.  The  richea  with
which  to  supply  our  poverty  are  found  in  Christ.  His  unsearchable  riches  (Eph.  iiL  8)
consist  in  the  grace  that  he  brings  to  us  in  his  advent  and  the  grace  that  he  secures  for
as  by  his  death  and  resurrection.  As  we  receive  the  highest  blessings  for  Christ's  sake
they  may  he  regarded  as  riches  that  are  stored  up  in  Christ.  2.  The  method  of  sup-
plying our  need  is  through  lAartn;  in  the  glory  of  Christ.  The  riches  are  in  glory.
They  are  the  fruits  of  the  triumph  of  Christ,  righting  under  our  Captain's  banner,  w«
share  his  triumph,  ent«r  into  the  same  glory  with  him,  and  ao  enjo/  his  wealth  •!
UMringg.— W.  W.  A.


HOMHiETIOAL  INDEX
to

THE  EPISTLE  OP


ST.  PAUL  TO  THE  PHILIPPIANS.


OHAFTEB  t

rAss

The  Addresi        ...             ...             ...  7

8t.  Fanl  an  Example  to  all  Ohristion

Ministers          ...            ...             ••.  8

Bt.  Paul's  Prayer  for  the  Fhilippiana  9

The  Apostle's  own  Oiroamstancea   ...  10

St.  Paul's  own  Hope           ...            ...  10

The  Great  Altemative,  Life  or  Death  11

Fractioal  Exhortation        ...             ...  12

Apostolic  Address  and  Salutation  ...  13
Thanksgiving  for  their  Fellowship  in

the  Qospel        ...            ...            ■■.  13

The  Grounds  of  the  Apostle's  Thanks-

giving               ...             ...             ...  M

A  Double  Explanation  of  the  Origin  of

this  Confidence               ...             ...  14

The  Apostle's  Prayer         ...            ...  16

Furtherance  of  the  Gospel  through

the  Apostle's  Imprisonment  ...  16
A.  Significant  Difference   among  the

Apostle's  Brethren         ...            ...  16

The  Bearing  of  his  Yarious  Trials  upon

his  Salvation    ...             ...            «.  17

The  Grand  Alternatives    ...            ...  17

The  Apostle's  Dilemma     ...            ...  18

The  Apostle's  Personal  Oonviotion  as

to  his  Fotnre  Course      ...            ...  19

Fnctioal  Counsel  for  Hdy  and  Con.

■iltent  Living  ...             ...            ...  19

The  Privilege  of  Suffering               m  M

;  Bunts,  Birii^s,  and  Oeaossu          m  H


The  Apostle^s  Interoesrion  and  Assw-

ance   ...  ...  ...  ...      8S

The  Qospel  promoted  hf  Feneoati«a      83
Life  here  and  hereafter      .„  ...      24

The  Gifts  of  Faith  and  of  Suffering         SS
lutrodnctiou        ...  ...  ...      26

Expression  of  Interest        ...  ...      27

Thoughts  suggested  by  his  Captivitj       M
Paul's  Salutation  ...  ...      86

Paul's  Gratitude  for  Good  Men       .»      89
Personal  Christianitj         ...  .»      40

The  Augmentation  of  Christly  Lore

assures  the   Improvement  of   the

whole  Man       ...  ...  ...      41

A  Grand  Principle  and  a  Splendid

Example  ...  ...  ...      42

The  Magnifying  of  Christ  the  Supreme

End  of  Life      ...  ...  ...      44

An  Ideal  Life  blooming  into  a  Happy

Death  ...  ...  ...      46

Self-Love  and  Social  Lore  ...      47

A  Life  of  Consistency,  TTnity,  and

Courage  ...  ...  ...      48

The  Philippian  Church  (the  Firstborn

Church  of  Europe)  a  Type  of  the

Catholic  Church  ...  ...      49

Christian  Joy   not  dependent  upon

Outward  Circumstances  ...      60

The  Truest  Guarantee  <rf  Perseve-

...      60


ranoe  ...  ..

THhv  Oommnnion  of  Saints


61


INDEX.


Ttma  rAoa

The  Life  of  Gk>d  in  the  Sonl  of  Hnn  61
The  Benefits  conferred  npon  Men  by
the   Steadfast  Confession  of    our

Faith ...            ...            .,.            ...  61

The  Spirit  of  Faction         «..            .••  52

The  Oain  of  Death              .m            •••  62

Fmit  and  Gain    ...             ...            ...  52

Exhortation  to  TTnitj :  Hotires  for  it  63

An  Ancient  Letter              ...             ...  53

Begnn,  continaed,  and  ended  in  God  54

The  Things  that  excel        ...             ...  64

Christianity  promoted  by  being  per-

eeonted              ...             ...            ...  65

Christ  preached  in  Sectarian  Jealousy  56

"  To  me  to  live  is  Christ "                 ...  56

A  Strait                ...             ...             «.  67

Suffering  in  Behalf  of  Christ            ».  68

CHAPTEE  n.

Exhortation  to  Unity         ...             ...  64

The  Example  of  the  Lord  Jesne  ...  66
What  should  be  the  Besnlt  of  Christ's

Example  P         ...             ...            ...  67

The  Salvation  of  the  Philippians  the

Apostle's  Joy    ...            ...            ...  68

Timothy                 ...             ...             ...  69

Epaphroditus        ...  ...  70, 110

Christian  Like-MindednesB  ...  71
The    Qualities    of    Christian    Like'

Mindedness       ...              ...              ...  71

Jesus  Christ  the  Supreme  Example  of

Humble.Mindednesa       ...            ...  72

Christ's  Beward  ...            ...            ...  73

Christian   Salvation  a  Working  out

what  God  works  in         ...            ...  73

The  Importance  of  a  Contented  and

Peaceful  Habit  of  Sonl  ...            ...  74

The  Apostle's  Beadiness  to  sacrifice

his  Life  for  the  Philippians          ...  76

The  Mission  of  Timothy    ...             ...  76

Epaphroditns  the  Link  between  the

Apostle  and  Fhilippi      ...             ...  76

Altruism               ...            ...            ...  77

The  Self -Sacrifice  of  Christ             ...  78

Christ's  Exaltation             ...             ...  79

The  Awful  Besponsibility  of  Personal

Inspiration        ...             ...            ...  80

Inspired  to  be  Blameless  Sons         ...  81
The  Considerate  Missions  of  Epaphro-
ditns and  Timothy          ...             ...  88

EzhortatioB     to      Unanimitj     mai

BMaOiij          83


rAoi

Exhortations         ...            ...            ...  87

Timothy  and  Epaphroditna               ...  91

Genuine  Socialism  apostolically  nrged  96
The  Moral  Histoiy  of  the  Christly

Spirit                ...            ...            ...  97

Salvation  as  a  Work  in  the  Sonl      ...  99

Church  Activity  ...            ...            ...  100

Christly  Love       ...             ...            ...  101

The  TmeSpiritof  Christian  XTsefnlnesB  101
True  Labonrers  for  Christ               ...  102
Exhortation  to  Unity :  the  Testimonj
of  our  Spiritual  and  Moral  Con-
science            ...            ...            ...  103

Exhortation  to  Unity :  Causes  of  its

Breach              ...            ...            ...  104

Exhortation  to   Unity:   its   Highest

Motive  and  most  Powerful  Agent  104

The  Humiliation  of  Christ                ...  104

Exaltation  through  Humiliation      ...  105

The  Exaltation  of  the  Son  of  Man  ...  105

"  Our  own  Salvation "       r...             ...  106

The  Christian  Life  i  its  Effect  npon

the  World         ...             ...            ...  106

The  Law  of  Sacrifice         ...            ...  106

Two   Characters,  representing  Two

Aspects  of  Christian  Work            ...  106

Brotherly  Union  ...             ...            ...  107

Selfishness            ...            ...            ...  107

The  Mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesns ...  108

Working  out  our  own  Salvation       ...  109

Lightsj  ...            ...            ...            ^  109


CHAPTER  in.


...    116
...    117


Holy  Joy

The  Example  of  St.  Paul  ...

St.  Paul's  Humility  ...  ...     Hg

The  Christian  Minister  mnst  set  an

Example  to  his  Flock     ...  ...     120

The  Grounds  for  following  St.  Paul

and  other  Holy  Men      ...  ...    181

Spiritual  Joy       ...  ...  ...     122

Serious  Warning  against  Errorists  ...     122
The  Apostle's  Estimate  of  his  High

Privileges  as  a  Jew        ...  ...     123

The  Excellency  of  the  Knowledge  of

Christ  ...  ...  ...     123

The  True  Groond  of  a  Sinner's  Hope    US
The    Apostle's    Confession    of    his

imperfection   and  his  Method  ti

Christian  Progress         ...  ...     126

Praotical    Exhortation  to  Unity  in

BelipoM  Ltfo  ,„  ,„  ,.,    18f


INDEX.


ffl


THim  rAoi

The  Imitation  of  Good  Men              ...  126

The  Walk  of  Mere  Worldly  ProfeSBora  126
The    Heavenly  Citizenship   and   its

Blessed  Expectations     ...             ...  127

Spiritnal  Jndaism                ...              ...  127

Pride  of  Birth  and  Breeding             ...  128

The  Enthusiast    ...            ...             ...  129

The  Biver  of  Forgetfalnen              ...  ISO

Celestial  Citizenship          ...             u.  132

The  True  Cironmoision      ...             ...  182

Contrasted  Characters  and  Destiniea  139

Bejoicinsf,  Eschewing,  and  Imitating  142
The  Cost  and  the  Value  of  Personal

Christianity     ...             .m            ...  1^

Phases  of  Christ  ...             „.            ...  143

Moral  Onwardnesa              »•            ...  144

Moral  Perfection                ...             ...  145

Conventional  Christians  as  riewed  by

Genuine            ...             ...             ...  146

The  Blessedness  of  the  Christly       ...  146

Sameness              ...            ...             ...  147

Identity  not  to  be  found  in  Continuity

of  Form,  but  in  Harmony  of  the

Inner  Spirit      ...             ...            ...  148

The   Knowledge  of   Christ  the  one

Thing  needful                 ...             ...  148

The  Enowledge  of  Christ:  its  Degrees

and  its  Purpose              ...             ...  148

The  Christian  Bacei    Conditions  of

Victory             ...             ...             ...  149

A  Deficient  Faith  will  be  accepted

and  enlightened  if  it   be  held  in

a  Good  Conscience         ...             ...  149

Our  Heavenly  Citizenship                 ...  149

"Dogs"                ...             ...             ...  150

All  Loss  for  Christ  is  Gain               ...  160

"  The  Fellowship  of  his  Safferinga"  161

Forward               ...             ...             ...  161

"  Otherwise  minded"        m.            ».  162

Imitation              ...             .m            m.  153

Citizenship  in  Heaven        ...             mt  153

Tlte  Benewal  of  the  Body                w.  154

CHAPTKB  IV.

gt.  Paul's  Belations  to  his  Flook  ...  160
The  Key-Note  of  the  Spistle :  Holy

Jof,  with  its  Blessed  Seenlta       ...  Ul


TBEHX  rAOB

Exhortation  to  cultivate    Habits  of

Holy  Thought ...             ...            ...  162

St.  Paul's  Happy  Temper                ...  163
The    Sympathy   of    the  Fhilippiana

with  St.  Paul  ...             ...             ...  164

The  Salutations  ...             ...            .„  165

The  Duty  of  Steadfastness              „.  166

A  Touching  Personal  Appeml           ...  166

Christian  Joy  a  Dnty         ...             m.  167

The  Virtue  of  Forbearance              m.  167

A  Cure  for  Care  ...             ...             ...  168

Subjects  for  Christian  Study           ...  169
The  Apostle  himself  an  Example  to

Believers          ...             ...             ...  170

The  Secret  of  Contentment  170, 197

The  Circumstances  of  their  Liberality  171
The  True  Source  of  Supply  in  Spiritual

Need 171

Mutual  Salutations            ...             ...  172

The  Life  of  Joy  and  Peace               ».  172

The  Art  of  Divine  Contentment      ...  173

Various  Exhortations        ...             ...  174

Categories  of  Morality       ,„             ...  177
Paul  thanks  the  Philippiana  for  their

Contribution    ...             ...            ...  180

Salutation  and  Benediction              ...  184

Genuine  Churchism            ...            ...  185

Divine  Peace       ...             ...             ...  186

The  Transmission  of  the  Knowledge

of  Christ           ...            ...            ...  188

Man  in  Model  Aspects       ...            „.  189

The  Healing  of  Dissensiona             ».  191

Bejoicing  always                ,„            n.  191

God's  Peace         ...            ».            „.  192

Meditation  and  Action      .m            «..  192

Contentment        ...             ...            ...  193

The  Difficulties  of  Prosperity          ...  193
Almsgiving  a  Part  of  Christian  Life

and  Worship     ...             ...            ...  193

Steadfastness      ...             m             ...  193

Christian  Joy      ...            m            ...  194

The  Cure  for  Anxiety        ...            ...  195

The  Peace  that  is  Better  than  Intel-
lectual Satisfaction         ...             ...  196

The  Contemplation  of  Goodneaa       ...  196

Christian  Omnipotenes     n.            w.  198

AF^Snpply     ...           «.           ••  196


THE


PULPIT    COMMENTARY,


EDITED  BY  THE


REY.  CANON  H.  D.  M.  SPENCE,  M.A.,

TICAK  AJTO  RURAL  DEAN  OF  ST.   PANCRAS,  AND  EXAMINING  CHAPLAIN  TO  THK  LO«D
BISHOP  OF.  GLOUCESTER  AND  BRISTOL  ;


AND  BY  THE

REV.  JOSEPH    S.  EXELL,  M.A.


COLOSSIANS.

(S^poaition  arits  ^ontiletic0:
By   rev.    G.    G.    PINDLAY,   B.A.,

TUTOR  IN  BIBLICAL  LANGUAGES,   HEADINGLEV  COLLEGE.

j^otnilies  bg  t)arions  !%ntt)ors:

REV.   PROF.  T.  CROSKERY,   D.D.,  REV.   R.   M.   EDGAR,   M.A.,

REV.  W.   F.  ADENEY,  M.A.,  REV.   R.   FINLAYSON,   B.A.,

REV.  U.  R.  THOMAS,  D.D.,  REV.  E.  S.  PROUT    M.A.


FUNK    &   WAGNALLS    COMPANY
New  Yoek  akd  Toronto.


THE  EPISTLE  OF

PAUL  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.

INTRODUCTION.

§  1.     COLOSSJ!  AND   ITS   PeOPLB.

CoLOSSJ!  (or  Colassae)  was  an  inland  city  of  Western  Asia  Minor.  Tt  was
situated  on  tlie  river  Lyons  (modern  Tclioruk-su),  a  southern  affluent  of  the
famous  Mseander,  lying  under  the  frowning  heights  of  Mount  Cadmus,
which  bounded  the  Lycus  valley  on  the  south ;  and  on  the  high-road  from
Miletus  and  Ephesus  to  the  central  highlands  of  the  peninsula,  at  a  point
distant  about  a  hundred  and  twenty  miles  from  the  coast.  Ethnically,  it
belonged  to  south-western  Phrygia,  with  the  borders  of  Lydia  and  Oaria
closely  approaching  it  on  the  west  and  south;  but  politically,  the  district
was  included  in  the  Roman  proconsular  province  of  Asia,  whose  capital  was
Ephesus.

Under  the  Persian  kings,  Colossse  had  been  "  a  populous  city,  prosperous
and  great"  (Xenophon,  'Anabasis,'  i.  2.  6;  Herodotus,  vii.  30);  but  in
later  times  it  was  eclipsed  by  its  more  fortunate  neighbours,  Laodicea  and
Hierapolis,  which  lay  on  opposite  sides  of  the  Lycus  valley,  ten  or  twelve
miles  below  Colossse,  and  distant  some  six  miles  from  each  other.  Laodicea,
whose  name  commemorated  the  rule  of  the  Greco- Syrian  dynasty  in  Asia
Minor,  was  the  chief  city  of  the  immediate  district,  the  Cibyratic  conventus
(SiotKijo-is,  diocese)  or  "jurisdiction,"  one  of  the  departments  or  counties
into  which  the  Roman  province  of  Asia  was  divided  for  administrative
purposes.  Hierapolis,  on  the  other  hand,  was  a  health-resort,  celebrated
for  the  medicinal  qualities  of  its  waters,  which  were  extremely  abundant ;
"full  of  natural  baths"  (Strabo,  xiii.  4,  14).  The  great  prosperity  of  this
region  was  chiefly  due  to  its  wool.  Tho  neighbouring  uplands  afforded
excellent  pasture  for  sheep,  and  the  streams  of  the  Lycus  valley  were
peculiarly  favourable  to  the  dyer's  art.  Both  these  cities  were  actively
engaged  in  the  trade  in  wool  and  dyed  stuffs,  of  which  Colossi  had
formerly  been    a   chief   centre,  giving    its  name  (colossinus')   to  a  valned

O0L0BSIAI7S.  i


1i  INTRODUCTION  TO


purple  dye.  Colossee,  however,  had  already  dwindled  into  a  third-rate
town  (Strabo,  xii.  8.  13 ;  died  a.d.  24),  whether  from  natural  causes,  or,
as  M.  Renan  conjectures,  from  the  conservative  and  Oriental  habits  of  its
people,  who  were  slow  to  adapt  themselves  to  new  conditions.  After  this
time  it  disappears  from  history,  whilst  the  other  cities  held  a  conspicuona
place  both  in  secular  and  Christian  annals.  Even  its  ruins  have  been
discovered  but  lately,  and  with  difficulty.  The  Byzantine  town  of  Chonffi
(modem  Ghonas),  which  took  its  place,  is  situated  three  miles  to  the  south
of  the  river,  at  the  mouth  of  the  pass  leading  through  the  Cadmus  range.

The  early  decay  and  subsequent  obliteration  of  Colossae  are  probably  due
to  the  combined  action  of  the  earthquakes  with  which  this  valley  has  been
frequently  visited,  and  of  the  immense  calcareous  deposits  formed  by  the
streams  on  the  northern  side  of  the  Lycus — a  phenomenon  especially  marked
at  Colossae  (Pliny,  '  Natural  History,'  xxxi.  2.  20) — which,  in  the  course  of
ages,  have  considerably  modified  the  features  of  the  locality.  Colosss9,  if
situated  in  the  plain,  immediately  on  the  river-side,  as  now  appears,  would
be  liable  to  suffer  greater  injury  from  these  causes  than  the  sister  cities.
There  was  a  destructive  earthquake  in  this  region  about  the  very  time  that
St.  Paul  wrote,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Tacitus  and  Eusebius.  Tacitus,
indeed,  gives  its  date  as  A.D.  60  or  61,  and  mentions  only  Laodicea  as  involved
in  the  calamity.  But  Eusebius,  who  says  that  Laodicea,  Hierapolis,  and
Colossee  were  overthrown,  fixes  the  date  of  the  occurrence  some  four  years
later;  and  in  this  instance  he  is  probably  more  correct  (see  Lightfoot,  pp.  38
— 40).  Veiy  possibly  Colossae,  already  decaying  and  enfeebled,  succumbed
to  this  disaster.

The  population  of  this  district  was  of  a  heterogeneous  character.  Its
substratum  was  Phrygian,  marked  by  that  tendency  to  mystical  illusion
and  orgiastic  excitement  which  made  Phrygia  the  home  of  the  frantic
worship  of  Dionysus  and  of  Oybele,  and  which  gave  birth  to  the  Mon-
tanistic  heresy  with  its  strange  ecstasies  and  its  ascetic  rigour.  In  the
cities,  as  throughout  Asia  Minor,  the  Greek  language  and  Greek  manners
prevailed,  and  the  immigrant  Greek  population  had  long  ago  blended  with
the  native  inhabitants  and  leavened  them  with  their  own  superior  culture.
A  large  body  of  Jewish  settlers  had  been  deported  to  this  region  from
Mesopotamia  by  Antiochus  the  Great,  and  the  Jewish  community  in
Laodicea  and  the  neighbourhood  appears  to  have  been  both  numerous  and
wealthy.  If  we  may  judge  from  the  Talmud,  it  was  not  renowned  for
strict  orthodoxy :  "  The  wines  and  the  baths  of  Phrygia  have  separated  the
ten  tribes  from  Israel"  (see  Lightfoot,  p.  22),  M.  Benan  believes  that
there  existed  "  about  the  Cadmus  (sc.  Bastern  :  a  Semitic  word)  an  ancient
Semitic  settlement,"  aud  that  traces  of  its  influence  exist  in  the  remains
of  Colossee ;  and  the  tutelary  Zeus  of  Laodicea  bore  the  epithet  of  Aseis,  a
name  which  seems  to  be  of  Eastern  (probably  Syrian)  origin  (Lightfoot,
pp.  8,  9).  These  are  circumstances  of  some  importance  in  view  of  the
Oriental  affinities  of  the  Colossian  error.


THE   EWSTLE   TO   THE   COLOSSIANS.  Mi


§  2.  St.  Paul's  Connection  with  Colossi.

The  Churches  of  the  Lycas  were  not  founded  by  St.  Paul  himself.  Twice
he  had  traversed  Phrygia — in  his  second  missionary  tour  from  the  Lycao-
nian  cities  through  Galatia  to  Troap  (Acts  xvi.  4 — 8),  and  in  his  third  from
Galatia  to  Ephesus  (Acts  xviii.  23 ;  xix.  1).  Bat  his  direct  route,  on  both
journeys,  would  take  him  through  northern  Phrygia,  to  the  north-east  of  the
Lycus  valley.  The  language  of  ch.  i.  7  and  ii.  1  seems  to  us  positively  to
exclude  the  supposition  that  this  district  had  been  evangelized  by  the  apostle
in  person.  But  during  his  long  residence  at  Ephesus  (a.d.  54  or  65  to  57,
58)  we  are  told  that  "  all  they  which  dwelt  in  Asia  heard  the  word  of  the
Lord,  both  Jews  and  Gi'eeks  "  (Acts  lix.  10).  Epaphras,  a  Colossian  by
birth  (ch.  iv.  12),  had  been  the  principal  means  of  spreading  the  knowledge
of  Christ  in  ColossaB  and  the  neighbouring  cities,  and  had  supei'intended
the  Colossian  Church  since  its  foundation  (ch.  i.  6,  7  ;  iv.  12,  13).  He  had
laboured  from  the  beginning  under  St.  Paul's  direction  (ch.  i.  7,  "  for  us : "
see  Exposition),  and  with  remarkable  zeal  and  success.  The  apostle  has
nothing  but  praise  for  his  labours ;  nothing  but  approval  for  the  doctrine
that  Epaphras  had  taught,  and  the  discipline  that  had  been  established  in  the
Church  at  Colossse  (ch.  i.  5—7,  23  ;  ii.  5—7;  iv.  12, 13).  He  had  evidently
been  acquainted  by  report  with  the  Churches  of  the  Lycus  for  some  time
(ch.  i.  3,  4, 9;  ii.  1),  and  had  been  previously  in  communication  with  Colossae
(ch.  iv.  10).  Now  Epaphras  has  come  to  visit  the  apostle  in  his  captivity,
bringing  a  good  report  of  the  general  condition  of  the  Colossian  Church,  of
its  stability  and  growth  in  grace,  and  assuring  the  apostle  of  its  loyal
affection  for  him  (ch.  i.  8)  ;  but  at  the  same  time  filling  St.  Paul's  mind
with  a  deep  anxiety  (ch.  ii.  1 — i),  which  he  shared  himself  (ch.  iv.  12),  by
his  tidings  of  the  new  and  perilous  doctrine  that  was  gaining  a  footing  in  it.

The  apostle's  friend  Philemon  resided  at  Colossse  (comp.  ch.  iv.  9  with
the  Epistle  to  Philemon),  where  his  house  had  become  an  important  centre
of  Christian  influence  (Philem.  2,  4 — 7).  He  was  another  of  St.  Paul's
"  sons  in  the  gospel  "  (ver.  19),  having  come  under  the  apostle's  influence,
we  may  presume,  when  on  some  visit  with  his  family  to  Ephesus,  the
metropolitan  city  of  the  province.  His  son  Archippus  was  at  present
exercising  some  special  "  ministry  "  in  the  Laodicean  Church,  as  we  gather
from  the  connection  of  vers.  16  and  17  in  ch.  iv.  (comp.  Philem.  2).  The
apostle  had,  by  a  singular  providence,  recently  met  with  Onesimus,  Phile-
mon's runaway  slave,  and  had  been  the  means  of  converting  him  to  the
faith  of  Christ  (Philem.  10,  11).  He  has  persuaded  him  to  return  to  his
master,  and  is  sending  him  back,  "  no  longer  as  a  slave,  but  a  brother
beloved"  (Philem.  16),  in  company  with  Tychicus,  the  bearer  of  the  Colossian
and  Ephesian  letters  (ch.  iv.  7 — 9  ;  Eph.  vi.  21,  22),  with  a  private  note  to
Philemon,  entreating  pardon  for  Onesimus,  and  announcing  his  own  hope
of  being  free  before  long  to  yisit  Colossae  himself  (Philem.  12 — 17,  22).


INTRODUCTION  TO


§  3.  Datb  of  this  Epistlb.

"When  be  wrote  this  letter,  the  apostle  was  a  prisoner  (oh.  iv.  3,  18:
comp.  Eph.  iii.  1,  13 ;  iv.  1 ;  vi.  19,  20  ;  Phil.  i.  12—20;  Philem.  9,  10,  13),
suffering  for  the  cause  of  Gentile  Christianity  (oh.  i.  24 — 27 :  comp.  Eph.
iii.  1 — 6,  13).  We  cannot  donht,  therefore,  that  it  was  written  during  the
long  imprisonment  (a.d.  58  or  59  to  62,  63) — first  in  Csesarea,  then  in  Rome
— which  ensued  on  the  attack  made  on  his  life  in  Jerusalem,  due  to  the
animosity  of  the  "Jews  from  Asia"  (Acts  xxi.  27),  whose  hatred  was
roused  by  the  success  of  his  ministry  among  the  Gentiles.

The  Epistle  to  the  Philippians,  we  know,  was  written  from  Rome  (Phil,
i.  13  ;  iv.  22)  ;  and  it  has  been  generally  assumed,  according  to  the  subscrip-
tion of  the  Received  Text,  that  the  other  three  letters  of  this  period  date
likewise  from  the  same  city.  Meyer,  Reuss,  and  others  have,  however,  con-
tended for  Csesarea  as  their  birthplace,  but  on  insufficient  grounds.  Rome
was  the  most  likely  place  in  the  world  for  the  runaway  Onesimus  to  seek
to  hide  in.  There,  too,  St.  Paul  was  allowed,  as  a  prisoner,  considerable
freedom;  and  communication  with  distant  Churches  was  probably  easier
and  less  jealously  guarded  than  at  Csesarea  (Acts  xxviii.  30, 31 :  comp.  xxiv.
23  R.V.,  26  ;  and  see  note  on  ch.  i.  6,  "in  all  the  world  ").  And,  what  is
still  more  decisive,  the  apostle's  own  thoughts  and  the  guiding  hand  of
Providence  had  hitherto  been  pointing  continually  to  Mome  as  the  imme-
diate goal  of  his  mission  (Acts  xix.  21 ;  xxiii.  11 ;  Rom.  xv.  23 — 29).
TUl  he  had  "  seen  Rome,"  he  would  scarcely  think  of  returning  to  Asia
(Philem.  22).  And  while  at  Caesarea  he  had  no  prospect  of  release,  we
know  that  in  Rome  he  cherished  the  hope  of  seeing  his  Macedonian  friends
again  (Phil.  i.  27 ;  ii.  23,  24)  ;  and  from  Macedonia  it  is  but  another  step
to  Asia  Minor.  Luke  and  Aristarchns,  who  were  with  the  apostle  when
he  wrote  these  letters  (ch.  iv.  10,  14 ;  Philem.  24),  were  the  companions
of  his  voyage  to  Rome  (Acts  xxvii.  2).  Dating  the  Epistle  from  St.  Paul's
imprisonment  at  Rome,  during  the  years  61  to  63  a.d. — and  a  later  rather
than  an  earlier  point  in  this  period  is  more  probable — we  allow  to  the
Church  at  Colossee  a  growth  of  five  or  six  years,  a  time  not  too  long  to
account  for  the  progress  and  development  of  Christian  life  in  its  members
which  the  tenor  of  the  letter  implies  (ch.  i.  4 — 6,  9,  23 ;  ii.  5 — 7).

It  is  quite  evident  that  the  Epistle  to  Philemon  and  that  to  the  Bphesians
were  written  contemporaneously  with  this.  The  relation  between  Ephesiana
and  Oolossians  is  closer  than  that  which  exists  between  any  other  of  St.
Paul's  writings.  They  are  twins,  the  offspring  of  one  birth  in  the  writer's
mind.  Their  connection  we  shall  discuss  more  fuUy  afterwards.  The
Epistle  to  the  Philippians  stands  distinctly  apart  from  these  Epistles,  both
in  its  contents  and  style,  though,  at  the  same  time,  it  has  unmistakable
affinities  with   them.     It  matters  little  whether  we  suppose  it  to  have


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


preceded  or  followed  them  in  its  composition.  Bishop  Lightfoot  ably
contends,  on  internal  grounds,  for  its  precedence ;  bnt  the  language  of  Phil,
ii.  6 — 11  seems  to  indicate  that  the  apostle's  teaching  had  already  reached
the  Christological  stage  of  its  progress  signalized  by  the  Colossian  Epistle,
Indeed,  this  passage  is  the  climax  of  St.  Paul's  Christologj.


§  4.  Thb  Oolossun  Hebest.

There  was  no  intrinsic  importance  attaching  to  Oolossse  itself  or  arising
out  of  its  relation  to  the  future  progress  of  the  gospel,  as  in  the  case  of
Corinth  or  Rome  ;  nor  had  the  Colossian  Church  any  such  peculiar  claims
on  the  apostle  as  he  recognizes  in  writing  to  the  Philippians  or  the
Galatiftns.  It  is  the  more  evident  that  the  emergency  which  called  forth
this  Epistle,  and  the  questions  that  had  arisen  at  Colossse,  were  in  his  view
of  the  most  grave  and  ominous  character.  For  in  this  remote  country  town
had  appeared  the  first  symptoms  of  a  heretical  movement,  so  well  known  j
under  its  later  name  of  Gnosticism,  whose  outbreak  in  this  region  St.  Paul
had  already  predicted  (Acts  xx.  29,  30),  and  which  was  pregnant  with
deadly  mischief  to  the  Church  of  Christ.  '

The  exact  nature  and  origin  of  what  is  called  "  the  Colossian  heresy"  it
is  difficult  to  ascertain;  and  widely  divergent  views  are  still  prevalent
respecting  it.  Our  subsequent  examination  of  the  Epistle  will  show  (1)  that
this  doctrine  pretended  to  a  philosophical  character  (ch.  ii.  8 :  comp.  vera.
3,  -4)  ;  (2)  that  its  advocates  were,  in  some  sense,  Judaists  (ch.  ii.  11,  14,
16,  17)  ;  (3)  that  they  practised  the  worship  of  angels,  whose  powers  they
exaggerated  (cb.  ii.  10,  15,  18,  19 ;  i.  16) ;  (4)  that  they  inculcated  ascetic
rules,  going  beyond  the  Mosaic  Law,  and  inspired  by  antipathy  to  the  bodily
life  (ch.  ii.  20 — 23);  (6)  that  their  whole  system  tended  to  limit  the  greatness
and  tlw  authority  of  Christ  and  the  sufficiency  of  his  redemption  (ch.  ii.  8 — 10,
17, 19;  i.  14—20) ;  and  (6)  that  they  still  assumed  the  character  of  Christian
teachers,  and  professed  to  be  inviting  Christians  to  a  higher  and  more  secure
spiritual  life  (ch.  i.  23,  28;  ii.  3—10,  16—18,  23;  iii.  1,  14,  15).  The
Colossian  erroristd,  then,  were  philosophical,  Judaizing,  visionary,  ascetic
Christians.

Now,  it  is  necessary  to  ask  whether  there  was  anything  in  the  conditions
of  the  time,  and  in  the  tendencies  of  religious  thought  in  the  first  century,
to  account  for  so  remarkable  a  combination  as  this.  The  question,  as
it  seems  to  us,  admits  of  a  tolerably  sufficient  answer.  For  the  last  two
hundred  years  Alexandria,  the  most  important  city  of  the  Dispersion,  had
been  the  centre  of  an  intellectual  movement  within  Judaism  itself  which,
while  carefully  maintaining  the  outward  framework  of  the  Mosaic  economy,
had  profoundly  modified  its  inner  character,  under  the  combined  influence
of  Greek  philosophy  and  of  Oriental  mysticism.  The  result  of  this  process
ie  presented  to  us  in  the  extensive  works  of  Philo,  a  contemporary  of  Jesua


INTRODUCTION  TO


and  of  Pan!,  whose  testimony  in  regard  to  the  direction  of  Hellehistio
thought  at  this  period  is  the  more  valuable  as  it  is  evident  that  he  was  not
a  writer  of  independent  or  original  genius,  but  rather  the  eloquent  exponent
of  the  long-established  and  influential  school  to  which  he  belonged.  Among
the  first  principles  of  his  teaching  are  those  which  have  always  been  the
commonplaces  of  Eastern  theosophy,  whether  Indian,  Persian,  or  Egyptian
— the  doctrines  of  the  intrinsic  evil  of  matter  and  of  the  absolute  separation
between  the  Godhead  and  the  created  world.  His  Judaism  supplied  the
angelg,  powers,  words  (and  especially  the  word),  who  were  the  necessary
intermediaries  between  God  and  the  creature ;  and  furnished  also,  with
certain  modifications  and  refinements,  the  ceremonial  and  ritual  cultus  by
which,  under  angelic  direction,  the  spiritual  element  in  man  was  to  raise
itself  above  the  gross  obstructions  of  the  material,  and  to  regain  that
rational  vision  of  God  from  which  it  had  fallen.  Greek  philosophy  sup-
plied the  terminology  and  the  method  of  Philo's  system,  which  resolved
religion  into  a  mystical  and  contemplative  knowledge  of  God  belonging  to
the  higher  reason,  and  identified  the  spiritual  man  with  the  philosopher.
This  teaching  took  the  form,  for  the  most  part,  of  elaborate  expositions
of  the  Books  of  the  Law,  allegory  being  the  all-powerful  instrument  by
which  every  historical  incident  and  legal  injunction  was  spiritualized  and
made  to  prove  or  to  illustrate  the  tenets  of  the  Alexandrine  philosophy.
Prevalent  and  traditional  as  this  system  was  with  the  Egyptian  Jews  in
the  home  of  the  Septuagint,  its  principles  were  widely  diffused  amongst
Hellenistic  Jews  and  Greek  proselytes  in  other  quarters.  Especially  in
Western  Asia  Minor,  which  was  in  active  intercourse  with  Alexandria  and
presented  similar  mental  and  social  conditions,  we  may  presume  that
Philonian  Gnosticism  was  a  doctrine  already  current  in  educated  Jewish
circles.

The  Essenism  of  Palestine,  so  well  known  through  Josephus  ('Jewish
War,'  ii.  8)  and  sympathetically  described  by  Philo  ('  Quod  Omnis  probus
Liber,'  §§  12,  13),  is  a  striking  proof  of  the  extent  to  which  foreign  theo-
Bophic  and  ascetic  elements  had  penetrated  Judaism.  In  spite  of  the
"  hedge  set  about  the  Law  "  by  the  watchful  rabbis,  a  subtle  mysticism
had  found  its  way  into  the  heart  of  Palestine,  filtering  through  either
from  Alexandria  and  the  West  or  from  Persia  and  the  East.  It  may  be
doubted,  however,  whether  the  local  and  isolated  Essenic  fraternities  had
any  direct  connection  with  the  rise  of  the  Colossian  heresy.  It  was  the
conversion  of  the  Essenes  after  the  fall  of  Jerusalem  that  originated  in
Ebionism,  a  properly  Essenic  Christianity  (A.  Ritsehl,  'Die  Entstehung
d.  Altkatholischen  Kirche,'  ss.  178 — 248).  Although  the  Essenes,  like  the
Pharisees,  are  called  "  philosophers  "  by  Josephus  writing  for  Greek  readers,
it  does  not  appear  that  they  claimed  any  such  title  for  themselves,  or  that
their  system  was  of  a  rationalistic  character  (see  Philo,  as  referred  to
above).  But  St.  Paul  puts  the  philosophical  pretensions  of  the  Colossian
errorist   in  the  forefront  of  his  denunciations   (ch.  ii.  4,  8).     On  "  the


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  ▼«

Bssenes,"  see  Lightfoot's  dissertation  ('Commentary,'  pp.  349 — 419;  also
pp.  82— 95).»

It  is  important  to  note  ttat  in  the  Greek  world  there  had  been  going
on  for  some  time  an  extensive  revival  of  the  Orphic  and  Pythagorean  mystic
doctrines,  ■which  might  be  described  as  a  pagan  Essenism.  The  marvellous
career  of  Apollonins  of  Tyana — philosopher,  ascetic,  mystic,  and  miracle-
worker — shows  how  well  prepared  was  the  soil  of  Asia  Minor  in  the  first
century  for  the  growth  of  all  kinds  of  magical  and  Gnosticizing  theosophy,
no  matter  how  crude  in  construction  or  monstrous  in  pretensions.

The  time  was  ripe,  surely,  for  the  birth  of  Gnosticism  such  as  we  find
it,  in  its  infant  form,  in  this  Epistle.  Under  all  the  circumstances,  it  would
have  been  surprising  if  a  theosophy  of  this  type  had  not,  during  the  apostle's
lifetime,  made  its  appearance  within  the  Christian  Church  at  some  point  or
other  in  that  strange  border-land  between  East  and  West,  where  his  mission
had  been  attended  with  such  wonderful  success.

We  have  evidence  of  a  connection  between  Pauline  Christianity  and
Alexandrine  Judaism  in  the  person  of  Apollos  (Acts  xviii.  24 — six.  1).
The  cultured  Greek  eloquence  which,  combined  with  his  scriptural  learning,
made  this  teacher  so  acceptable  at  Ephesus  and  Corinth  (1  Cor.  i.  12 ;  iii.
4 — 6),  he  owed,  doubtless,  to  the  more  liberal  and  eclectic  training  of  the
Jewish  schools  of  Alexandria.  And  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  whoever
was  its  author,  shows  that  there  were  many  points  of  contact  between
Christian  theology  and  the  religious  philosophy  of  Philo,  and  that  the
gospel,  as  Paul  taught  it,  was  quite  capable  of  absorbing  and  assimilating
the  best  fruits  of  Alexandrine  learning.  Now,  let  us  suppose  that  some
philosophic  and  eloquent  Jew,  imbued  like  Apollos  with  the  Alexandrine
culture,  and  a  man  of  an  ascetic  and  ambitious  disposition,  had  come  under
the  influence  of  Christian  teaching  in  Asia  Minor;  but  that,  unlike  Apollos,
subordinating  the  gospel  to  his  philosophy,  he  had  conceived  the  idea
of  amalgamating  the  new  faith  with  his  Alexandrine  intellectual  system,
modified  to  some  extent  under  local  influences  j  also  that  he  pretended,
as  might  be  expected  with  such  antecedents,  in  carrying  out  this  plan,  to
be  extending  and  completing  St.  Paul's  own  doctrine,  and  offering  a  more
advanced  wisdom,  the  true  "mystery  of  God,"  to  the  more  cultivated  and
spiritual  members  of  the  Church.  Attempts  of  this  kind  must  have  taken
place  again  and  again  in  individual  instances,  in  that  syncretistic  age.  The
cases  of  Simon  Magus,  and  of  Cerinthus  at  a  later  time,  are  not  dissimilar.
But  this  supposition,  we  submit,  is  all  that  is  needed  to  explain  the  rise  of
"The  Colossian  heresy."  The  problem  is  scarcely,  as  Dr.  S.  Davidson
puts  it  ('Introduction  to  Study  of  New  Testament,'  vol.  ii.  p.  179),  to
account  for  the  existence  of  "  a  Gnostic  sect "  in   St.  Paul's  time.     The

'  The  existence  of  the  •  Therapeutse,'  as  a  Jewish  monastic  sect,  is  very  doubtful.
Lucius,  in  his  'Die  Therapeuten  n.  ihre  Stelluug  in  d.  Geschichte  d.  Ascese'  (Strassburg,
1879),  has  agnin,  and  more  successfully,  called  in  question  the  authenticity  of  the  tieatim
'De  Vita  Contemplativa,'  attributed  to  Fhilo.


vlil  INTRODUCTION  TO


appearance  of  individual  teaohera  and  of  sporadic  tendencies  always  pre-
cedes the  formation  of  a  distinct  sect.  So  far  as  the  indications  of  the
Epistle  itself  are  concerned,  the  heresy  may  have  been  confined  to  a  single
person,  in  this  decaying  and  unimportant  town  of  Colossse.  But,  the
heresiarch  was  evidently  a  teacher  of  eloquence  and  influence  (ch.  ii.  4,
8,  23)  ;  and  his  doctrine,  though  it  had  not  become  prevalent  even  at
Colossas  (ch.  ii.  5),  possessed  a  singular  fascination.  The  apostle  had  good
reason  to  "doubt  whereunto  this  would  grow."  Where  the  material  lies
ready  for  a  conflagration,  the  first  spark  may  be  fatal.  St.  Paul  had
marked  with  a  prescient  eye  the  working  of  men's  minds  around  him
during  his  long  sojourn  at  Ephesus,  and  he  had  warned  the  Church  there
of  an  impending  struggle  (Acts  xx.  29,  30).  Through  his  intimacy  with
Apollos  he  had,  presumably,  become  well  acquainted,  even  if  he  were  not
so  before,  with  the  principles  of  Alexandrine  Judaism.  He  had  had  occasion
to  censure  at  Corinth  the  Greek  tendency  to  overvalue  eloquence,  and  to
welcome  philosophic  and  rationalizing  views  of  Christian  truth  (1  Cor.  i.  17
— ii.  16 ;  XV.  12).  In  writing  to  Rome  he  had  also  had  to  deal  with  a  class
of  "  weak  brethren,"  who  had  adopted  mistaken  ascetic  rules  (Rom.  xIt.).
The  apostle  cannot,  therefore,  have  been  altogether  taken  by  surprise  when
Epaphras  arrived,  in  preplexity  and  alarm,  to  seek  his  help  against  the
strange  form  of  doctrine  that  had  appeared  in  Colossae.

It  is  only  by  a  forced  and  fanciful  exegesis  that  Baur  and  his  followers
have  found  traces  in  the  Epistle  of  a  reference  to  the  developed  Gnosticism
of  the  second  century.  Had  the  Epistle  originated  then,  such  traces  must
have  been  much  more  distinct  than  even  these  critics  pretend.  Neither  this
nor  the  Ephesian  letter  knows  anything  of  the  CBons,  the  personified  Wisdom
and  Knowledge,  the  Demiurge,  the  syzygies  and  emanations  oi  the  Valentinians
and  Marcionites.  And  the  ascetic  notions  of  the  later  Ebionites  were  common
to  them  with  the  Essenes  and  with  Philo  in  the  first  century.  The  Colossian
heresy  represents  the  earliest  and  crudest  stage  of  the  movement  which
culminated  in  the  full-blown  Gnosticism  of  the  second  century,  with  its
endless  ramifications  and  its  imposing  array  of  technical  terms.  The
Epistle  to  the  Colossians,  the  Pastoral  Epistles,  the  Apocalypse,  and  the
Epistles  of  St.  John,  indicate  in  natural  order  the  rise  and  progress  during
the  apostolic  age  of  the  incipient  heretical  tendencies  which  are  the
necessary  presupposition  of  the  widely  spread  and  highly  organized  Gnostic
system  delineated  by  the  apologists  of  the  following  centuries.  Pfleiderer
defines  with  delicate  precision  the  nature  of  the  Colossian  heresy  when  he
calls  it  "  an  advance  to  a  speculative  and  ascetic  refinement  of  Judaism,
which  was  amalgamated  with  Christianity,  anil  represented  as  the  complete
fulfilment  of  it."  But  he  asserts  too  much  when  he  says,  "  It  is  certain
that  a  false  doctrine  of  this  kind  could  not  have  existed  in  the  time  of  th«
apostle  "  ('  Paulinism,'  English  trans.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  95,  98).


THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANS.


§  5.  Chaeacter  of  the  Bpistl«.

The  novel  character  of  the  Oolossian  heresy  accounta  in  great  part  for  the
numher  of  new  and  pecaliar  words,  occnrring  especially  in  the  polemic
part  of  the  Epistle.'  The  obscure  and  seemingly  embarrassed  style  of  some
passages  in  the  second  chapter,  with  the  absence  of  Old  Testament  citations,
and  the  rarity  of  St.  Paul's  favourite  logical  formulae  and  conjunctive  par-
ticles, may  be  due  to  the  same  cause.  However  thoroughly  master  of  his
position,  we  can  hardly  expect  the  apostle  to  move  on  this  new  ground  with
quite  the  same  ease  and  freedom  with  which  he  combats  his  Pharisaic
opponents  in  the  Galafcian  and  Roman  Epistles,  with  the  weapons  sharpened
in  the  schools  of  rabbinical  dialectic.  He  was  himself  by  training  a  rabbi,
and  not  a  philosopher.  Moreover,  the  system  he  is  dealing  with  was  but
loosely  coherent,  being  speculative  rather  than  argumentative  in  method,
and  not  based,  like  the  legalistic  Judaism  of  Galatia,  on  scriptural  authority.
And  the  false  teachers  (or  teacher)  of  Colossse  did  not,  we  should  gather,
assail  the  apostle's  personal  authority ;  but  may  have  rather  claimed,  in  com-
petition with  Bpaphras,  to  be  the  true  exponents  and  completers  of  Pauline
doctrine.  Hence  the  apostle  asserts  and  denounces,  and  no  longer  argues
and  appeals  as  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Galatians.  The  Divine  glory  and
sufficiency  of  Christ  he  sees  to  be  at  stake  ;  and  he  applies  the  whole  force
of  his  mind  and  the  weight  of  his  recognized  apostleship  to  the  vindica-
tion of  that  principle  in  its  commanding  grandeur  and  simplicity  and  in
its  instant  appeal  to  the  loyalty  of  the  Christian  heart.  From  this  lofty
height  he  rejects  and  casts  down,  now  on  this  side  and  now  on  that,  the
speculations  and  pretensions  which  so  insidiously  trenched  upon  the  sove-
reign completeness  of  Christ,  and  endangered  the  citadel  of  the  Church's
faith.

The  doctrines  of  salvation  retreat  comparatively  into  the  background
here  ;  but  they  are  by  no  means  absent,  and  are  expressed  in  a  thoroughly
Pauline  manner,  and  sometimes  in  language  that  puts  them  in  a  new
and  striking  light  (ch.  i.  12—14,  21—23  ;  ii.  11—14  ;  iii.  12—15).  But  the
doctrine  of  the  person  of  Christ  is  "  all  and  in  all "  in  this  Epistle.  Every
part  of  the  letter  directly  or  indirectly  pays  its  tribute  to  this  theme,  and
"  acknowledges  "  him  "to  be  the  Lord."  This  sublime  and  all-pervading
thought  gives  a  unity  to  the  Epistle  which  defies  every  attempt  at  dis-
integration,   and   suffuses   it  with   a  sustained   loftiness    and    devotional

'  Of  the  thirty-four  Pauline  hapax  legomena  of  the  Epistle,  the  Becond  chapter  contaioB
half,  and  amongst  them  such  words  as  "  persuasiveness-of-speeoh,"  "  making-(one)-a-8poil,"
•  philosophy,"  "  Godhead,"  "bodily,"  "new-moon,"  "  Investigating "  (or  " intruding-into,"
l/iPaTeiup),  "  will-worsljip  "  (or,  "  devotion-to-worship  "),  "  unsparingness,"  "  surfeiting,"
whose  use  is  obviously  due  to  controversial  exigency.  In  other  instances,  as  Alford  well
remarks  (in  his  '  Intioduction '  to  this  Epistle,  §  iv.  8),  "  It  is  the  irenvdrris  of  controversial
tone,  even  more  than  the  necessity  of  the  subject  handled,  which  catees  our  Epistle  to
kbonnd  so  much  with  peculiar  words  and  phrases."


INTRODUCTION  TO


intensity  of  feeling  peculiar  in  its  kind  to  St.  Panl.  "  Non  est  cnjnSTis
hominiB  Paulinum  pectus  effingere"  (Erasmus).

But  the  apostle's  Christology  here  is  no  more  than  the  complete  and
deliberate  statement  of  what  is  virtually  contained,  by  way  of  implication
and  incidental  reference,  in  the  earlier  Epistles.  It  is  the  necessary  dia-
lectic deyelopment  of  the  Christology  of  Romans  and  Corinthians  brought
into  conflict  with  Gnosticizing  theosophy.  "  The  most  advanced  formulas
that  we  shall  find  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Colossians,"  M.  Eenan  justly  says,
"  exist  already  in  germ  in  the  older  Epistles "  ('  St.  Paul,'  p.  275) ;  see
Rom.  i.  4;  ix.5;  xiv.  9  ;  1  Cor.  ii.  8  ;  iii.  22,  23  ;  viii.  6;  xv.  24— 28;
2  Cor.  iv.  4 — 6 ;  v.  15, 19 ;  viii.  9 ;  Gal.  iv.  4.  That  sovereignty  of  Christ
which  the  apostle  had  previously  asserted  as  extending  over  the  in-
dividual life  and  the  relations  of  mankind  to  God,  he  now  victoriously
carries  forward  into  the  transcendental  sphere,  into  the  world  of  angels
and  the  constitution  of  the  created  universe,  the  ground  from,  which  it  was
being  assailed  by  the  new  philosophic  teachers.  He  is  thus  led  to  give  his
teaching  respecting  the  person  of  Christ  its  ideal  completion.  He  sets
forth  the  unity  of  the  earthly  and  the  heavenly,  the  moral  and  the  natural,
the  Church  and  the  universe,  in  "  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified."  "  All
things,"  he  declares,  "  consist  in  Christ :  through  him  were  all  things  recon-
ciled unto  him  "  (compare  introductory  note  to  Sect.  II.  in  the  Exposition).

From  the  nature  of  its  subject  it  arises  that,  while  the  Epistle  to  the
Romans,  for  example,  is  predominantly  psychological  and  historical  in  its
treatment,  this  Epistle  is  metaphysical  and  transcendental.  The  logic  of  the
former  is  mainly  inductive,  of  the  latter  deductive.

It  is  due,  partly  perhaps  to  the  requirements  of  the  more  advanced
Christian  life  of  the  Church,  but  chiefly  to  the  ascetic  and  moralizing
character  of  early  Gnosticism,  that  the  moral  teaching  of  Colossians  and
Ephesians  is  more  full  and  systematic  than  that  of  St.  Paul's  earlier  Epistles.
The  sacredness  oi  family  obligations  and  their  relation  to  Christian  doctrine
now  come  into  prominence  in  the  apostle's  teaching,  in  opposition  to  the
universal  tendency  of  mysticism  and  asceticism  to  disparage  and  undermine
the  natural  order  of  life.  In  these  respects  the  letters  to  the  Asiatic
Churches  constitute  a  middle  term  between  the  four  great,  specifically
evangelical  Epistles,  and  the  Pastoral  Epistles  with  their  concern  about
"  good  works."  Necessarily,  as  time  went  on  and  the  Churches  grew  out  of
their  infancy,  and  as  new  dangers  assailed  them,  St,  Paul  became  more  of  a
"  pastor  and  teacher,"  and  less  predominantly  an  "  evangelist."

In  this  Epistle,  as  still  more  markedly  in  Ephesians,  and  to  a  less  degree
in  Philippians,  we  find  a  cumulative  fulness  and  roundness  of  expression,
a  fondness  for  compound  terms  and  phrases,  and  a  habit  of  extending  sen-
tences indefinitely  by  participial  and  relative  clauses,  that  do  not  appear,
at  any  rate  to  the  same  extent,  in  the  apostle's  former  writings.  And  we
miss  something  of  the  glow  and  vehemence,  "  the  powerful  step  and
dancing  spring  "  (Ewald)   of  his  earlier  style.      But  we  must  remember


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


that  the  writer  is  now  "  such  a  one  as  Paul  the  aged "  (Philem.  9),  worn
and  broken  by  hardship  and  imprisonment.  These  letters  belong  to  the
mellow  afternoon  rather  than  to  the  heyday  of  the  apostle's  vigonr.  The
difierence  is  not  greater  than  often  appears  in  the  same  writer  at  different
periods  and  under  a  change  of  circumstances.  There  is  nothing  stereotyped
about  St.  Paul.

§  6.   CotOSSIANS   AlTD  EPHESUNS.

With  the  doctrine  of  the  person  of  Christ,  that  of  tlie  Church  advances  to
its  completion.  For  it  is  "  his  body,  the  fulness  of  him  that  filleth  all  in
all"  (Eph.  i.  23).  The  Church  is  the  recipient  of  his  fulness,  its  organic
expression  and  embodiment.  The  more  complete  and  all-embracing  that
"  fulness  of  God "  in  Christ  is  seen  to  be,  the  grander  becomes  our  con-
ception of  the  Church  and  her  destiny,  and  of  the  subordination  under  which,
in  God's  counsels,  all  other  objects  and  interests  are  placed  to  her  perfec-
tion ;  the  more  sacred  and  essential  her  unity  becomes,  in  our  view,  as  the
counterpart  of  the  oneness  in  which  "all  things"  are  "summed. up  in
Christ "  (Eph.  i.  10).  These  thoughts,  however,  the  apostle  contents  himself
with  indicating  here  (ch.  i.  18 ;  ii.  19 ;  iii.  11,  15)  ;  he  reserves  their  full
expansion  and  application  for  the  Ephesian  letter.  Prom  this  point  of
view,  the  general  relation  of  the  two  Epistles  becomes  sufficiently  clear.

But  while  these  Epistles  are  so  intimately  connected  in  thought  and  in
expression,  and  in  a  number  of  passages  are  not  only  parallel  but  almost
identical  in  content,  when  more  closely  examined  they  betray  a  striking
difference  of  tone  and  style.  Not  a  few  critics  have,  on  this  account,
assuraed  a  different  authorship.  But  the  difference  is,  in  reality,  one  of
mood  and  attitude  in  the  same  mind — a  contrast  between  two  opposite  states
of  mind,  such  as  frequently  alternate  in  intense  and  mobile  natures  like  St.
Paul's.  Our  Epistle  is  the  expression  of  a  mind  anxious  and  perturbed,
struggling  with  great  spiritual  difficulties  of  a  profound  and  perplexing
character,  and  in  regard  to  which  the  writer  is  at  a  greater  disadvantage,
as  they  have  come  upon  a  Church  at  a  distance  and  comparatively
unknown  to  him  (ch.  i.  28 — ii.  3).  The  Ephesian  letter  breathes  the  spirit  of
rest  that  follows  conflict ;  it  is  the  most  tranquil  and  meditative,  the  most
calmly  expansive  and  John-like  of  St.  Paul's  Epistles;  and  only  here  and
there  (Eph.  iv.  14 ;  vi.  10 — 20)  does  it  remind  us  of  the  struggle  in  which
his  mind  has  been  engaged,  and  which  he  sees  to  be  awaiting  the  Church
in  the  future.  The  first  is  like  the  mountain  stream  cleaving  its  way
with  swift  passage,  by  deep  ravines  and  sudden,  broken  turnings,  through
eome  barrier  thrown  across  its  path.  The  second  is  the  calm  and  far-
ipreading  lake  in  which  its  chafed  waters  find  rest,  mirroring  in  their  clear
iepths  the  eternal  heavens  above.


INTRODUCTION  TO


§    7.    COLOSSUNS  AND   OTHEE  NeW   TESTAMENT  WeITINOB.

This  Epistle  is  closely  allied  to  tliat  to  the  Hebrews.  Both  have  the
Person  and  offices  of  Christ,  with  his  relation  to  the  angels,  for  their  leading
theme.  The  latter  treatise  furnishes,  in  several  passages,  the  earliest  and
best  commentary  on  the  Christology  and  angelology  of  onr  Epistle  (see  notes
on  ch.  i.  15,  18;  ii.  9,  10,  15).  This,  however,  is  the  Epistle  of  the  lordship
of  Christ ;  that,  of  his  priesthood.  This  is  concerned  mainly  with  the  pro-
sent,  with  the  relations  of  Christ  as  Redeemer- King  to  the  existing  Church,
and  to  the  natural  nniverse ;  that  is  a  review  of  the  past,  and  beholds  in
Christ  the  fulfilment  of  the  spiritual  needs  and  anticipations  of  the  ancient
covenant.  In  ch.  iii.  17,  indeed,  the  apostle  gives  a  passing  glance  in  the
direction  followed  by  the  other  Epistle,  and  furnishes  a  pregnant  hint  of
which  a  great  part  of  its  argument  may  be  viewed  as  the  development.

The  doctrine  of  the  Person  of  Christ  also  brings  this  (and  the  Ephesi^ns)
letter  into  closer  and  more  sympathetic  connection  than  any  other  of  St.
Paul's  Epistles  with  the  writings  of  St.  John.  Addressing  himself  to  "  the
seven  Churches  -which  are  in  Asia  "  (including  Laodicea),  St.  John  cannot
forget  that  they  know  "  Jesus  Christ "  as  "  the  Firstborn  of  the  dead,"  who
"  loosed  us  from  our  sins,"  and  as  "the  Beginning  of  the  creation  of  God  "
(Rev.  i.  5,  R.V.;  iii.  14:  comp.  ch.  i.  14—18).  "  The  Word  of  God"  of
the  Apocalypse,  to  the  majesty  of  whose  Person  all  nafure  pays  its  tribute,
who  "  sits  with  the  Father  on  his  throne,"  and  as  "  Prince  of  the  kings  of
the  earth,"  "  comes  forth  conquering  and  to  conquer,"  is  "  Christ  Jesus  the
Lord,"  whom  the  Asiatic  Churches  had  "  received  "  through  St.  Paul,  is  the
"  Image  of  God,"  who  intended  to  be  "  in  all  things  pre-eminent "  (Rev.  i.  5,
13—18  ;  iii.  21 ;  vi.  2 ;  xis.  11—16  :  comp.  ch.  i.  15—18  ;  ii.  7,  10 ;  iii.  1).
No  passage  of  St.  Paul's  approaches  so  nearly  the  teaching  of  St.  John's
great  Epistle  as  ch.  i.  12,  13,  where  "the  inheritance  in  the  light,"  "the
dominion  of  the  darkness,"  and  the  "  translation  "  by  "  the  Father  "  into
"  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  his  love,"  appear  in  a  combination  intrinsically
Pauline,  and  yet  that  sounds  like  an  utterance  of  St.  John's  before  the  time.
Finally,  it  was  reserved  for  "  the  beloved  disciple  "  to  pronounce  that  title
of  Christ  which  seems  trembling  on  our  apostle's  lips  in  ch.  i.  15 — 18 ;  and
yet  which  he  forbears  to  use  (Was  it  because  of  the  abuse  of  the  term  Logos
in  the  Philonian  philosophy,  which  confounded  the  werds  with  the  angels  of
QroA  in  a  very  mystifying  fashion  ?).  St.  John  has  brought  all  the  earlier
Christological  teaching  to  a  focus,  and  given  it  a  completed  form  in  his
doctrine  of  the  Incarnate  Word,  which  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  his  Gospel,
and  indeed  of  the  New  Testament  itself.

The  First  Epistle  of  Peter  appears  to  echo,  again  and  again,  the  language
and  ideas  of  this  Epistle  (comp.  e.g.  1  Pet.  i.  4  with  ch.  i.  6 ;  i.  7,  13,  14
with  ch.  iii.  4—7  ;  i.  20,  21  with  ch.  i.  26,  27  ;  iii.  15,  R.V.,  with  ch.  ii.  6  and
iv«  6 ;  v>  4  with  ch.  iii.  4).     It  contains  reminiscences,  still  more  uumistak-


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  iHi

able,  of  the  Bpliesian  and  Roman  Epistles,  and  of  St.  Panl's  earlier  ■writings
generally ;  but  not,  as  we  think,  of  the  Pastoral  Epistles,  nor  of  Philippians-
This  dependence  of  1  Peter  on  the  Pauline  Epistles  presents  a  curiona  and
interesting  problem.  The  key  to  its  solution  may  probably  be  fonnd,  in
part,  in  the  reference  of  ch.  iv.  10  (see  note  in  loo.}  to  Mark,  who  was  present
with  St.  Paul  when  he  wrote  to  the  Asiatic  Churches,  and  was  at  that  time
contemplating  a  journey  to  the  East;  and  who  is  found  again  at  Babjlon
with  St.  Peter,  when,  at  a  date  probably  but  little  later,  he  is  inditing  his
general  Epistle  addressed  to  the  same  quarter.

The  links  which  connect  this  Epistle  with  the  other  letters  of  St,  Paul
are  too  numerous  and  varied  to  be  here  set  forth  in  detail.  They  pervade
the  entire  texture  of  the  Epistle,  and  extend  not  only  to  the  general  corre-
spondence of  thought  and  manner,  which  is  apparent  on  the  surface,  but  also
to  those  finer  idiosyncrasies  of  sentiment  and  nuances  of  style  which  infallibly
betray  the  author,  whatever  variety  of  subject-matter,  and  of  logical  method
and  phraseology,  his  writings  may  present.  This  Epistle  is  linked  to  the
rest  by  a  network  of  coincidences  of  this  nature,  which  embraces  every  one
of  the  canonical  Pauline  Epistles,  saving  only  that  to  the  Hebrews.  It  has
been  one  object  of  this  Exposition  to  exhibit  these  correspondences  as  fully
as  possible.  The  student  who  will  take  any  single  section  of  this  Epistle,
and  work  out  its  lines  of  connection  with  the  other  Epistles,  will  gain  au
impression  of  its  genuineness,  and  of  the  sure  and  solid  way  in  which  it  is
braced  into  the  fabric  of  Pauline  teaching  and  theology,  snch  as  can  scarcely
otherwise  be  obtained.


§  8.   AUTHENTICITT  OF  THE  BPISTLB.

It  is  the  less  necessary  to  defend  the  authenticity  of  this  Epistle,  assailed
first  by  Mayerhoff  (1838)  and  then  more  dangerously  by  Baur,  since  Holtz-
manu  and  Pfleiderer,  the  ablest  representatives  of  the  school  of  Baur  who
nave  dealt  with  the  subject,  acknowledge  that  "  there  is  so  much  that  is
genuinely  Pauline  in  it,  that  it  is  almost  impossible  to  regard  the  whole
of  the  Epistle  as  a  later  production."  Its  partial  authenticity  being
allowed,  the  course  of  the  Exposition  will  show  that  the  Epistle  is  thoroughly
consecutive,  and  is  entirely  a  unity  from  beginning  to  end.  Critics  so  free
from  orthodox  predilections  and  of  such  difEerent  schools  as  De  Wette,
Renan,  and  Ewald,  acknowledge  that  it  bears  the  stamp  of  Paul  throughout.
Holtzmann  has  attempted,  in  his  '  Kritik  der  Epheser-  u.  Kolosserbriefe '
(Leipzig,  1872),  to  recover  the  original  Pauline  nucleus  by  a  learned  and
ingenious  process  of  critical  dissection.  His  analysis  is  rejected  by  Pflei-
derer, who  holds  the  interpolation  theory,  but  gives  no  definite  expression
or  thorough  grounding  to  it  ('  Paulinism,'  English  trans.,  vol.  ii.  pp.  95 — 119  ;
Pfleiderer's  treatment  of  the  subject-matter  is,  in  many  respects,  remarkably
clear  and  instructive).     Klopper,  in  his  full  and  impartial  Commentary,  has


INTRODUCTIJN  TO


examined  and  effectually  disposed  of  Holtzmann'e  reconstraction  (ss.  25 —
42).  The  chief  objections  made  against  the  Pauline  authorship  on  internal
grounds  have  been  met  by  anticipation  in  the  preceding  sections.

"  The  external  testimony  to  our  Epistle  is  so  ancient  and  unbroken  and
general,  that  from  this  side  no  well-founded  doubt  can  be  raised  "  (Meyer)
It  appears  in  the  Muratorian  Canon,  the  earliest  detailed  list  of  the  New
Testament  writings,  drawn  up  about  the  end  of  the  second  century.  The
Church  Fathers  of  the  second  and  third  centuries,  Irenseus,  TertuUian,
the  Alexandrian  Clement,  and  Origen,  quote  it  repeatedly  and  amply,  in
the  form  in  which  we  possess  it,  without  hesitation  or  variation,  as  a  work
of  the  Apostle  Paul  and  an  authoritative  Church  document.  From  Tertullian
and  Irenseus  we  learn  that  it  was  acknowledged  by  Marcion  and  by  the
Valentinian  school  of  Gnostics  in  the  first  half  of  the  second  century.  And,
before  the  age  when  formal  quotation  of  the  New  Testament  Scriptures
began,  in  the  Epistles  of  the  earlier  Clement,  of  Barnabas,  and  of  Ignatius,
belonging  to  sub-apostolic  times,  and  in  the  writings  of  Justin  Martyr  and
of  Theophilus  ('  Ad  Autolycum  ')  amongst  their  successors,  there  are
expressions  which  appear  to  show  an  acquaintance  with  the  Epistle.


§  9.   Recent  Commentaries.

Amongst  available  commentaries  on  this  most  difficult  Epistle,  Bishop
Lightfoot's  masterly  work  is  pre-eminent  in  all  that  belongs  to  its  historical
and  doctrinal  elucidation.  Every  page  of  the  present  Exposition  testifies
to  the  writer's  obligations  to  this  work.  Meyer  displays  here  even  more
than  his  wonted  thoroughness  and  acumen.  It  is  needless  to  say  that
EUicott  and  Alford  should  be  diligently  consulted.  The  latter,  in  his  hand-
ling of  this  Epistle,  shows  remarkable  independence  and  soundness  of
judgment.  Hofmann  is  always  keen  and  suggestive.  Klopper's  latesi
work  ('  Der  Brief  an  d.  Colosser,  kritisch  untersucht  u.  s.  w.,'  Berlin,
1882)  is  valuable  for  its  ample  and  luminous  discussion  of  the  leading
exegetical  questions,  and  of  recent  critical  theories  of  the  Epistle.  The
writer  is  glad  to  find  himself  supported  by  Klopper  on  several  points  on
which  he  has  been  compelled  to  dissent  from  other  authorities,  and  regrets
that  this  work  was  not  earlier  to  hand.  Valuable  aid  will  be  found  in
Eadie's  and  LI.  Davies'  expositions,  and  in  the  '  Speaker's  Commentary,'
and  the  '  2Tew  Testament  Commentary  for  English  Readers.'


§  10.   Analysis  op  the  Epistib.

The  main  division  of  the  Epistle  evidently  falls  at  the  end  of  the  second
chapter.  Its  first  half  is  chiefly  doctrinal  and  polemical ;  the  second,
hortatory  and  practical.  It  ia  divided  in  the  following  Exposition  into  ten
sections :—


THE   EPISTLE   TO   THE   COLOSSI AiJS.


1.  The  introduction,  with  its  »alutation,  opening  thanksgiving,  and
prayer  (oh.  i.  1 — 14),

2.  The  ftindamental  doctrinal  statement  of  the  Epistle,  concerning  the
redeeming  Son  and  Ms  kingdom  (ch  i.  15 — 23).

3  and  4.  A  parenthesis  by  way  of  personal  explanation,  respecting  the
apostle  himself  and  his  mission  (ch.  i.  24 — 29),  and  his  present  concern  for
the  Golossians  and  their  neighbours  (ch.  ii.  1 — 7).

5  and  6.  The  polemic  against  the  false  teaching  at  Colossee,  directed  (1)
against  its  general  principles,  as  limiting  the  sufficiency  of  Christ  and  the
Christian's  completeness  in  him  (ch.  ii.  8 — 15)  ;  (2)  against  the  particular
elaiins  of  the  false  teacher,  and  the  Jewish  observances,  the  angel-worship,
and  the  ascetic  rules  he  inculcated  (ch.  ii.  16 — 23).

7.  The  apostle  now  proceeds  from  negative  warnings  and  denunciations
to  positive  injunctions,  setting  forth  with  considerable  fulness  the  true
Christian  life  in  its  practice,  as  contrasted  with  the  false  asceticism  and
visionary  illusions  of  theosophy  (ch.  iii.  1 — 17).

8.  He  enforces  particularly  the  duties  of  family  life,  and,  with  the  case  of
Onesimus  in  view,  dwells  at  length  on  the  obligations  of  servants  and
masters  (ch.  iii.  18 — iv.  1).

9.  Brief  exhortations  of  a  general  character  are  added,  respecting  prayer
and  social  converse  (ch.  iv.  2 — 6).

10.  The  Epistle  concludes  with  personal  messages  and  greetings  (ch.  iv.
7 — 17) ;  and  ia  sealed  by  the  writer's  authenticating  signature  and  final
benediction  (ch.  w.  18).


THE  EPISTLE  OF

PAUL  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEB  L


Venu  1 — 14. — Section  I.  iNTBOurcTiON.
The  Epistle  commences,  in  St.  Paul's
maTinor,  with  a  salutation  (vers.  1,  2),
followed  by  thanksgiving  (vers.  3 — S)  and
prayer  (rets.  9 — 14).  Only  in  2  Thessa-
fonians,  however,  outside  of  the  Epislles  of
this  group,  do  we  find  a  formal  openins
prayer.  The  salutation  agrees  closely  with
that  of  Bpheaiana.

Ver.  1. — Paul,  apostle  of  Clirist  Jesus
through  God's  will,  and  Timothy  the  brother
(Eph.  i.  1;  2  Cor.  i.  1).  The  apostle
designates  himself  by  hia  office,  as  always,
except  in  the  Macedonian  Epistles  and  the
letter  of  private  friendship  to  Philemon.
Timothy  shares  also  in  the  greeting  of
the  Epistle  to  Philemon,  probably  a  lead-
ing member  of  the  Colossian  Church
(comp.  oh.  iv.  9,  17  with  Philem.  2,  10—12).
During  St.  Paul's  long  residence  at  Bphesus
Timothy  was  with  him  (Acts  xix.  22),  and
there,  probably,  Philemon  had  come  under
his  influence  (see  Introduction,  §  2),  and
made  Timothy's  acquaintance.  There  was,
therefore,  at  least  one  link  of  acquaintance
between  "  Timothy  the  brother'  and  "  the
saints  in  Oolossse  "  (comp.  Phil.  i.  1 ;  2  Cor.
i.  1 ;  1  and  2  Thess.  i.  1,  where- his  name
appears  in  the  same  way).  The  lionourable
prominence  thus  p;iven  to  Timothy  marked
him  out  for  future  leadership  in  the  Church
(1  Tim.  i.  3,  18 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  2 ;  iv.  2,  5,  6).

Ver.  2. — To  those  ia  Colossae '  (which  are)
saints  and  faithful  brethren  in  Christ  (Eph.


'  The  Greek  manuscripts  vary  in  their
spelling  of  Colossse.  The  evidence  points  to
Golossss  as  the  genuine  reading  here,  and
Colaseians  in  the  title.  "  While  Colossse  alone
occurs  during  the  classical  period  and  in  St.
Paul's  time,  it  was  afterwards  supplanted
hj  Oolassie"  (Lightfoot,  p.  16;  so  Westoott
and  Uort).

OOLOSSIANSi


i.  1;   Phil.  1.  1;  Eom.  L7;  1  Cor.  i.  2;   2

Cor.  i.  1).  "Saints"  in  respect  of  their
Divine  calling   and  character  (eh.  iii.  12 ;

1  Cor.  1,  2,  where  tliis  title  is  formally
introduced) ;  "  faithful  brethren  in  Christ "
(Eph.  i.  1)  in  view  of  the  errors  and  con-
sequent divisions  threatening  them  as  a
Church  (ver.  23  ;  oh.  ii.  5,  18,  19 ;  iiL  15  ;
Eph.  iv.  14—16;  vi.  10—18;  Phil.  i.  27;

2  Tim.  ii.  19).  Grace  to  yon,  and  peace :  "  as
in  all  his  Epistles."  This  Panlme  formula
of  greeting  combines  the  Greek  and  Hebrew,
Western  and  Eastern,  forms  of  salutation
(comp.  "Abba,  Father,"  Kom.  viii.  15)
Xdpis  is  d  modification  of  the  everydny
Xa'peii/,  haill  (Acts  XV.  23 ;  Jas.  i.  1 ;  2  John
10) ;  and  elpiivri  reproduces  the  Hebrew
shaldm  {saldm).  Orace  is  the  source  of  all
blessing  as  bestowed  by  God  (ver.  6 ;  Eph.
i.  3—6;  ii.  5;  Kom.  v.  2,  17,  21;  Titus  ii.
11);  and  peaen,  in  the  large  sense  of  its
Hebrew  original,  of  all  blessing  as  ex-
perienced by  man  (Eph.  ii.  16,  17  ;  Luke  ii.
14  ;  Acts  X.  36 ;  Rom.  v.  1 ;  viii.  6  ;  2  Thess.
iii.  16).  From  God  our  Father.  Among  tho
apostle's  salutations  this  alone  fails  to  add
"  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ" — a  defect
which  copyists  were  tempted  to  remedy.
The  omission  is  well  established  (see
Revised  Text,  and  critical  editors  gene-
rally), and  cannot  surely  be  accidental.  In
this  and  the  twin  Ephesian  letter,  devoted
as  they  are  to  the  glory  of  Christ,  tlie
name  of  the  Father  stands  out  with  a,
pi  culiar  prominence  and  dignity,  much  as
in  St.  John's  Gospel:  "honouring  the  Son,"
they  must  needs  "  honour  the  Father "  also
(vers.  12,  13 ;  oh.  iii.  17 ;  Eph,  i.  17 ;  u.  18 ;
Iii.  14 ;  iv.  6 ;  v.  20).

Vers.  3—8. — The  opening  thanksgiving  is
full  and  appropriate.  Its  content  is  deter-
mined by  the  state  of  this  Church,  and  by  the
apostle's  relation  to  it  through  Epaphras,
anil  his  own  present  position.

Ver.  3. — We  give  tiianks  to  God,  Father  of


THE  BPTS'J'LE  TO   THE  COLOSSIANS.


[oh.  1. 1—29.


our  IiOid  Jesus  Christ.  We ;  Timothy  and  I  |
(oomp.  1  Thess.  i.  2 ;  2  These,  i.  3 ;  2  (Jor.  i.  3,
i,  etc.).  The  Revised  Text  omits  "  aud  "  be-
tween "  God  "  and  "  Father,"  following  Laoh-
mann,Westcottand  Hort,alidLiglitfoot  (who
hesitates),  on  evidence  numerically  slight,
but  sufficient ;  especially  as  in  every  other
instance  of  this  combination  the  conjunction
is  present.  "Father"  is  also  without  de-
finite article  in  the  better-attested  (Eevised)
reading.  The  words,  "  Father  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,"  bear,  therefore,  an  explana-
tory, quasi-predicative  force.  St.  Paul
wishes  his  readers  to  understand  that  he
gives  thanks  to  God  on  their  account  dis-
tinctly under  this  aspect,  regarded  as
"Father  of  Christ."  He  has  just  spoken
of  "our  Father,"  and  now  adds,  "Father
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  suggesting  that  it
is  in  this  relation  that  we  know  God  as
"  our  Father,"  the  Author  of  grace  and
peace,  the  Object  of  Christian  thanksgiving.
So  the  sovereign  and  exclusive  mediation  of
Christ,  the  ruling  idea  of  the  whole  Epistle,
is  thrown  into  bold  relief  at  the  outset ;  and,
in  this  light,  the  unique  omissions  of  vers.  2
and  3  explain  and  justify  each  other.  This
fatherhood  embracts  the  entire  Person  and
offices  of  the  Son  aa  "  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."
Praying  always  for  you  (ver.  9 ;  ch.  ii.  1 — 3 ;
Phil.  i.  4;  Eom.  i.  9).  The  apostle  had
known  from  the  first  of  the  existence  of  this
Church ;  and  had  already  been  in  com-
munication with  it  (see  Introduction,  §  2).
He  had,  therefore,  a  general  prayerful
interest  in  the  Colossians  (2  Cor.  xi.  28),
that  has  been  quickened  to  joyful  thanks-
giving (oh.  ii.  5 ;  oomp.  1  Thess.  ui.  6 — 10)
by  the  arrival  of  Epaphras.  "Always"
and  "  for  you  "—either  or  both  of  the  phrases
— may  be  joined  grammatically  to  "  we  give
thanks  "or  to  "praying:"  the  latter  con-
nection is  preferable  (see  Alford  or  EUicott) ;
similarly  in  Fhilem.  4 ;  in  Eph.  i.  16  the
turn  of  expression  is  different.

Ver.  4. — Having  heard  of  your  faith  in
Christ  Jesus,  and  of  the  love  which  ye
have  (^v  ex^'''^)  Revised  Text)  teward  all
the  saints  (Eph.  i.  15,  E.V. ;  Philem.  5,
K.V. ;  1  Thess.  iv.  9,  10 ;  1  John  iii.  23 ;
2  John  4 ;  S  John  3, 4).  "  Having  heard  "—
more  ioimediatuly  from  Epaphras  (vers.  8,
9).  Note  the  characteristic  recurrence  of
this  word  :  ho  had  heard  of  their  faith  and
love,  as  they  had  heard  before  the  word  of
truth  (vor.  5);  from  the  day  they  had  heard
they  had  home  fruit  (ver.  6),  and  he,  in
return,  from  the  day  he  heard  of  it,  had  not
ceased  to  pray  for  them  (ver.  9);  see  note  on
ver.  8 ;  and  comp.  1  Thess.  i.  5  and  ii.  2  with
iii.  6  (Greek).  "In  Christ  Jesus"  is
attached  to  "faith"  (as  to  "brethren"  in
ver.  2)  so  closely  as  to  form  with  it  a  single
idea;  to  be  "in  Christ  Jesus"   is  of  the


very  essence  of  this  faith  and  brotherhood.
"Faith  in  Christ,"  "believe  in  Christ,"  in
our  English  Bible,  commonly  represent  a
different  Greek  preposition,  cU  (literally,
into  ur  unto  Christ);  only  in  the  pastoral
Epistles  and  in  Eph.  i.  15 — not  in  Gal.  iii.  26
(see  Lightfoot)  or  Bom.  iii.  25  (see  Meyer  or
Beet) —do  we  find,  as  here,  irians  in  Xpio-r^.
in  Christ  faith  rests,  finding  its  abiding
ground  and  element  of  life.  In  the  Epistles
of  this  period  the  Christian  state  appears
chiefly  as  "  life  in  Christ,"  rather  than,  as
in  the  earlier  letters,  as  "  salvation  through
Christ "  (comp.  e.g.  Bom.  v.  and  Col.  ii.  9 —
15).  The  "love"  of  the  Colossians  evokes
thanksgiving,  as  that  which  they  have
"  toward  all  the  saints ; "  for  as  the  Church
extended  Christian  love  needed  to  be  more
catholic  (ver.  6 ;  ch.  iii.  11),  and  Colossian
error  in  particular  tended  to  exclusiveness
and  caste-feeling  (see  note  on  ver.  28) .  The
iteration  of  "all"  in  this  Epistle  is  re-
markable.

Ver.  5. — (We  give  thanks)  because  of  the
hope  which  is  laid  up  for  you  in  the  heavens
(ch.  iii.  4;  Eph.  i.  12—14;  Phil.  iii.  20,  21 ;
Eom.  Tiii.  18—25 ;  1  Cor.  sv.  50—58 ;  2  Cor.
V.  1—5;  1  Thess.  iv.  13—17;  lPet.i.»— 5;
Matt.  vi.  20;  xix.21;  Luke  xii.  33;  John
xiv,  2-,  3).  "  Hope  "  is  objective — matter  of
hope,  as  in  Gal.  v.  5 ;  Titus  ii.  13 ;  Heb.  ii.
18.  St.  Paul  speaks  most  of  heaven  and
heavenly  things  in  the  letters  of  this  period.
Ver.  4  gives  the  nearest  grammatical  connec-
tion for  this  clause ;  and  many  recent  com-
mentatora,  following  Greek  interpreters,
accordingly  find  here  that  which  "  evokes
and  conditions "  the  Colossians'  "  love "
(Meyer,  Ellicott)  or  " faith  and  love"  (De
Wette,  Lightfoot).  But  this  construction
we  reject.  For  it  makes  the  heavenly
reward  the  reason  of  the  Colossians'  present
(faith  and)  love,  reversing  the  true  and
Pauline  order  of  thought  (Bom.  v.  1 — 5 ;  viii.
28—39 ;  XV.  13 ;  Eph.  i.  13 ;  comp.  1  John
iv.  17, 18) ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  the
heavenly  hope  is  the  last  and  highest  ground
of  the  apostle's'  thanksgivings  and  en-
couragements, and  the  forfeitjire  or  impair-
ing of  it  the  chief  matter  of  his  fears  and
warnings  throughout  the  Epistles  of  this
group  (ch.  i.  12,  22,23,  27,  28 ;  ii.  18;  iii.  4,
24;  Eph.  1.13, 14;  ii.  12;  iii.  6;  iv.i;  Phil.
i.  6;  ii.  16;  iii.  11—21:  comp.  1  Pet.  i.  3,
4).  It  is  better,  therefore,  with  Bengel,
Hofmann,  Klopper,  Conybeaie,  Eadie,  and
others,  from  Athanasius  downwards,  to
refer  ver.  5  as  well  as  ver.  4  to  the  principal
verb,  "  we  give  thanks  "  (ver.  3).  What  the
apostle  hears  of  "the  faith  and  love"  of
the  Colossian  brethren  moves  him  to  give
thanks  for  "  the  hope  which  is  in  store  for
them  in  heaven."  Of  that  hope  this  faith
and  love  are  tu  him  a  pledge  and  an  earnest


CH.  1. 1—29.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


even  aa  the  "  seal  of  the  Spirit "  (Eph.  i.
14)  and  the  "  peace  of  Christ  in  their
hearts  "  (oh.  iii.  15 ;  see  note)  are  to  them-
selves. Similarly,  in  Phil.  i.  27,  28  and  2
Thesa.  L  4,  5,  from  the  present  fuith  and
patience  of  the  saints  the  certainty  of
their  future  blessedness  is  argued.  By
singling  out  this  hope  as  chief  matter  of
thanksgiving  here,  the  apostle  enhances  it*
certainty  and  its  yalue  in  his  readers'  eyes.
(On  this  verse,  see  the  Expositor,  first  series,
vol.  X.  pp.  74 — 80.)  From  the  general
occasion  and  ground  of  his  thanksgiving
in  the  Christian  state  and  prospects  of  his
readers,  St.  Paul  proceeds  to  dwell  on
certain  special  drcumttances  whieh  enhanced
his  gratitude  to  God  (vers.  5  6—8).  Whioh
(hope)  ye  heard  of  before,  in  the  word  of  the
truth  of  the  gospel;  or,  good  tidings  (vers.
7,  23;  ch.  il.  7;  Eph.  i.  13;  iv.  15,  21;
Gal.  i.  6—9 ;  iii  1—4 ;  iv.  9 ;  v.  7 ;  1  TIjbss.
t.  5;  ii.  13;  iv.  1 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  13—15;  1
Pet.  T.  12).  There  is  a  veiled  polemic
reference  in  "  the  vford  of  the  truth  of  the
gospel "  (comp.  ver.  7  and  parallels  from
( jalatians).  The  word  "  before  "  (aforetime')
"contrasts  their  earlier  with  their  later
lessons,  the  true  gospel  of  Epapliras  with
the  false  gospel  of  recent  teachers  "  (Light-
foot).  Others  interpret,  less  suitably :  heard
already  (before  my  writing),  or  heard  before-
hand (before  the  fulfilment  of  the  hope).  It  is
in  St.  Paul's  manner  to  refer  liis  readers
at  the  outset  to  their  conversion  and  first
Christian  experiences  (see  parallel  passages).
Tlieir  hope  was  directly  at  stake  in  the
controversy  with  Colossian  error.  Here  we
meet  the  first  of  those  cumulative  com-
binations of  nouns,  so  marked  a  feature
of  the  style  of  Colossians  and  Ephesinns,
which  are  made  a  reproach  against  these
Kpistles  by  some  critics ;  but  each  is  appro-
priate in  its  place.

Ver.  6.— That  is  come  unto  you,  even  m
also  (it  is)  in  all  the  world,  bearing  fruit  and
increasing,  as  in  you  also  (Bom.  i.  8';
1  Thess.  i.  8 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  14 ;  Acts  ii.  47 ;  v.  14 ;
vi.  7 ;  ix.  31 ;  xi.  21 ;  iii.  24;  xix.  20).  The
words,  "  and  increasing,"  are  added  to  the
text  on  the  testimony,  all  but  unanimous,  of
the  older  witnesses.  Their  propriety  is
manifest ;  fur  the  success  of  the  gospel  at
Colossss  was  a  gratifying  evidence,  both  of
its  inherent  fruitfulness,  and  of  its  rapid
progress  in  the  Gentile  world.  Stationary
at  Borne  (see  Introduction,  §  3),  and  with
his  messengers  coming  and  going,  and  news
reaching  him  from  time  to  time  of  the  ad-
vance of  the  Christian  cause,  the  strong
expression,  "in  all  the  world,"  is  natural  to
St.  Paul.  From  Borne  "  all  the  world "  is
surveyed,  just  as  what  takes  place  at  Borne
seems  to  resound  "  in  all  the  world  "  (Bom.
i.  8).    Bearing  fruU  (verb  is  middle  voice.


implying  inherent  energy)  precedes  grow'
ing — the  first  "  describing  the  inner  work-
ing," the  second  "the  outward  extension  of
the  gospel"  (Lightfoot).  For  "bearing
fruit,"  comp.  Eph.  v.  9 ;  Gal.  v.  22  ;  Phil.  i.
11;  John  XV.  8, 16:  and  for  "growing,"  2
Thess.  iii.  1 ;  Matt.  xrii.  31 — 33;  and  parallel
passages ;  see  also  ver.  1 1.  In  the  last  clause
tlie  expression  " doubles  back  upon  itself"
in  a  fashion  characteristic  of  St.  Paul,  whose
sentences  grow  and  change  their  form  like
living  things  while  he  indites  them  (comp.
oh.  iii.  13 ;  1  Thess.  i.  5—8 ;  iv.  1,  B.V.) :  the
coming  of  the  gospel  to  ColosssB  suggests  the
thought  of  its  advent  in  the  world,  and  this
gives  place  to  the  fuller  idea  of  its  fruitful-
ness and  expansion,  which  in  turn  i*
evidenced  by  its  effect  at  ColosssB.  Since
the  day  that  ye  heard  (it),  and  knew  well  the
grace  of  God  in  truth  (ver.  5 ;  ch.  ii  6,  7 ;
Eph.  i  13;  It.  21;  1  Thess.  ii.  1,  2,  13;
1  Cor.  il  1—5 ;  XT.  1—11 ;  2 Cor.  i  19;  Gal.
i  6,  11;  iii.  1—3;  2  Tim.  iii.  14).  For
their  progress  had  been  continuous  (comp.
Phil.  i.  5).  Meyer  and  EUioott,  with  the
A. v.,  better  maintain  the  connection  of
thought  in  understanding  "  the  gospel  "  as
object  uf  "  heard."  The  verb  Iveyvare^  hnew
well,  with  4irlyvwais  (ver.  9,  etc.),  belongs
specially  to  the  vocabulary  of  this  group  of
Epistles.  Knowledge,  in  1  Corinthians,  is
denoted  by  the  simple  gnosis.  But  this
word  became  at  an  early  time  the  watch-
word of  the  heretical  Gnostics  ("men  of
knowledge :  "  comp.  1  Tim.  vi  20) ;  and  the
false  teachers  of  Colossss  pretended  to  an
intellectual  superiority,  asserted.  We  may
imagine,  in  much  the  same  way  (comp.  oh.
ii  2—4,  8,  23).  The  apostle  now  prefers  the
more  precise  and  distinctive  epignosis  (eiri-
yivdffKo),  meaning  "  accurate  "  or  "  advanced
knowledge"  (see  Lightfoot  here,  and  on  ver.
9).  "  To  hoar  the  gospel "  is  "  to  know  well
the  grace  of  God  "  (Acts  xx.  24 ;  Bom.  iii  21
—26;  2  Cor,  t.20— vi.  1;  John  i  17);  the
full  knowledge  of  which  "  in  truth  "  (ver.  5 ;
Eph.  iv.  14,  15,  20—24)  would  preserve
the  Colossiana  &om  knowledge  falsely  so
called.

Ver.  7. — ^Aiye  learned  from  Epaphras,  our
beloved  fellow-servant;  literally,  bondman
(Eph.  iv.  20;  2  Tim.  iii.  14).  Only  in  ch.  iv.
7  does  the  epithet  "fellow-bondman"  ap-
pear again  in  St.  Paul  (the  Bevisers  in
these  two  places  omit  their  marginal  "  bond-
servant ").  The  dominant  thought  of  Christ
Jesus  "  the  Lord  "  (oh.  ii.  6 ;  iii  22— iv.  1)
possibly  dictates  this  expression.  That  tlie
Colossians  had  reeeived  the  gospel  in  this
way  from  Epaphras,  a  disciple  of  St.  Paul,
was  a  striking  proof  of  its  fruitfulness,  and
a  further  cause  for  thanksgiving  on  his  own
part.  'Who  is  a  faithful  minister  of  Christ
ou  our  (or,  your)  behalf  (oh.  iv.  1%,  M;  S


THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  COLOS^IANS.


[oB.  1. 1^29,


Cor.  viii.  22  ;  Phil.  ii.  22).    He  puts  his  seal

upon  the  ministry  of  Epapliras,  and  vindi-
o.ites  it  agftinat  all  questioning  at  home.
Textual  evidence  for  "on  our"  or  "your
behalf "  is  pretty  evenly  balanced :  most
older  Greek  copies  road  the  first  person,
while  the  ancient  versions  generally  adopted
the  second;  and  the  critical  editors  are
similarly  divided.  The  Revisers,  with
Tregelles,  Alford,  Lightfoot,  Westoott  and
Hort,  prefer  "  our,"  which  gives  a  finer  and
more  fitting  sense.  It  was  as  St.  Paul's
representative  that  Epaphras  had  ministered
in  ColossBB,  and  to  him  he  now  reported  his
BuocesB ;  and  this  justified  the  apostle  in
claiming  the  Coloseians  aa  his  own  charge,
and  in  writing  to  them  in  the  terms  of  this
letter  (ch.  ii.  1,  2,  5—7 :  comp.  Rom.  xv.  20  ;
2  Cor.  X.  13-16).  "Minister"  (Sitimi/os,
deacon,  in  its  official  sense  found  in  St.  Paul
first  in  Phil,  i  1,  then  in  1  Timothy)  is  to  be
distinguished  from  the  "servant"  (Sov\of,
slave)  of  the  last  clause,  and  from  "  assistant "
( imiipeTrii :  1  Cor.  iv.  1 ;  Acts  xiii.  5 ;  xxvi.
1 U),  aud  "  attendant "  (Bspa-woov :  Heb.  iii.  5) ;
see  Trench's  '  Synonyms  of  the  New  Testa-
ment.' It  is  a  favourite  word  of  St.  Paul's,
and  points  to  the  service  rendered,  while
other  terms  indicate  the  status  of  the  eer-
vunt.

Ver.  8. — Who  also  showed  na  your  love
in  (the)  Spirit  (2  Cor.  vii.  7 ;  viii.  7 ;  1  Thess.
jii.  6;  Phil.  iv.  10);  i.e.  your  love  to  us,
Timothy  and  myself,  especially  if  we  read
"  in  our  behalf  "  in  ver.  7 :  so,  many  inter-
preters, from  Chrysostom  to  Klopper.
Epaphras  had  conveyed  the  blessings  of  the
gospel  from  St.  Paul  to  tlie  Coloasians,  and
they  now  send  back  the  grateful  assurance
of  their  love  by  the  same  channel  (comp.
note  on  "  liaving  heard,"  ver.  4,  and  parallel
passages).  This  was  a  choice  fruit  of  the
gospel  in  them  (comp.  Phil.  iv.  10,  15—18),
and  such  a  reference  to  it  gives  a  kindly
conclusion  to  the  thanksgiving.  Ellicott
aud  others  understand  here  brotherly  love  in
general — a  somewhat  pointless  repetition  of
ver.  4.  Meyer,  reading  "  on  your  behalf"
in  ver.  7,  more  suitably  suggests  tiie  Coloe-
eians'  love  to  Epaphras  in  return  for  his
services  to  thorn.  The  Spirit  is  the  ruling
element  of  the  Colossians' love  (GaL  v.  22).
"Love-in-the-Spiiit"  forms  a  single  comT
pound  phrase,  like  "  faith- in-Chriat-Jesus"
(ver.  4).  The  one  Spirit  dwella  alike  in  all
the  members  of  Christ's  body,  however
bundered  by  place  or  circumstance  (Kph.  iv.
1 — -l),  and  makes  them  one  in  love  to  each
other  as  to  him  (John  xiii.  34,35;  I  John  iii.
23,  24).  "Spiiit"  occuiB  besides  in  this
Epistle  only  in  ch.  ii  5  (but  see  "  spiritual,"
ver.  9),  and  sonle  find  in  ch.  ii.  1,  5  the
explanation  of  this  phrase  (so.  "a  love
^formed  in  absence,  without  Dcrsonal  iuter»


course : "  bnt  this  is  forced,  and  doubtful  in
point  of  grammar).

Vers.  9 — 14. — Tlie  opening  prayer  ilste  out
of  the  foregoing   thankagiving,  and  leads
up  to  the  chief  doctrinal  statement  of  the
Epistle  (vera.  15^-20 :  compare,  for  the  con-
nection, Eph.  i.  15—23 ;  Rom.  i.  8—17).  The
burden  of  this  prayer,  as  in  other  letters  of
this  period,  is  the  Church's  need  of  know-
ledge (comp.  Eph.  i.  17,  18 ;  Phil.  i.  9,  10).
Here  this  desire  has  its  fullest  expression,
as  the  necessity  of  the   Colossians  in  this
respect  was  the  more  urgent  and  their  situa-
tion, therefore,  the  more  fully  representative
of  the  stage  in  the  history  of  the  Pauline
Churches  now  commencing.    He  asks  for
his  readers  (1)  a  fuller  knowledge  of  the
Divine  will  (ver,  9);  to  result  in  (2)  greater
pleasingness  to  God  (ver.  10  a),  due  (3)  to
increased  moral  fruitfulness  and  spiritual
growth  (ver.   10   6),  to  (4)  patience  under
suffering  (ver.  11),  and  to  (5)  thankfulness
for  the  blessings  of  redemption  (vers.  12 — 14).
Ver.  9. — For  this  cause  we  also  (Eph.  1.
15—17 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  6—13).    Timothy  and
I,  in  return  for  your  love  to  uB  (ver.  8)  and  in
response  to  this  good  news  about  you  (vers.  4
— 6).    From  the  day  that  we  heard  (it) ;  an
echo  of  "  from  the  day  that  ye  heard  it "
(ver.  (i).    Do  not  cease  praying  for  yon,  and
making  request.    The  former  is  a  general
expretslAi  (ver.  3),  the  latter  points  to  some
special  matter  of  petition  to  follow.     This
second  verb  St.  Paul  only  uses  elsewhere  of
prayer    to  God  in  Eph.  iii.   13,   20   (see
Trench's    '  Synonyms '   on    akw,    alTrifia).
That  ye  may  be  filled  with  (or,  made  coni-
plete  in)  the  knowledge  of  his  will  (ch.  ii.
10;  iv.  12;  Eph.  iii.  18,  19;  Rom.  xii.  2;
Heb.  xiii.  21).    On  "  knowledge  "  {imynuais),
see  note  to  ver.  6,  and  Lightfoot's  note  heie.
"With    the     knowledge"    represents    the
Greek   accusative    of   specification  (as    in
Phil.   i.  11,  where   see  Ellicott) ;  aud  the
verb  TThripaBfJTf  (comp.  note  on  pleroma,  vi  r.
19),  as  in  ch.ii.  10  and  i.25,  denotes  "ful-
filled" or  "made  complete,"   rather  than
"made  full" — "made  complete   aa  to   the
full  knowledge,"  eta.    "  His  will "  ("  God's
will,"  ver.  1 ;  ch.  iv.  12)  need  not  be  limited
to  the  oiiginal  purpose  of  ealvaiion  (Eph.  i.
9),  cr  to  his  moral  requirements  respectimi
Christian  believeri  (ver.  10 ;  so  Meyer),  hut
includes  "  the  whole  counsel  of  God  "  (Acts
XX.  27)  made  known  to  us  in  Christ  (vers.
26,    27).      In   all    spiritual    wisdom   and
understanding  (ch.    ii.    2 ;  Eph.    v.    17 ;
Phil.  i.  9 ;  1  OoT.  xiv.  20).     Wisdom,  in  its
highest  sense,  is  the  sum  of  personal  excul-
lence  as  belonging-  to  the  niind;  it  implies
a  vital  knowledge  of  Divine  truth,  forming
the  sentiments  and  determining  the  will  as
it    possesses  the  reason.     Hence  the  word
occurs  in  a  great  variety  of  connections :


mt.  1. 1—29.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  TflE  COLOSSIANS.


"  Wisdom  and  knowledge"  (oh.  ii.  3),  "and
ipriidence"  (Eph.  i.  8),  ctf.  For  tliii  Church
the  apostle  aska  specially  tl'.e  gift  of  under-
standing or  comprehension  (cnrap.  eh.  ii.  2  ;
only  in  Eph.  iii.  4  and  2  Tim.  ii.  7  besides,
in  St.  Paul ;  1  Cor.  i.  19  from  LXX),  the
power  oi putting  things  together  {<rii>-eiTts),  of
discerning  the  relations  of  different  truths,
the  logical  bearing  and  consequences  of  one'a
principles.  For  the  errors  invading-  .Colossa)
were  of  a  Gnostic  type,  myslio  at  once  iind
rationalistic;  against  which  a  clear  and
well-informed  understanding  was  the  best
protection  (comp.  notes  on  "  truth,"  in  vers.
5,  6;  also  ch.  ii.  i,  8,  18,  23;  Eph.  iv  13,
14).  This  "  wisdom  and  understaniling "
are  "spiritual,"  as  inspiied  by  the  Divine
Spirit  (comp.  the  use  of"  spirit,"  "  spiritual,"
in  1  Oor.  xii.  1 — 11 ;  Gal.  vi.  1  and  v.  in,
25;  Epli.  i.  17;  iii.  16 — 19),  and  opposed  to
all  "  wisdom  of  the  flesh,"  the  unrenewed
nature  of  man  (oh.  ii.  18 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  4 — 6,
13 — 15;  Jas.  iii.  15).

Ver.  10. — To  walk  worthily  of  the  Lord
unto  all  pleasing-  (Eph.  iv.  1 ;  Phil.  i.  27 ;
1  Thess.  ii.  12 ;  iv.  1  ;  2  Thess.  i.  5,  11;  1
John  ii.  6;  Rev.  iii.  4  ;  Heb.  xiii.  21);  so  as  to
please  him  in  every  way.  "  The  end  of  all
Icnowledge,  the  apostle  would  say,  is  con-
duct" (Lightfoot).  Spiritual  enlifflitenment
(ver.  9)  enables  the  Christian  to  walk  (a
Hebraism  adopted  also  into  bii)lical  English)
in  a  way  "  wortliy  of  the  Lord "  (Clirist,
ch.  ii.  6;  iii.  24;  Acts  xx.  19,  etc.),  becom-
ing those  who  have  such  a  Lord  and  who
profess  to  be  his  servants.  And  to  be
"  worthy  of  Christ"  is  to  "please  God"  (Rom.
viii.  29 ;  Eph.  i.  4,  5,  11 ;  1  Cor.  i.  9).  Tl.ia
is  the  ideal  and  the  aim  of  the  religious  life
throughout  the  Bible  (comp.  1  Sam.  xiii.  14  ;
Mieah  vi.  6—8 ;  Heb.  xi.  5,  6;  John  viii.  29 ;
Rom.  viii.  8).  The  characteristics  of  this
walk  are  set  forth  by  three  co-ordinate  par-
ticipial phrases  (vers.  10  6 — 12),  standing
in  th«  half-independent  nominative  case
instead  of  the  more  regular  accusative  (as
agreeing  with  the  understood  object  of  the
iniinitiTe  irepmaTrja-ai :  see  Winer's  '  N.  T.
Grammar,'  p.  716 :  compare,  for  the  idiom,  oh.
iii,  1 0,  also  ii.  2).  In  every  good  work  bearing
fruit  (Eph.  iv.  28;  Gal.  vi.  9, 10  ;  1  Thess.  v.
15 ;  2  Tliess.  ii.  17 ;  1  Tim.  v.  10 ;  Titus  iii  8 ;
Heb.  xiii.  16;  Acts  ix.  36)  "  Good  work  "
is  that  which  is  henefleial,  practically  good
(fee  parallel  passages).  "  In  every  good
work"  might  grammatically  qualify  the
foregoing  "  pleasing  "  (so  R.V.  margin  and
many  older  interpreters),  but  appears  to  be
parallel  in  position  and  sense  with  "in  all
power  "  (ver.  1 1).  On  "bearing  fruit"  (active
In  voice  where  the  subject  is  personal :  oomp.
ifepyea  in  ch.  i.  29  and  in  Phil.  ii.  13),  see
note  to  ver.  6.  While  doing  good  to  hia
fellow-men,  tha  Christian  is  growing  by  (or,


in)  the  knowledge  of  Ood  (ch.  ii.  19 ;  Epli.
iv.  13—16;  2  Pat.  iii.  IS;  1  Cor  iii  1,  2;
xiv.  20 ;  xvi.  13 ;  Heb.  v.  12—14).  His  own
nature  becomes  larger,  stronf;or,  more  oom-^
plete.  Here  it  is  individual  (internal)"
growth,  in  ver.  6  collective  (external)  growth
(of  the  gospel,  the  Church)  that  is  implied;
the  two  are  combined  in  Epli.  iv.  13—16.
The  dative  rp  iviyvdffn  (so  best  copies  and
Revised  Text :  the  Received,  unto  the  know-
ledge, is  a  repetition  of  ver.  9)  is  "  dative  of
instrument"  (Alford,  Lightfoot)  rather  than
"  of  respect "  {in  the  knowledge ;  so  R.V.).

Ver.  11. — In  all  power  being  empowered,
according  to  the  might  of  his  glory,  unto  all
patience  and  long-suffering  with  joyfnlness
(vers.  24,  29 ;  Eph.  i.  19 ;  iii.  16 :  vi.  10 ;  1
Cor.  xvi.  13;  2  Tim.  i.  7,  8;  ii.  1,  3,  9,  10;  1
Pet.  V.  10).  The  same  word  is  repeated  as
noun  and  verb  (56i/afjLt$,  hvua^6u>,  power,
empower)  with  a  strong  Hebraistic  sort  of
emphasis  (otherwise  in  Eph.  iii.  16).  In
all  (every  kind  of)  power  gives  the  mode,
according  to  the  might  of  his  glory  the  mea-
sure, and  unto  all  patience,  etc.,  the  end  of  this
Divine  sirengihening.  "Mi;^ht"  (^Kpdros),
in  distinction  from  "  power "  (5iJya/iis)  and
other  synonyms  (comp.  ver.  29;  Eph.  i.
19;  vi.  10),  imijlies  "mastery,"  "sovereign
sway,"  and,  except  in  Heb.  ii.  14  ("  might  of
death"),  is  used  in  the  New  Testament
only  of  the  power  of  God.  "  Glory,"  as  in
Phil.  iii.  21,  bears  a  substantive  meaning  of
its  own,  and  is  not  a,  mere  attributive  of
"  might."  It  is  the  splendour  of  God's
revelations  of  himself,  in  which  his  might
is  so  conspicuous.  Gazing  on  this  glory,
especially  as  seen  in  Christ  (2  Cor.  iv.  6)
and  the  gospel  (1  Tim.  i.  11,  B.V.),  the
Christian  discerns  the  might  of  him  from
whom  it  streams  forth,  and  understands
how  that  might  is  engaged  in  his  behalf
(Eph.  i.  19,  20  ^  comp.  Isa.  xl.  28,  29;  xiii.
5,  6) ;  and  this  thought  fills  him  with  in-
vincible courage  and  endurance.  Patience
is  steadfastness  and  stout-heartedness  under
ill  fortune  (not  a  mere  resigned  patience) ;
long-suffering  is  gentleness  of  temper  and
magnanimity  under  ill  treatment  (oomp.
oh.  iii.  12;  and  see  Lightfoot,  in  loe.,  and
Trench's  'Synonyms').  Chriit,  in  Ida
earthly  life,  was  the  supreme  example  of
patience  (2  Thess.  iii.  5,  R.V. ;  1  Pet.  ii.
21—23 ;  Heb.  xii.  3,  4),  which  is  «  wrought
by  tribulation "  (Rom  v.  4) :  long-sufering
finds  its  pattern  in  God's  dealing  with
"the  unthankful  and  evil"  (Rom.  ii.  4;
1  Tim.  i.  16;  1  Pet.  iii.  20;  2  Pet.  iii.  15).
"With  joy  fulness"  belongs  to  this  clause
(Theodoret,  Calvin,  Bengel,  Alford,  Light-
foot) rather  than  the  next,  ami  lends  a
more  vivid  force  to  the  foregoing  woi-ds,
while  comparatively  needless  if  prefixed  to
those  that  follow  (so,  however,  Chrysostom,


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa


[oh.  1. 1—29


Erasmus,  Meyer,  EUicott  —  "with  joy
giving  thanks,"  etc.).  This  piradox  is
genuinely  Pauline,  and  arises  from  personal
ex])erience  (comp.  ver.  24 ;  Phil.  i.  29 ;  Eom.
T.  a;  1  Thess.  i.  6;  2  Gor.  i.  4—8;  vi.  10;
xii.  9,  10).

Ver.  12. — Giving  thanks  to  the  Father,
who  made  us  (or,  you)  meet  for  our  (or,  your)
share  in  the  lot  (or,  pmtion)  of  the  saints  in
the  light  (vers.  3 — 5;  Acta  xx.  32;  xxvi.
18 ;  Titus  iii.  7 ;  Bph.  i.  5,  11—14 ;  Gal.  iii.
29 ;  Rom.  viii.  15—17).  Therea<Ung  "us"  is
very  doubtful.  Wesloott  and  Hoi  t,  with  Ti-
sohendorf,  prefer  "you,"  as  in  the  two  oldest
manuscripts:  for  the  transition  from  first
to  second  person,  comp.  oh.  ii.  13,  14  (vers.
9 — 12).  In  the  tame  strain  the  apostle  gave
thanljs  on  their  account  (ver.  5).  "  Thanks-
giving "  is  prominent  in  this  letter  (ch.  ii.
7;  iii.  15,  17;  iv.  2),  as  "joy"  in  Philip-
pians.  The  title  "the  Father"  frequently
stands  alone  in  St.  John's  Gospel,  coming
from  the  lips  of  the  Son,  but  St.  Paul
employs  it  thus  only  here  and  in  Eph.
iii.  14,  E.V. ;  Eom.  viii.  15 ;  Gal.  iv.  6
(^cornp.  1  John  iii.  1);  see  note  on  ver.  2.
Those  "give  thanks  to  the  Father"  who
gratefully  acknowledge  him  in  "  the  spirit
of  adoption "  as  their  Father  through
Christ  (Rom.  viii.  15;  Gal.  iv.  1—7;  Bph.
i.  5).  And  the  Father  mnJcee  us  meet  for  the
inheritance  when  he  enables  us  to  call  iiim
"  Father  "— "  If  children,  then  heirs."  •'  To
make  meet "  (Uavoa,  the  verb  found  besides
only  in  2  Cor.  iii.  5,  6  in  tho  New  Testa-
ment, "to  make  sufBcient,"  E.V.)  is  "to
make  competent,"  "  to  qualify "  for  some
position  or  work.  This  meetnesi,  already
conferred  on  the  Colossians,  con&ists  in  their
forgiveness  (ver.  14)  and  adoption  (Eph.  i.
5 — 7),  which  qualify  and  entitle  them  to
receive  the  blessings  of  Christ's  kingdom
(ver.  13 ;  Eom.  v.  1, 2 ;  Gal.  iii.  26—29 ;  Bph.
ii.  5,  6 ;  Titus  iii.  7),  and  which  anticipate
and  form  the  basis  of  that  worthiness  of
cliaracter  and  fitness  of  condition  in  which
they  are  finally  to  be  presented  "perfect  in
Christ "  (vers.  10,  22, 28 ;  1  Thess.  v.  23,  24) ;
"  nut  qui  dignos  fecit  (Vulgate),  but  qui
iiloneos  fecit "  (EUicott).  "  Called  and  (made
lismeet)"  i«  one  of  the  few  characteristio
readings  of  the  great  Vatican  Manuscript,
which  Westcott  »nd  Hort  reject  (see  their
'introduction,'  §  320,  and  I  jghtfoot's  '  De-
tached Notes,'  p.  251).  "The  lot  of  the
saints  "  is  tliat  entire  wealtli  of  blessedness
laid  up  for  the  people  of  God  (Eph.  i.  3;
ii.  12;  iii.  6;  iv.  4 — 7),  in  which  each  has
his  due  share  ox  part  (Meyer,  EUicott,  Ligl  it-
foot,  less  suitably :  "  parcel  of  (consisting  in)
tl  le  lot ") ;  comp.  ver.  28 ;  Eph.  iv.  7.  K\TJpos
("  lot,"  Acts  viii.  21 ;  xxvi.  18),  scarcely  dis-
tinguishable from  the  more  usual  KKi\poroij.ia
("  inheritance,"  ch.  iii.  24  ;  Eph.  i.  11,  etc. ;


Acts  XX.  32 ;  Heb.  ix.  15  ;  \  Pet.  i.  4),  i?
used  in  the  Old  Testament  rLXX)  of  tlie
sacred  land  as  "divided  by  lot,''  and  as
"the  lot  "  assigned  .to  Israel  (Numb,  xxxiv.
13;  Deut.  iv.  21,  etc.),  also  of  Jehovah
himself  as  "the  lot"  of  the  landless
Levites  (Deut.  x.  9),  and  of  Israel  in  turn
as  "  the  lot "  of  Jehovah  (Deut.  iv.  2U).  It
is  the  divinely  allocated  possession  of  the
people  of  God  in  his  kingdom.  It  be-
longs to  them  as  "saints"  (ver.  2;  Eph.  ii.
19;  Acts  XX.  32;  xxvi.  18;  Ps.xv.;  Numb.
XXXV.  34;  Jer.  ii.  7);  and  it  lies  "in  the
light,"  in  "tlie  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  God's
love"  (ver.  13)  that  is  filled  with  the  light
of  the  knowledge  of  God  proceeding  from
Christ  (2  Cor.  iv.  1—6 ;  John  i.  4  ;  viii.  12),—
light  here  manifest  "in  part"  an^lin  conflict
with  Satanic  darkness  (ver.  13;  Eph.  v.
8—14 ;  vi.  11,  12 ;  1  Thess.  v.  4—8 ;  Eom.
xiii.  11 — 13 ;  John  i.  5),  hereafter  the  full
possession  of  God's  saints  (ch.  iii.  4 ;  1  Cor.
xiii.  12 ;  Eom.  xiii.  12 ;  John  xii.  36 ;  Eev.
xxi.  23—25;  Isa.  Ix.  19,20).

Vers.  13  and  14  proceed  to  show  how  this
qualificatiun  has  been  gained.

Ver.  13. — Who  (so.  the  Father)  rescued  na
from  the  dominion  ai  the  darkness,  and
translated  us  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of
his  love  (Eph.  v.  8 ;  vi.  12 ;  Eom.  vii.  14—
vni.  4  ;  1  Cor.  xv.  56,  57  ;  1  Thess.  i.  9, 10 ;
1  Pet.  ii.  9 ;  1  John  i.  5—7  ;  ii.  7—11).  To
"  rescue"  Qio/jiai :  1  Thess.  i.  10  ;  Bom.  vii.
24 ;  2  Cor.  i.  10 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  17,  18,— to  be
carefully  distinguished  from  other  Greek
verbs  rendered  "deliver")  implies  the  evil
state  of  the  rescued,  the  superior  power  of
the  rescuer,  and  a  conflict  issuing  in
deliverance.  St.  Paul  repeatedly  associates
the  figure  of  darkness  with  the  language
of  warfare  (Eph.  vL  12 ;  Rom.  xiii.  12 ;  1
Thess.  v.  8 ;  comp.  John  i.  5,  R.V.  margin).
"  Dominion  of  darkness " — same  as  "  do-
minion of  Satan  "  (Acts  xxvi.  18).  'Efoi/trfa,
as  distinguished  from  Sura^is  ("power,"
vers.  11,  29),  is  "  right,"  "  authority"  (comp.
1  Cor.  ix.  4—6 ;  John  i.  12 ;  xvii.  2)  ;  the
power  of  Satan  is  not  mere  external  force,
but  takes  the  form  of  established  and  (as  it
were)  legalized  dominion  (1  Cor.  xv.  56 ;
Luke  iv.  6;  John  xii.  31).  "The  dark-
ness "  is  precisely  opposed  to  "  the  light "
(ver.  12),  being  the  region  of  falsehood  and
hatred,  whethei  in  this  world  or  outside  of
it,  where  Satan  rules  (Eph.  vL  12  ;  v.  8,  11 ;
2Cor.  iv.  4;  1  John  ii.  8—11;  Matt.  viii.
12 ;  Lnke  xxii.  53;  John  iii.  19,  20  ;  xii.  35).
To  "  translate "  {iieBia-Trnn)  is  to  remove
from  one  place,  ofiSce,  etc.,  to  another ;  Jose-
phus  ('Ant.,'  ix.  11,1)  uses  it  of  the  depor-
tation of  the  Israelites  by  the  Assyrian  king.
TAe  Father,  rescuing  his  captive  chiMren,
brings  them  "  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Son
of  his  love."    Here  we  touch  the  central


OH.  1. 1—29.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


and  governing  idea  of  this  Epistle,  that  of
the  supreme  lordship  of  Christ  (vers.  15 — 20  ;
oh.  ii.  6, 10, 19,  etc.) ;  and  this  passage  affords
a  clue  which  will,  wo  trust,  guide  ustlirough
enme  of  the  greatest  difficulties  which  fol-
low. (On  "  the  kingdom  of  the  Son,"  comp.
Eph.  i.  20— 23;  Phil.  ii.  6—11;  Kom.  xiv.
9 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  6 ;  xv.  24—28  ;  Heb.  i.  1—4 ;
ii.  5 — 10 ;  Eev.  i.  S — 7,  18;  v.,  etc. ;  Johnr.
22—27;  xvii.  2;  xviii.  36;  Matt.  xxv.  31—
46 ;  xxviii.  18—  20.)  Only  here  and  in  Eph.
V.  5;  2  Tim.  iv.  1,  18;  1  Cor.  xv.  24,  25,
does  the  apostle  speak  of  the  kingdom  as
Christ's;  otherwise  as  God's  (and  future).
The  "  Son  of  his  love  "  is  not  simply  the
"beloved  Son"  (Eph.  i.  6;  Matt.  iii.  17,
etc.),  but  the  representative  and  depositary
of  his  loTe  :  "  Who  is  his  lore  made  mani-
fest" (Augustine,  Lightfoot;  see  ver.  2,note;
John  iii.  16 ;  xvii.  26 ;  1  John  iv.  ^,  9,  14—
16;  Eph.  ii.  4;  Titus  iii.  4— 6;  Kom.  T.  8),
being  at  once  our  "Kedeemer-King  "  (ver.  13,
14)  and  the  "  Image  of  the  invisible  God  "
(vev.  15).

Ver.  14. — ^In  whom  we  have  (or,  had)  our
redemption,  the  forgiTeness  of  our  sins
(Eph.  i.  7;  Gal.  iii.  10—13;  Eom.  iii.  19—
26;  2  Cor.  v.  18—21;  1  Pet.  iii.  18,  19).
Eph.  i.  7  suggested  to  some  later  copyists
the  interpolation  "through  hia  blood,"
words  highly  suitable  in  the  Ephesian
doxology.  This  verse  is  the  complement  of
the  last :  there  salvation  appears  as  a  rescue
hy  sovereign  power,  here  as  a  release  hy  legal
ransom  {cnro-KiTpuffts').  The  ransom-price
Christ  had  declared  beforehand  (Matt.  xx.
28;  xxvi.  28  ;  comp.  Kom.  iii.  24—26;  Gal.
ii.  20  ;  1  Tini.  ii.  6;  Heb.  ix.  12—14;  1  Pet.
1.18;  Eev.i.5,R.V.;  V.9).  " We Aace redemp-
tion "  ("  had  it,"  according  to  a  few  ancient
witnesses)  in  present  experience  in  "  the  for-
giveness of  our  sins  "  (vers.  21, 22  ;  ch.  ii.  13,
14  ;  iii.  13;  2  Cor.  v.  21 ;  Kom.  iv.  25;  v.  1 ;
viii.  1;  Titus  ii.  14;  Heb.  ix.  14;  x.  1—18;
1  Pet.  ii.  24;  1  John  i.  7— ii.  2;  iv.  10).
Eom.  iii.  24  gives  its  objective  ground.
The  "  redemption  of  the  body  "  (also  bought
by  the  same  price,  1  Cor.  vi.  20)  will  make
tlie  work  complete  (Eph.  i.  13,  14;  Eom.
viii.  19—23 ;  1  Cor.  i.  30).  lightfoot  Bug-
gestg  that  the  apostle  intends  to  contradict
the  doctrine  of  redemption  taught  by  the
Gnostics,  who  made  it  consist  in  initiation
into  their  "mysteries"  (see  note  on  ver.  27);
and  supposes  that  this  notion  may  already


have  existed  at  Colosssa  in  some  incipient
form.  But  such  an  ahuso  of  the  term  seems
to  imply  a  well-estiiblished  and  familiar
Christian  use.  Pliilo,  who  speaks  the  Ian-,
guage  of  the  Jewish  philosophic  mysticism
of  the  first  century,  has  no  such  usage.

In  firm,  clear  lines  the  apostle  has  retraced,
in  vers.  12 — 14  (comp.  vers.  20 — 23;  oh.  ii.
11 — 14),  the  teaching  of  his  earlier  Epistles
on  the  doctrines  ef  salvation.  Here  he
assumes,  in  brief  and  comprehensive  terms,
what  in  writing  to  the  Galatians  and  Bomans
he  had  formerly  been  at  so  much  pains  to
prove.

Vers.  IS — 23.— Section  II.  Thb  Eedbem-
iNG  Son  and  his  Kin  gdom.  We  now  approach
the  real  subject  of  the  apostle's  letter,  and
that  which  is  its  distinction  and  glory
amongst  the  Epistles,  in  the  great  theo-
logical deliverance  of  vers.  15 — 20  concern-
ing the  Person  of  Christ.  This  passage
occupies  a  place  in  the  Christology  of  St.
Paul  corresponding  to  that  which  belongs
to  Eom.  iii.  19 — 26  in  regard  to  his  Soterio-
Ibgy.  Here  he  treats  directly  and  expressly
of  the  sovereignty  of  Christ  and  the  nature
of  his  Person — subjects  which  elsewhere  in
his  writings  are  for  the  most  part  matter
of  assumption  or  mere  incidental  reference.
But  the  paragraph  is  no  detached  or  inter-
polated piece  of  abstract  theology.  It
depends  grammatically  and  practically  on
the  previous  verses  (12 — 14).  It  sets  forth
who  he  is  and  what  place  he  fills  in  the  uni-
verse—tliat  Sou  of  God's  love  in  whom  we
have  redemption,  and  in  whose  kingdom
the  Father  lias  placed  us ;  and  what  cause,
therefore,  there  is  for  the  Colossiaus  to  give
thanks  as  having  such  a  Person  for  their
redeeming  King.  The  passage  falls  into
two  parts,  closely  corresponding  both  in
form  and  sense,  aud  governed,  like  other  of
the  apostle's  more  fervid  and  elevated  utter-
ances, by  a  Hebraistic  antithetical  rhythm
of  expression,  which  should  aid  us  in  the
difficulties  of  its  interpretation.  A  twofold
headship  is  ascribed  to  the  Lord  Christ —
natural  (vers.  15 — 17)  and  redemptionul
(vers.  18 — 20) :  the  first  the  source  and
ground  of  the  second ;  the  second  the  issue
and  consequence  of  the  first,  its  reassertion
and  consummation.  This  symmetrical
structure  we  may  attempt  to  exhibit  in  the
following  way  ;—


I.  Ver.  15.
Ver.  16.


(a)      Who  is  Image  of  God  the  invisible.  Firstborn  of  all  creation :


(h)  For  in  Him  were  created  all  things,

(o)  In  the  heavens  and  on  the  earth,  the  things  visible  and  the  things

invisible —

whether  thrones,  whether  lordships,  whether   principalities,
whether  dominions —
Ver.  17.  (d)  All  things  through  Him  aud  unto  Him  have  been  created;
„        (e)  And  He  is  before  all  things,  and  in  Him  all  things  consist.


THE  EPISTLE   rO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


[oh.  1. 1—29


II.  Ver.  18.  (e)  And  He  is  the  Hend  of  the  body,  the  Ohnrch ;

„        (a)     Who  is  (the)  Uegiuning,  I'irstborn  out  of  the  dead,

that  in  all  things  He  might  become  pre-eminent:
Ver.  19.  (6)  For  in  Him  lie  was  pleased  that  all  the  fulness  should  dwell;

Ver.  20.  (d)  And  through  Him  to  reconcile  all  things  unto  Him,  having  made  peaca
through  the  blood  of  liis  cross, — through  tlim,
»        (•)  Whether  the  things  on  the  earth,  or  the  things  in  (he  heavens.  '


t.  (a)  In  virtue  of  his  relation  to  God,  Christ
is  at  once  (6)  ground  of  creation,  (c)  both  in
heaven  and  on  earth,  and  at  the  same  time
((f)  its  means  and  its  end ;  he  is,  therefore,
(c)  supreme  over  the  universe,  precondition-
ing its  existence,  constituting  its  unity.  II.
In  a  similar  sense  he  is  (e)  Head  of  the
Church,  (a)  in  virtue  of  his  new  relation  to
man,  which  makes  him  (6)  ground,  (d)
means,  and  end  of  reconciliation  also,  (c)
whether  on  earth  or  in  heaven.

Ver.  15. — Who  is  Image  of  God  the  in-
visible (ch.  ii.  9;  Phil.  il.  6;  2  Cor.  iv.  4;
Heb.  i.  1—3;  xi.  27;  John  i.  1—3,  18;
V.  37,  38;  1  Tim.  i.  17;  Bxod.  xxxiii.
20 ;  Job  xxiii.  8,  9).  On  "  image  "  (eUiit)),
see  Lightfoot's  full  discussion ;  and  Trench's
'  Synonyms.'  The  word  is  well  defined  by
Philo  ('  On  Dreams,'  i.  §  40)  :  "  The  image
— no  imitation,  but  the  very  archetypal
representation  itself  (^abrh  rb  apx^Tuirop
e?5os)."  -Tliis  title  the  apostle  had  before
conferred  on  Christ  in  2  Cor.  iv.  4.
There  it  is  in  the  moral  and  redemptional
attributes  of  the  Godhead,  manifest  in
"  the  illumination  of  the  gospel,"  1hat
Jesus  Christ  (ver.  6),  the  incarnate  Hedeemer,
appears  as  "  the  Image  of  God : "  here  the
title  is  put  upon  him  as  representing  the
invisible  God  in  all  that  pertains  to  nature
and  creation.  The  Colossian  error  rested
on  a  philosophical  dualism.  It  assumed  an
absolute  separation  between  the  infinite  God
and  the  finite,  material  world,  which  was
viewed  as  the  work  of  lower  and  more  or
leas  evil  powers.  To  counteract  it,  there-
fore, the  apostle's  argument  must  go  down
to  the  foundation  of  things,  and  seeks  for
a  true  conception  of  the  universe  on  which
to  ground  itself.  Accordingly,  in  this  and
the  following  verses,  he  bases  the  redeeming
work  of  "  the  Word  made  flesh  who  dwelt
among  us,"  set  forth  in  his  previous  Epistles,
upon  that  of  "  the  Word  who  was  with  God
in  the  beginning,  who  was  God,  and
through  whom  all  things  were  made."  He
•voids,  however,  the  term  Logos,  which
must  have  been  perfectly  familiar  to  him  in
this  connection — possibly  to  prevent  misun-
derstanding (see  Introduction,  §§  4, 7).  First-
born of  aJJ  creation  (Rom.  viii.  29 ;  Heb.  i.
2,  6;  John  i.  18;  Ps.  Ixxxix.  27).  (On
"  firstborn,"  see  again  Lightfnot'e  invaluable
note.)  Frimogeniture  in  early  ages  carried
with  it  the  rights  of  full  heirship,  involving
repi'ecentation   of   the  father  both  in  his


religious  and  civil  capacity,  and  in  hii
sovereignty  within  the  house  (Gen.  xxv.
31;  xxvii.  29;  xlix.  3;  Deut.  xxi.  17;
1  Chron.  v.  1).  But  natural  precedence,  as
in  the  case  of  Esau  and  Jacob,  may  yield
to  Divine  election,  which  gives  a  unique
sacredness  and  separateness  to  the  position
and  title  of  the  fir.,tborn.  So  Israel  is
Jehovah's^rf <6or»  among  the  nations  (Exod.
iv.  22,  23;  Jer.  xxxi.  9).  What  belonged
to  the  chosen  people  under  this  title  is,  in
the  language  of  Pa.  Ixxxix.  27,  concentrated
on  the  person  of  the  Meesianic  King,  the
elect  Son  of  David;  and  firMorn  became
a  standing  designation  of  the  Messiah.
The  apostle  has  already  applied  it  to  Christ
in  his  relation  to  the  Church  (Rom.  viii.  29  ;
see  below,  ver.  18),  as  being  not  the  eldest
simply,  but  one  intrinsically  superior  to
and  sovereign  over  those  whom  lie  claims
for  his  brethren  (conip.  Rom.  xiv.  9).  Here
the  historical  birthriglit  and  actual  sove-
reignty of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  within  the
Church  are  affirmed  to  rest  upon  an  original
primacy  over  the  universe  itself.  He  is  not
the  Church's  only,  but  "all  creation's  First-
born "  (comp.  Heb.  iii.  3  -  6,  "  Son  over  his
own  house  " — the  house  of  him  "  who  built
all  things ").  The  phrase  is  synonymous
with  the  "  Heir  of  all  things"  of  Heb.  i.  2,
and  the  "  Only-begotten "  of  John  i.  18.
So  far  were  the  titles  Firstborn  and  Only-
begotten  from  excluding  each  other  in
Jewish  thought  that  Israel  is  designated
"  God's  firstborn,  only-begotten,"  in  the
apocryphal  Psalms  of  Solomon  (xviii.  4;
also  4  Esdr.  vi.  58) ;  and  so  entirely  had
the  former  become  a  title  of  sovereignty  that
God  himself  is  called  "Firstborn  of  the
world "  (Rabbi  Bechai :  see  Liglitfoot).
Philo  uses  the  equivalent  TrpaiT6yoi/os  of  the
Divine  Word  as  the  seat  of  the  archetypal
ideas  after  which  creation  was  framed.
This  phrase  has  been  a  famous  battle-ground
of  controversy.  It  was  a  chief  stronghold
of  the  Arians,  who  read  "  of  (out  of)  all
creation  "  as  partitive  genitive.  This  in-
terpretation, while  grammatically  allowable,
is  exegetioally  and  hislorically  impossible.
Forvers.  16and  ]7expresslyand  emphatically
distinguish  between  "him"  and  "the  all
things  "  of  creation.  The  idea  of  the  Son  of
God  being  part  of  creation  was  foreign  to  St.
Paul's  mind  (ch.  ii.  9 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  6 ;  Phil.
ii.  6 — 8),  and  to  the  thought  of  his  day.
Had  euiik  a  misunderstanding  occurred  tc


OB.  t  1—29.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSlANS.


him  as  possible,  he  would,  peihapa,  have
expressed  himself  differently.  Some  of  the
early  opponents  of  Arius  gave  to  vpaT6TOKos,
against  all  usage,  in  active  sense — "  First-
begetter  of  all  creation."  A  thanasius,  with
other  Greek  Fathers  of  the  fourth  century,
in  the  stress  of  the  same  controversy,  were
led  to  propose  what  subsequently  became
the  standard  Sooiniau  interpretation,  un-
derstanding "  creation  "  to  mean  "  the  new
(moral)  creation"  (.so  also  Solileiermaoher)
— againat  the  whole  scope  of  the  context,
and  cutting  the  very  nerve  of  the  apostle's
argument.  The  Jewish  theosopby  of  the
day  distributed  the  offices  of  representing
God,  and  of  mediating  between  him  and  the
creatures,  amongst  a  variable  and  nebulous
crowd  of  agencies — angels,  words,  powers —
neither  human  nor  strictly  Divine.  The
apostle  gathers  all  these  mediatorial  and
adpiiiiistrative  functions  into  one,  and  places
them  in  the  hands  of  "  the  Son  of  Ijis  love."
Looking  up  to  God,  he  is  his  Image :  look-
ing down  on  creation,  he  is  its  primal  Head
ami  Lord.  "Creation,"  standing  collectively
without  the  article  in  antithesis  to  "  First-
bom,"  is  used  qualitatively,  or  (as  the  logi-
cians would  say)  intensively  (see  Alford ;  and
corap.  ver.  23  and  Eph.  ii.  21,  Revised  Text).
This  is  better  than  making  xrlffts  a  quasi-
proper  noun  (Winer,  Lightfoot),  or  render-
ing distributively,  "every creature"  (Meyer,
EUieott).  (On  this  occasional  collective  use
of  TOs  without  article,  see  Kriiger's  'Griech.
Sprachlelire,'  i.  50.  11.  9.)

Ver.  16. — For  in  him  were  created  all
things  (ver.  17 ;  John  i.  3,  4).  'Ev  is  "  in,"
never  "by,"  in  St.  Paul.  T&  ttiJa'to  (coUto-
tive  plural  with  singular  predicate,  literally,
was  created)  corresponds  nearly  to  our  "  the
universe."  John  i.  4  (E.V.  margin  ;  prefer-
able, as  we  think)  is  the  true  parallel  to
this  sentence.  St.  John  sees  in  "  the  Word  "
the  animating  principle  of  creation ;  St.  Paul
in  "  the  Son  of  God's  love  "  its  ground  and
raison  d'Hre.  "  He  is  the  Source  of  its
life,  the  Centre  of  all  its  developments,  the
Mainspring  of  all  its  motions"  (Lightfoot).
As  the  spiritual  life  of  believers  was  formed
"  in  Christ "  (ch.  L  2, 4 ;  ii.  ]  0—15),  so,  in  its
measure,  the  natural  life  of  creation.  The
added  in  the  heavens  and  on  the  earth  (ver.
20;  Phil.  ii.  10;  Matt.  vi.  10)  reduces  to  the
same  subordination  to  the  Lord  Christ  the
two  worlds  so  widely  separated  in  common
thought  and  in  the  religious  philosophy  of
the  time.  The  polemic  bearing  of  tliia  dis-
tinction comes  out  more  cleuily  wnen  to
the  distinction  of  sphere  is  added  that  of
nature — the  things  visible  and  the  things
invisible  (oh.  ii.  18 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  18 ;  Rom,  i.
20 ;  Heb.  xi.  3) ;  and  when  amongst  the
latter  are  gpeoifled  those  highest  orders  of
invUible   beings   whose    power  might  be


most  readily  supposed  to  come  into  eom-

parison  with  that  of  the  Son, — whether
thrones,  or  lordships,  or  principalities,  or
dominions  (ch.  ii.  10,  15,  18,  19  ;  Eph.  i.  21 ;
iii.  10 ;  iv.  10 ;  vi.  12  ;  Rom.  viii.  38  ;  1  Cor.
XV.  24 ;  Heb.  ii.  5 ;  Eev.  iv.  4).  By  their
low  and  vague  conceptions  of  the  position
of  Christ,  and  by  over-exalted  notiona  of
that  of  the  angels,  the  Colossiau  errorists
had  all  but,  if  not  altogether,  identified
their  powers  with  his.  The  apostle,  there-
fore, declares  that  the  invisible  beinj<s  of
the  worlds  above  us,  however  lofty  their
n.^me3  or  mighty  their  powers,  are  his  crea-
tures as  much  as  the  lowliest  objects  within
our  sight  (eomp.  Heb.  i.,  ii.,  where  also
false  views  are  corrected  of  the  impurtance
of  the  angels,  exaggerated  at  the  expense  of
Christ).  This  list  of  angelic  titles  is  not
intended  to  be  exhaustive,  or  authoritativ*.
It  is  ratlier  quoted  as  current  at  the  time,
and  in  a  certain  tone  of  "  impatience  with
1his  elaborate  angelology"  (Lightfoot).
AH  things  through  him  and  unto  him  have
been  created  (1  Cor.  viii.  6 ;  Heb.  i.  2 ;  John
i.  3).  "  In  liim"  (ver.  16 o)  carries  us  back
to  the  beginning  of  creation  (with  verb
iKrla-Ori  in  aorist,  indefinite  past);  "through
him  "  leads  us  along  its  process ;  and  "  unto
him  "joints  us  to  its  end  (verb  iKTiarai
in  perrect  tense,  of  abiding  result).  Comp,
Philo  ('  On  Monarchy,'  ii.  §  5) :  "  Now  tho
image  of  God  is  the  Word,  through  which
the  whole  world  was  framed."  Already  St.
Paul  had  said,  "  Through  Christ  are  all
things  "  (1  Cor.  viii.  6).  Hitherto  the  "unto
(for)  him"  has  been  reserved  for  "the
]?ather"  (1  Cor.  viii.  6;  Kom.  xi.  36;  comp.
Heb.  ii.  10).  Baur  finds  in  this  change  of
expression  a  radical  theological  contradiction
and  a  sign  of  unauthenticity,  as  also  in
the  contrast  of  ch.  iii.  11  with  1  Cor.  xv.  28.
But  the  apostle  speaks  from  a  gtandpoint
different  from  that  of  the  earlier  Epistles.
In  the  Roman  and  Corinthian  passages  he
is  concerned  with  the  relations  of  God  to
man,  and  his  dealings  with  mankind  through
Chriit;  here,  with  the  relation)  of  Christ
himself  to  his  own  kingdom.  The  final
"  delivering  up  of  the  kingdom  to  the
Father"  lies  outside  the  scope  of  this  pas-
sage, which  begins  with  the  delivering  up
of  us  by  the  Fatlier  to  "  the  kingdom  of  the
Son"  (ver.  13).  Till  "the  end,"  which  ii
"  not  yet,"  Christ  must  reign  (1  Cor.  xv.  25),
and  all  things  owe  allegiance  to  him ;  they
are  created  unto  this  end  (Eph.  iii.  9,  10),
and  therefore  unto  him,  to  serve  his  king-
dom (Phil.  ii.  10).  The  apostle  asserts  oj
creation  what  he  has  already  said  (2  Cor.
V.  15 ;  Eom.  xiv.  9 ;  Acts  xx.  28)  and  is
about  to  say  again  (ver.  20)  of  the  redeemed
Oliurch.  That  both  exist  for  Christ  (rela-
tively and  proximately)  is  a  truth  perfectly


10


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


[CH.  1. 1—29


consistent  with  tlieir  existing  for  God
(absolutely  and  ultimately)  ;  1  Cor.  iii.  23
gives  the  unity  of  the  two  iileas.

Ver.  17.  —  And  he  is  before  all  things
(ver.  15 ;  John  i.  1 ;  viii.  58 ;  xvii.  5 ;  Eev.
ill.  14 ;  ProT.  viii:  22 — 31).  This  emphatic
"he"  (ouT<is)  meets  us  in  every  clause
and  in  every  possible  grammatical  form,
as  though  in  the  very  giammar  of  the
sentence  Christ  must  be  "  all  in  all."  "  He  "
is  kept  ringing  in  the  ears  of  those  who
were  in  danger  of  forgetting  him  in  the
charm  of  othtr  sounds  (eh.  ii.  4, 19  :  comp.
ch.  ii.  9 — 15;  Eph.  ii.  14 — 18,  for  the  same
rhetorical  feature ;  also  Eph.  iv.  11 ;  1  John
ii.  2;  Eev.  xix.  15,  Greek).  We  now  pass
from  the  origination  (ver.  16  a),  through
the  continuance  (ver.  16  6,  present  perfect
eifTKTTai),  to  the  present  constitution  (ver.
17  6)  of  the  universe  as  resting  upon  this
antecedent  and  perpetual  He  Is,  which
affords  the  underlying  basis  uniting  in  one
tlie  redemptional  and  the  creative  offices
of  Christ  (vers.  17,  18).  In  the  mouth  of
a  Hebraist  like  St.  Paul,  the  coincidence
of  the  doubly  emphatic  "  He  Is  "  with  the
etymological  sense  of  Jehovah  {Yahweh;
6  Hv,  IjXX),  as  interpreted  in  Exod.  iii.,  vi.,
can  scarcely  be  accidental  (see  Lightfoot).
And  Greek  readers  of  the  LXX  might
be  reminded  of  such  declarations  as  those
of  Isa.  xli.  4 ;  xliv.  6 ;  xlviii.  12  (comp.  John
i.  1,  2;  viii.  24,  28,  58;  xiii.  19;  Eev.
i.  8,  17;  xxi.  6).  In  St.  Paul's  Christ,  as
in  Isaiah's  Jehovah,  sovereignty  of  redeem-
ing, ri-sts  upon  sovereignty  of  creative
power,  and  both  alike  upon  that  perpetuity
of  being  which  "the  Son  of  God's  love"
shiires  with  the  Father.  Socinian  exegetes
give  to  "  before "  an  ethical  sense  ("  at
the  head  of,"  "  superior  to "),  in  harmony
with  their  reference  of  vers.  15—18  to  the
relation  of  Christ  to  the  Church.  But  irph
never  has  this  sense  in  St.  Paul :  comp.  also
tlie  "Firstborn"  of  ver.  15,  and  again
"Beginning,"  "Firstborn"  (ver.  18).  If
ver.  15  left  us  in  any  doubt  as  to  the
writer's  intention  to  assert  Christ's  pre-
mundane  existence,  this  expression  ought
to  remove  it.  Language  can  hardly  be
more  explicit.  And  all  things  in  Mm  consist
(John  i.  3,  4,  E.V.  margin ;  Heb.  i.  3 ;  xi.  3) ;
i.e.  have  their  common  standing,  are  consti-
tuted a  whole.  The  apostle  speaks  here  the
language  of  philosophy.  In  Plato  and
Aristotle,  the  term  consist  (eoneietence)  is
found  expressing  the  essentially  philoso-
phical conception  of  the  inherent  unity,  in
virtue  of  which  the  universe  is  such  and
forms  a  single,  correlated  whole.  The
Alexandrine  Judaists  had  already  found
this  unifying  principle  in  the  Logos :  "  He
is  the  Image  of  God,  to  whom  alone  fulness
belongs.    For  other  things  of  themselves


are  loose;  and  if  they  happen  to  be  con-
solidated anywhere,  it  is  the  Divine  Word
by  which  they  are  tied  fast.  For  it  is  the
cement  and  the  bond  of  things,  that  has
filled  all  things  with  its  essence.  And
having  chained  and  woven  together  every-
thing, it  is  itself  alisolutely  full  of  itself"
(Pliilo,  'Who  is  Heir  of  Divine  Things?'
§  38).  St.  Paul's  declaration  meets  the
questionings  indicated  by  language  of  this
kind  (see  the  more  extended  references  of
Meyer  and  Lightfoot).

Ver.  18. — The  words,  And  he  is  the  Head
of  the  body,  the  Church  (ch.  ii.  10,  19;
Eph.  i.  22,  23;  iii.  8—10;  iv.  15,  16;  Heb.
i.  3;  John  xv.  1 — 6),  identify  the  media-
torial Lord  of  creation  (vers.  15 — 17)  with
the  redeeming  Head  of  the  Church,  and
claim  the  prerogatives  belonging  to  him  in
the  former  capacity  as  the  basis  of  his
position  and  offices  in  the  latter  (comp.
Eph.  i.  22).  The  Pauline  doctrine  of  "the
Church  as  the  body  of  Christ  is  developed
in  Colossians  and  Ephesians,  especially  in
the  later  Epistle,  where  it  receives  its  fruit-
ful application.  Here  the  doctrine  of  the
Person  of  Christ  and  the  doctrine  of  the
Church  find  their  meeting-point  as  mutually
implying  each  other,  and  together  opposed
to  the  double  effect  of  early  Gnosticism,
which  tended  first  to  lower  the  dignity  of
Christ,  and  then  to  impair  the  unity  of  his
Church  (see  ch.  ii.  19,  note).  In  1  Cor.
xii.  12 — 27  and  Kom.  xii.  4,  5  the  figure
of  the  body  and  members  is  merely  a  passing
illustration  of  the  mutual  relation  of  believ-
ers in  the  Church ;  now  the  body  of  Christ
becomes  the  formal  title  of  the  Church,
expressing  the  fundamental  and  fixed  con-
ception of  its  nature  bs  related  to  him,  who
is  the  centre  of  its  unity,  the  source  of  all
vital  energy  and  directing  control  within  it
(comp.  the  vine  and  branches,  John  xv.).
In  vers.  16,  17  the  writer  passed  from  the
ti.ough^i  of  the  origin  to  that  of  the  con-
stitution of  the  cosmos ;  now  he  proceeds
in  the  reverse  order.  {He  is  the  head)  who
is  (the)  Beginning  (Eev.  iii.  14;  xxi.  6;
xxii.  13;  Acts  iii.  15;  v.  31;  Heb.  ii.  10;
xii.  2).  'Apxh  is  without  article,  used  as
a  proper  noun.  It  is  arbitrary  to  identify
it  with  a.irapxii  ("  firstfruits  ")  of  1  Cor.  xv.
20,  23 ;  Eom.  xi.  16.  As  explained  by  the
following  words,  it  denotes,  as  in  philosophi-
cal Greek,  a  first  principle,  originating  cause,
font  et  origo  (see  Lightfoot's  note  and
references).  To  borrow  "of  the  dead"
from  the  following  parallel  clause  weakens
the  force  of  both.  His  body,  the  Church,
begins  in  him,  dating  and  deriving  from
him  its  "all  in  all"  (ch.  iii.  11,  4;  1  John
V.  12 ;  Eev.  xxi.  5 ;  2  Cor.  T.  17).  This  ia
quite  consistent  with  the  "all  things  are
of  God "  of  2  Cor.  v.  18 ;  for  the  apostle


OH.  1. 1—29.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


11


is  thinking  here  of  the  relative,  historical
beginning  of  "the  kingdom  of  the  Son"
(ver.  13),  there  of  the  absolute  beginning
of  the  Divine  work  of  redemption  (oomp.
1  Cor.  i.  30 ;  iii.  23 ;  and  note  on  "  unto
him,"  ver.  16).  St.  John,  writing  to  the
neighbouring  Laorticea,  eolioes,  apparently,
this  language  of  our  apostle  (Kev.  iii.  14).
As  Firathorn  out  of  the  Sead  (ch.  ii.  12,  13 ;
iii.  1 ;  Eph.  i.  19,  20 ;  Rom.  1.  4 ;  vi.  1—14 ;
1  Cor.  XV.  IS— 18;  2  Cor.  xiii.  4;  Acts
xiii.  30—89 ;  1  Pet.  1.  3,  21 ;  Rev.  i.  5,  18 ;
ii.  8;  John  xi.  25),  this  Beginning  actually
begins ;  Christ  becomes  the  source  of  a  new
humanity,  a  new  creation  (2  Cor.  iv.  14  and
Eom.  viii.  21).  The  apostle  derives  the
whole  life  and  power  of  Christianity,
whether  as  seen  in  Christ  or  proved  by  his
pRople,  from  his  resurrection  (ste  parallels).
The  name  Firstborn  brings  over  with  it  into
this  verse  the  gloiy  which  surrounds  it  in
ver.  15.  The  Divine  Firstborn,  who  is  before
and  over  all  things,  wins  his  title  a  second
timo  for  his  earthly  brethren's  sake  (Heb.
Ii.  10 — 15).  As  he  appears  "out  of  the
dead,"  bom  anew  from  the  dark  womb  of
the  grave,  the  nether  abyss  (Rom.  x.  7;
Kph.  iv.  9 ;  Pidl.  ii.  8),  the  Father  declares
to  him,  "  Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have
1  begotten  thee  "  (Acts  xiii.  33  ;  Heb.  i.  5) ;
the  Church  exclaims,- "  My  Lord  and  my
God"  (John  xx.  28);  "all  autliority  in
heaven  and  on  earth"  becomes  his  (Matt,
xxviii.  18 ;  John  xvii.  2) ;  he  is  made
•'  Fiistborii  over  many  brethren,"  who  call
him  Lord  (Riim.  viii.  29;  xiv.  9;  Rev.
V.  12);  and  proceeds  to  "subdue  all  things
unto  himself"    (Phil.  ii.  9,   10;    iii.  21;

1  Cor.  XV.  25;  Heb.  x.  13;  Rev.  six.
LI— 16).  "Firstborn  out  of  the  dead"  in
the  source  of  his  new  birthright  of  lordship
in  the  Church,  he  is  "  Firstborn  o/  the  dead  "
(  Kev.  i.  5,  B.V.:  oomp.  ver.  15)  in  his  abiding
relation  to  dying  humanity.  And  he  won
tills  title  80  as  to  carry  out  an  antecedent
purpose  in  his  mind  (comp.  Bom.  xiv.  9;
■'  In  the  mind  of  the  father,"say  Meyer  and
others — a  thought  true  in  itself,  but  inter-
[.olated  here),  viz.  that  he  might  become  in
all  things  pre-eminent  (ver.  13;  ch.  ii.  6;  Eph.
V.  5;  1  Cor.  xv.  25;  Luke  xix.  12—27;
xxii.  29,  30;  John  xviii.  36;  Rev.  1.5;
iii.  21;  xix.  16;  Ps.  ii.  7,  8).  The  purpose
of  creation  as  "  unto  Christ "  (ver.  17)  had
been  frustrated,  so  far  as  related  to  man,
by  the  entrance  of  sin  and  death,  and  his
rightful  pre-eminence  denied  him  (John
i.  10).  He  must,  therefore,  recover  it,
must  become  pre-eminent ;  and  this  he  does
by  his  death  and  resurrection  (John  xii.
31,  32;  Heb.  u.  14,  15;  xii.  2;  Phil.  ii.
6—11;  Isa.  liii.  12).  "To  this  end  Jesus
died  and  lived  again"  (Eom.  xir.  9;  eomn.

2  Cor.  T.  IS;  Rev.  i.  18).


Ter.  19. — For  in  him  he  was  pleased  that
all  the  fulness  should  dwell  (ch.  ii.  9 ;  Eph.
i.  10;  John  i.  14,  16;  Acts  ii.  36;  Heb.
vii.  25;  Matt,  xxviii.  18).  Vers.  19,  20
stand  to  ver.  18  as  vers.  16,  17  to  ver.  15.
The  creative  work  of  the  Son  explains  and
justifies  his  supremacy  over  the  natural
universe,  and  his  reconciling  work  accounts
for  his  lordship  over  the  Church,  as  it
establishes  his  "  pre-eminence  in  all  things."
In  him  dwelt  the  forces  and  laws  of  the
first  creation ;  in  him,  likewise,  all  the
fulness  engaged  in  the  new  creation.  It
is  hard  to  say  what  is  the  grammatical
subject  of  "  was  pleased."  (1)  The  great
majority  of  interpreters,  both  ancient  and
modern,  understand  "  the  Father "  as
borrowed  from  vers.  12,  13,  and  suggested
by  the  apostle's  use  of  this  verb  elsewhere
(see  1  Cor.  i.  21;  Gal.  i.  15;  Phil.  ii.  13;
Eph.  i.  5,  9,  11) ;  so,  recently,  De  Wette,
Meyer,  Lightfoot,  Alford,  Klopper,  E.V.
(2)  Ellicott,  Ewahl,  R.  Schmidt,  Weiss,
E.V.  margin,  adopt  the  immediately  follow-
ing "all  the  fulness."  (3)  Conybeare,
Hofmann,  with  a  few  others,  prefer  "the
Son,"  the  exclusive  and  all-absorbing  sub-
ject of  vers.  15—18.  The  second  interpre-
tation personifies  Pleroma  in  a  manner
unsupported  by  Pauline  usage,  and  more
suitable  to  the  second  century  (see  note  on
"  fulness,"  below)  ;  but  the  considerations
urged  by  its  supporters  against  the  common
view  are  of  great  weight.  In  favour  of
the  third  interpretation  given  above,  are  the
following  reasons  :  that  it  supplies  the
nearest  subject,  that  which  the  Colossian
reader,  without  the  usage  of  other  Epistles
in  his  mind,  would  naturally  assume  ;  that
it  prepares  for  the  reference  of  the  further
predieates,  "reconcile,"  "having  made
peace,"  "present  you  holy,"  etc.  (vers
20 — 23),  to  Christ,  in  agreement  with  the
closely  parallel  Eph.  ii.  14 — 16;  v.  27;
further  and  especially,  that  this  view  beet
harmonizes  with  the  sustained  and  unique
emphasis  with  which  tlie  writer  has  dwelt
on  the  sovereignty  of  Christ  in  every  clause
from  ver.  14  onwards;  and,  lastly,  that  his
point  of  view  is  historical  (note  the  aorista
throughout  vers.  18 — 20),  as  concerned  not
with  the  "  eternal  purpose "  and  absolute
initiative  of  the  Father,  but  with  the  estab-
lishment of  his  own  kingdom  by  the  Son
(ver.  13 ;  see  note  on  "  unto  him,"  ver.  16).
There  is  nothing  in  the  term  "  well  pleased  "
("good  pleasure")  to  prevent  the  apostle
applying  it  to  the  Son,  if  he  finds  occasion
to  do  BO.  But  "this  view  confuses  the
theology  of  the  passage  hopelessly  "  (Light-
foot).  Just  the  same  is  said  by  Baur  and
Pfleiderer  of  the  "  unto  him "  of  ver.  16,
and  the  "all  in  all"  of  ch.  iii.  11,  as  com-
pared with  the  language  of  1  CorinthiaiM


12


THE  EPISTLE  tO  TAB  CkJLOSSlAlifS.


tos.  1. 1—29,


and  Bomani:  and  the  eame  answer  holds
good  in  each  casp,  viz.  that  the  apostle
speaks  concerning  Christ  and  the  Church,
and  his  thoughts  move  within  the  circle  of
their  mutual  relations,  grounded  as  these
are  in  the  Christian  constitution  of  the
universe  itself.  God't  good  pleasure  (Eph.
i.  5,  9)  lay  within  and  behind  Christ's
choice  and  action  (John  viii.  29) ;  but  it
wag  his  own  good  pleasure  too  (John  x.  30).
So  in  John  x.  18  (comp.  also  Eph.  v  2  aud
Gal.  ii.  20  with  Eom.  v.  8  and  viii.  32)  the
initiiitive  of  Christ  in  the  work  of  redemp-
tion is  recognized  along  with  that  of  the
Father.  "He  emptied  himself  "  (Phil.  ii.  7);
and  again  "  was  pleased "  that  "  all  the
iulness  "  should  be  his :  comp.  Eph.  iv.  8 — 11
(quite  consistent  with  1  Cor.  xii.  28),  Heb.
i.  3  6,  where  Christ  appears  regally  assuming
his  own  glory.  "  All  the  fulnesi "  is  not
precisely  "  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  "  of
ch.  ii.  9.  Had  the  more  definite  expression
preceded,  it  wnuld  have  been  fai]  to  interpret
this  more  general  one  by  its  aid.  Pleroma
is  a  word  so  varied  and  elastic  in  Pauline
usage  (8<je  Kom.  xi.  12 ;  xiii.  10  ;  Gal.  iv.  4 ;
]':ph.  i.  10,  23 ;  iii.  19 ;  iv.  13)  that  it  can
scarcely  have  hardened  suddenly  into  "  a
recognized  term  in  theology,  denoting  the
totality  of  the  Divine  Person  and  iittributes"
(Liglitfoot).  No  earlier  example  of  sucii
a  usage  is  furnished.  To  import  it  here  is
to  make  the  Epistle  speak  the  language
of  the  second  century.  "All  the  fulness"
ascribed  to  "  the  Son  of  God's  love "  as
"Head  over  all  things  to  the  Church,"
alike  "  Beginning  of  tlje  creation  of  God  "
and  "  Firstborn  out  of  the  dead,"  embraces
tliat  entire  plenitude  of  nature  and  of  power
re&iding  in  him  since  the  time  that  he
ascended  to  the  right  hand  of  power  (oh.
iii.  1;  1  Pet.  i.  21;  Heb.  i.  3,  4;  v.  9;
vii.  28),  and  in  virtue  of  which  he  "becomes
in  all  things  pre-eminent."  KaToiKfio
denotes  a  "  fixed  dwelling"  (ch.  ii.  9  ;  Kph.
iii.  17);  but  is  aorist  in  tense  here  (present
in  ch.  ii.  9)  along  with  evS6Kri(Te  ("  was
pleased  ")—"  shouM  make  its  dwelling  ia
him"  (see  Acts  vii.  2,  4),  pointing  to  •
distinct  event,  viz.  in  this  case  tiie  Ascension
which  consummated  the  Besurrection  set
forth  in  the  last  clause.  Eph.  i.  20—23  and
iv.  8 — 10  strongly  confirm  the  correctness
of  this  view;  there  "the  fulness"  with
which  Christ  is  charged,  and  wherewith  he
proceeds  to  "  fill  all  things,"  dates  from  his
ascension  (John  xii.  32;  Acts  ii.  82 — 34;
V.30, 31;  Kom.  viii.  34).  (On  the  etymology
and  history  of  Pleroma,  see  Lightfoot,  pp.
257 — 273.  It  is  passive  in  derivation,
denoting  that  wherewitli  anything  is  filled
or  made  compk  te.)  "  Prom  henceforth  "
Christ  is  a  complete  Christ,  and  we  are
"  made  complete  iu  hiju  "  (ch.  iL  9, 10 ;  see


notes).  This  plenitude  qualifies  him  as
plenipotentiary  in  his  work  of  reconciliation.
Ver.  20. — And  (was  pleased)  through  him
to  reconcile  all  things  unto  him  (ver.  16;
Eph.  i.  10;  Heb.  ix.  26;  x.  12,  13;  Ps.
ii.  7,  8).  Not  "through  Christ— nnto  the
Father,"  as  Meyer,  Alford,  BUioott,  Light-
foot  contend.  This  involves  reading
"the  Father"  as  subject  of  ver.  19  (see
note).  There  is  nothing  in  the  grammar
of  this  verse  to  suggest  a  leferenoe  of  the
same  pronoun  to  two  different  persons.
And  the  analogy  of  ver.  16  appears  decisive
(see  note)  :  "  'J'hrpugh  him  wnd  unto  liiin
all  things  were  created  and  reconciled "
(De  Wutte,  Oonybeare,  Hofmann).  So
Chrysostom :  "Lest  thou  shonldest  think
that  he  undertook  the  ofBce  of  a  minister
only,  he  saith  '  unto  himself.'  And  yet  he
elsewhere  says  that  he  reconciled  us  'to
God.'  "  English  idiom  prefers  the  refiexive
"himself"  in  such  a  sentence  (so  in  ver.  19);
but  it  is  not  necessary  in  Greek  (A.  Butt-
mann,  'N.  T.  Grammar,'  p.  Ill,  English
tran.^.).  Elsewljere  icaToiAA<£ir(ra>  ("reconcile";
is  construed  with  -n-phs  or  simple  d.itive;
here  with  eh  in  correspondence  with  ver.
16,  and  implying,  in  contrast  with  Sia
("  through  "),  the  end  for  which  rather  than
the  person  to  whom  one  is  reconciled  (ver.
18  b ;  also  Eom.  xiv."  9  ;  2  Cor.  v.  15 ;  1  Cor.
iii.  23).  Brought  back  again  to  peace  with
God,  we  are  brought  into  the  kingdom  of
his  Son  (vers.  13,  14).  The  rebels  are
made  to  "  kiss  the  Son."  He  wins  back
his  kingdom  in  them.  And  so  the  design  of
creation  as  his  dominion  is  answered  at  last.
"  Reconcile"  ("  reconciliation  ")  m  New  Tes-
tament usage  implies  previous  resentment
in  him  to  whom  the  offender  is  reconciled
(see  Cremer's  'Lexicon,'  and  Meyer  on  Eom.
V.  10).  For  sucli  resentment  in  Christ,  comp.
ch.  iii.  13;  1  Cor.  viii.  12;  Luke  xix.  27;
Acts  xxvi.  14;  Eev.  vi.  IG;  Ps.  ii.  12.
KaraWdiTfra  is  "to  take  into  favour  or
allegiance,"  and,  with  cm-6,  "to  take  back
into  favour."  This  reconciliation  to  Christ
the  King  concerns  the  "  all  things "  of
ver.  16,  restoring  the  broken  unity  of
creation  (see  note  on  "the  things  in  the
heavens,"  below).  And  there  is  an  actual
reconciliation  now  being  carried  on  by  the
Son  from  heaven  (Phil.  iii.  20,  21 ;  1  Cor.
XV.  25),  resting  upon  the  potential  reconcilia-
tion effected  on  the  cross  (compare  the  same
double  sense  in  2  Cor.  v.  18—21).  Having
made  peace  through  the  blood  of  his  cross
(ch.  ii.  13,  14;  Eph.  ii.  13—18;  2  Cor.
V.  18— vi.  1;  Eom.  iii.  25;  v.  10;  Heb.
ix.  11—14;  Eev.  i.  5;  v.  9;  Matt.  xxvi.  28)
The  apostle  "  glories  "  only  "  in  the  cross  "
(Gal.  vi.  14),  the  sole  menns  of  salvation,
viewed  from  whatever  side  (1  Cor.  i.
23,  24).    Peace  is  made  foi;  those  who  wei«


OH.  1. 1—29.]  THE  EPrSTLB  TO  THE  COLOSSUNS.


IS


"  alienated  and  enemies  in  wioked  woTks  "
(ver.  21),  who  were  under  the  dominion  of
the  enemy  of  God  and  hJ8  Christ  (vers.
18, 14).  It  begins  as  the  peace  of  forgive-
•M*  (ver.  14;  ii.  13;  iii,  13;  Bom.  tii.
24—26;  V,  1),  and  continues  as  an  abiding
fellowship  with  God  through  the  Spirit,  in
obediencu  to  Christ,  the  one  Lord  (ver.  13;
cb.  ii.  6 !  Rom.  v.  1,  2 :  viii.  5—9,  28 ;  Gal.
V.  22;  Phil.  iv.  7;  2  Cor.  x.  4,  5;  Acts  it.
32 — 34).  There  can  be  peace  only  when  he
is  Lord  (1  Cor.  XT.  25;  Heb  x.  13;  KeT.
xix.  11 — 16).  In  this  all  the  present
blessings  of  salvation  are  comprised  (ver  2).
"  The  blood  of  the  cross "  is  the  one  all-
Buffloient  atonement  wliich  brings  men  into
peace  with  God,  and  so  puis  them  back
into  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  who  is  "  Prince
and  Saviour,"  "Priest  and  King"  (Eom,
iii.  25,  26;  xir.  9;  2  Cor.  v.  15;  Titus
ii.  14).  Faith,  the  suhjectiye  condition  of
peouse,  appears  in  Ter.  23  (Eom.  v.  1 ;  xv.  13),
"  Having  made  peace,"  as  a  single  compound
verb,  occurs  only  here  in  tlie  New  Testa-
ment (conip.  Matt,  v.  10).  The  repiated
through  him  is  textually  doubtful ;  copyists
were  more  likely  to  omit  than  to  insert
it  here.  This  emphatic  repetition  suitably
Introduces  the  bold  and  startling  words,
whether  the  things  on  the  earth,  or  the
things  in  the  heavens  (ver.  16).  The  things
"  in  the  heavens,"  as  in  ver.  16,  include  the
whole  creation,  spiritual  or  material,  other
than  "the  things  upon  the  earth."  In
Rom.  viii.  19 — 21  we  learned  that  the  earthly
creation  sliares  man's  fall  and  his  redemp-
tion. But  "sin  entered"  (Rom.  v.  12)
here  from  outside,  and  how  far  its  influence
extends  beyond  our  planet  we  cannot  tell.
St.  Paul  does  not  positively  affirm  that  the
reconciliation  of  the  cross  emlir.ices  other
worlds  than  ours.  He  speaks  hypotlietically.
Christ's  death  is  in  his  eyes  an  event
parallel  only  to  creation  in  its  magnitude,
ami  he  can  set  no  limit  to  its  potential
etHoacy.  Its  virtue  is  sufBcient  to  "  reconcile
all  tilings,"  wherever  such  reconciliation
is  needed  and  is  possible  (yet  see  Heb.
ii.  16).  Tlie  difficuliy  is  not  to  be  evaded
by  putting  a  milder  sense  on  "  reconcile "
as  applied  to  "  tlie  things  in  the  heavens"
(so  Alford  and  others,  referring  to  Bph.
iii.  10);  "the  blood  of  the  cross"  forbids
any  thought  but  that  of  the  propitiatory
alonoment  (see  Meytr).  Nor  does  the  text
say  anything  of  a  reconciliation  between
"earth  and  heaven"  (Erasmus),  " men  and
angels"  (Chrysostom,  Bengel),  "Jews  and
Gentiles,"  "secular  and  spiritual  affairs,"
etc. ;  such  glosses  are  opposed  to  St.  Paul's
strict  use  of  the  word  "  reconcile,"  and  to
the  parallelism  of  ver.  16.

In  vers.  21 — 23  the  apostle  descends,  with
chai«Rterietic  boldness  and  suddenness,  from


the  vast  generalizations  of  vers.  16 — 20  to

the  closest  personal  application  of  liis  theme
— from  "  all  things  in  earth  and  heaven  "  to
"you "(comp.  Bph. i. 22— ii.  1, 2).  With  Light-
foot,  we  place  only  a  comma,  or  a  colon  at
most,  after  v«r.  20.

Ver.  21. — And  yon,  at  one  time  being  (men)
alienated,  and  enemies  in  your  thought,  (en-
gaged) in  your  wicked  works,  yet  now  did  he
reconcile ;  or,  were  ye  reconciled  [so  Meyer,
Lightfoot,  Westoott  and  Hort,  and  R.V.
margin,  following  Codex  B]  (ch.  ii.  1 1 ;  iii.  7 ;
Eph.  il.  1—3,  11,  12;  iv.  18;  v.  5—8;  1  Cor.
vi.  4;  Rom,  vi.  21 ;  1  Pet.  i.  11 ;  iv.  3).  Tlia
combination  of  oyxej  ("being")  with  perfect
passive  participle  ("  having  been  alienated  ")
implies  a  fixed  condition,  that  has  become  as
a  part  of  one's  nature  (so  in  Eph.  iv.  18,
Revised  Text).  As  the  opposite  of  "  recon-
ciled," "  alienated  "  is  strictly  passive,  and
denotes,  not  a  subjective  feeling  on  tlie  part
of  the  sinner,  but  an  objective  determina-
tion on  the  part  of  God,  an  exolusinn  from
the  Divine  favour,  from  "  the  kingdom  of
the  Son  "  and  "  the  lot  of  the  saints  "  (vers.
12,  13;  Eph.  V.  9;  ii.  3,  11—13;  iv.  18;
Rom.  i,  18 ;  comp.  usage  of  LXX  in  Ps.
Ixviii.  9;  1  Esdr.  ix.  4 ;  Sir.  xi.  34).  "  Ene-
mies in  your  thought "  sets  forth  the  dispo
sition  of  the  sinner  towards  God  (Rom.  viii
7;  Phil.  iii.  18:  so  Alford,Ellioott,  Lightfoot).
Meyer  maintains  the  passive  sense  of  "  ene-
mies," as  found  in  Rom.  v.  10 ;  xi.  28 ;  Gal.
iv.  16.  On  the  latter  view,  tJ  Smvoia  is  in-
strumental dative,  "by,"  "in  virtue  of  your
state  of  mind ; "  on  the  former,  it  is  dative
of  reference  or  definition.  Aiavuia  (here  only
and  Bph.  ii.  3  and  iv.  18  in  St.  Paul)  has
possibly  a  polemical  reference.  It  denotes  in
Greek  philosophy,  the  faculty  of  thought,
as  opposed  to  the  bodily  powers.  In  Philo's
teaching  it  signifies  the  higher  part  of
human  nature,  akin  to  God,  and  opposed  to
evil  which  belongs  to  the  senses :  "  Thought
Qiavoia)  is  the  best  thing  in  us"  ('  On  Fugi-
tives,' §  26)  ;  "  Every  man  in  regard  to  liis
intellect  (8ioco(a)  is  united  to  the  Divine
Word,  being  an  impression  or  fragment  nr
ray  of  that  blessed  nature ;  but  in  respect
of  bis  body  he  belongs  to  the  entire  world"
('On  the  Creatnm  of  the  World,'  §  51).  But
here  sin  is  associated  with  the  intellect  in
man,  and  redemption  with  "the  body  of
Christ's  flesh"  (ver.  22):  comp.  notes  on
"  reason,"  cb.  ii.  18,  and  "  body,"  ch.  ii.  23 ;
also  Eph.  iv.  18,  where  the  reason  is  vain,
the  intellect  darkened.  "Wicked  [empha-
sized by  its  position  in  the  Greek,  denoting
active  evil ;  see  Trench's  '  Synonyms,'  on
irovwpfJs]  works"  is  a  phrase  common  in
St.  John,  only  used  here  by  St.  Paul  (comp.
ch.  iii.  7;  Bph.  ii.  1—3;  Rom.  vi.  19,  20;
Gal.  V,  19;  Heb.  ix.  14).  These  worka  are
the  practices  of  life  in  which  the  sinner  is


14


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS,


[oh.  1. 1 — ^


abidingly  excluded  from  "the  kingdom  of
Christ  and  God  "  (Eph.  v.  5),  and  manifests
the  radical  antipathy  of  his  mi  ad  toward
God.  "Yet  [or,  'but']  now:"  corap.  ver.
26;  ch.iii.8;  Eph.ii.13;  Eom.  iii. 21,  etc.— a
lively  form  of  transition  characteristic  of  St.
Paul,  primarily  temporal,  then  also  logical
in  sense.  "  Were  ye  reconciled  "  breaks
through  the  grammntical  structure  of  the
sentence,  as  in  vers.  26,  27  (see  Lightfoot,
and  Winer's  'N.  T.  Grammar,'  p.  717).  If
"did  he  reconcile'  (oi-,  "hath  he  reconciled")
be  the  coiTect  reading, "  Christ "  is  still  sub-
ject of  the  verb,  as  in  vers.  19 — 22,  and
consistently  with  Eph.  ii.  15, 16.  (On  "re-
concile," see  ver.  20.)

Ver.  22.— In  the  body  of  Ms  flesli  (ver.  20 ;
ch.  ii.  11;  Eom.  viii.  3;  TJi  4;  1  Tiui.  iii.
16;  1  Pet.  ii.  24;  iii.  18;  iv.  1 ;  Heb.  ii.  14,
15;  X.  20;  1  John  iv.  2;  2  John  7;  Luke
xxiv.  39).  With  a  significant  emphasis,  the
muterial  body  of  Christ  is  made  the  instru-
ment of  ttiat  reconciliation  in  the  carrying
out  of  which  "  his  whole  fulness  "  is  engaged
(vers.  19,  20) ;  see  note  on  "  thought,"  ver.
21,  and  on  "  body,"  ch.  ii.  23.  The  necessity
of  the  double  expression  was  shown  by  the
fact  that  the  Gnostic  Marcion  erased  "of
his  flesii "  from  the  text  of  this  Epistle,  and
interpreted  "the  body"  as  "the  Church;"
Bengel  and  others  suppose  "  of  his  flesh  "  to
be  added  to  prevent  this  mistake  (see  Tef-
tullian,  'Against  Marcion,'  v.  19).  This
phrase  was  the  crux  of  Dooetism,  whose
principles  were  indeed  implicitly  contained
in  the  Alexandrine- Jewish  philosophy  with
its  contempt  for  matter  and  the  physical
life,  which  was  now  first  beginning  to  leaven
the  Church.  Body  is  antithetical  to  soul;
flesh  to  spirit.  The  ibrm«r  is  individual  and
concrete,  tlie  actual  physical  organism ;  the
latter  denotes  the  material  of  which  it  con-
sists, the  bodily  nature  in  its  essence  and
characteristics  (com p.  note  on  ver.  11 ;  and
see  Cremer's  '  Lexicon '  on  these  words).
"  In  the  body "  is  not  "  by  the  body,"  nor
"  during  his  eaithly  life  "  (as  though  opposed
to  "  out  of  the  body,"  2  Oor.  v.  6—8 ;  xii.  3),
but  "as  incarnate."  The  Epistle  to  the
Hebrews  expands  the  thought  of  our  Epistle
in  its  own  way  in  Heb.  ii.  14 — 1 8 ;  x.  5 — 10.
That  reconciliation  is  through  the  (or,  his)
death  (Rom.  iii.  25;  iv.  25;  v.  10;  1  Cor.
XV.  3;  2  Oor.  v.  14, 15;  Gal.  iii.  13;  Heb.
ii.  9;  ix.  15,  16;  John  xL  51,  52;  x.  11;
Rev.  i.  18 ;  ii.  8)  is  the  fundamental  axiom
of  the  gospel  (vei.  5),  already  Implied  in
vers.  14  and  20.  And  the  atoning  death
iiresupposes  the  Incarnation  (Heb.  ii.  14).
The  two  foregoing  phrases  belong  gram-
matically to  ver.  21.  To  present  you  holy
and  without  blemish  and  uureprovable  before
h*m  (ver.  28 ;  Eph.  i.  4 ;  v.  25—27 ;  1  Thess.
«.  19;  V.  28;  Bom.  IL  16;  1  C!or.  iv.  5;  2


Oor.  iv.  14;  y.  10;  Acts  xvii.  31);  before
"  Christ"  (ver.  19),  who  ii  "Judge"  (John
V.  22,  23)  as  well  as  "King"  and  "Re-
deemer" (vers.  13,  14):  this  also  belongs  to
his  fulness.  He  will  "  him  elf  present  the
Church  to  himself"  (Eph.  v.  27,  Revised
Text ;  also  2  Cor.  iv.  14).  In  this  presenta-
tion bis  redeeming  work  culminates  (comp.
Phil.  i.  6,  10 ;  ii.  16 ;  and,  in  view  of  the
connection  of  vers.  22  and  23,  1  Cor.  i.  6 —
9).  So,  in  general,  Meyer  and  Alfurd.  EUi-
oott  and  Lightfoot  refer  to  God's  present
approbation,  quoting  Eph.  i.  4,  a  parallel
much  less  close  than  ver.  27,  and  supposing
"  God  "  the  subject  of  the  verb  (see  note  on
ver.  19).  "  Holy  erga  Deum ;  uiithaut  blemish
respeetu  vestri;  unreprovdble  reepecta  proxi-
mi"  (Ben.;el).  (On  "holy,"  see  note,  ver.
2 ;  also  eh.  iii.  12.)  "A/xuiios  is  not  "  with-
out iilame,''  but  "without  blemish,"  "im-
maculate "  (Lightfoot,  E.V. ;  Eph.  i.  4 ;  v.
27;  Phil.  ii.  15:  comp.  Heb.  ix.  14;  1  Pet.
i.  19).  In  the  LXX  it  is  the  eqoivalent  of
the  Hebrew  tamim  ("  integer"),  "  faultless  "
in  bodily  condition  or  in  moral  character,
" Unreprovalile,"  as  a  judicial  term  ("  with-
out charge  that  can  be  prefi-rred  "),  points
to  the  judgment-day.  and  bene  is  wanting
in  Eph.  i.  4  (comp.  1  Cor.  i  8 ;  Rom.  viii.
33,  ;^4;  1  Tim.  iii.  10;  Titus  i.  6,  7).

Ver.  23. — If  at  least  ye  are  continuing
in  the  faith,  grounded  and  settled  (ver.  4 ;
ch.  iL  6,  7;  Eph.  iii.  18;  vi.  10—17;  Phil,
i.  27 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  2 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  15 ;  1  Oor.
XV.  2,  58 ;  Gal.  i.  6 ;  v.  1).  All  that  Christ
has  done  and  will  do  for  the  Oolossians,  yet
depends  on  tlieir  continued  faith.  Etye  (only
Pauline  in  New  Testament;  containing  "  the
volatile  particle  yt ")  suggests,  actually  (.Gal.
iii.  4)  or  rhetorically  (Eph.  iii.  2 ;  iv.  21),  a
conceivable  altern.itive ;  if  as  appears,  as  one
hopes,  or  fears,  or  may  assume.  "  Are  con-
tinuing in  "  (eViMeVere)  is  both  "  abiding  by  "
and  "  adhering  to"  (Rom.  vi.  1 ;  Phil.  i.  24,
R.V. ;  1  Tim.  iv.  16).  As  present  indica-
tive, it  implies  a  (supposed)  actual  state.
"  The  faith,"  as  regularly  in  the  New  Testae
ment,  is  the  act  and  exercise  of  faith  (sub-
jective), not  the  contept  or  matter  of  faith
(objective).  "Grounded"  or  "founded,"
perfect  passive,  implies  a  fixed  condition
(comp.  oh.  ii.  7 ;  Epli.  iii.  18,  coupled  with
"rooted;"  1  Cor.  iii.  10—12;  Eph.  ii.  20;
2  Tim.  ii.  19 ;  also  Luke  vi.  48).  "  Settled  "
(eSpaios,  fr(Hn  tSpa,  a  seai')  is  opposed  to
"moved  away,"  just  as  in  1  Oor.  xv.  58.
The  words,  and  not  being  moved  away  (or,
letting  yourselves  he  moved  aiedy),  put  the
same  assumption  negatively,  and  more
specifically  as  be  adds,  from  the  hope  of  the
gospel;  good  tidings  (vers.  5,  27;  oh.  iii.  15,
24 ;  Eph.  ii.  12 ;  1  Thesa  i.  3,  10 ;  2  Tim.  i.  9
—11 ;  1  Oor.  XV.  58;  2  Cor.  iv.  13— v.  8 ;  Rom.
viii.  17—25;  Heb.  iii.  6,  14;  vi.  11, 18,  19;


OH.  1. 1—29.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


IS


X.  35, 36) — that  which  is  its  peculiar  property
and  glory,  the  crown  of  Christ's  redeeming
work  (ver.  22),  the  end  of  his  servant's
labours  (ver.  28),  for  which,  by  anticipation,
he  already  gives  thanks  (ver.  5),  but  which
was  directly  threatened  and  brought  in
question  by  Colossian  error  (see  notes  on
ch.  ii.  18  ;  iii.  15).  {The  gospel)  which  you
heard  (vers.  5, 7 :  notes),  which  was  preached
in  all  creation  that  is  under  the  heaven  (ver.
6 ;  Eom.  xvi.  26 ;  Maikxvi.  15 ;  Matt,  xxviil.
19,  20 ;  xxiv.  14).  The  transition  from
"  you  "  to  "  all  creation  "  resembles  that  of
vers.  5,  6  (comp.  vers.  20,  21).  "  Preached  "
is  literally  "  heralded,"  "  loudly  and  officially
announced ; "  so,  frequently  in  St.  Paul  (see
2  Tim.  i.  11),  also  in  Mark  xvi.  15.  Greek
usage  does  not  support  the  interpretation
which  makes  Krltrts  ("creation  ")  equivalent
to"humanity."  Thissenseoftho  word, which,
even  in  Mark,  such  interpreters  as  Bengel,
Lange,  Alford,  reject,  is  quite  Hebraistic  and
exceptional.  The  phrase,  "all  creatioii,"  the
write:  has  already  Ubcd  in  ver.  15 ;  here,  as
there  (see  note),  without  the  article  (Bevised
Text).  The  universal  meaning  it  carries
tliere  is  now  limited  by  "  under  the  heaven."
The  earthly  creation,  subject  as  it  is  to  Christ,
is  the  sphere  of  this  proclamation,  the  preach-
ing-room which  is  to  resound  everywhere
with  the  glad  tidings  (comp.  Ps.  1.  1 ;  xoviii.
7;  Tsa.  Iii.  7;  Iv.  12;  Rev.  x.  2;  xiv.  6).
And  with  this  range  it  was  proclaimed,  for
from  the  first  it  claimed  universal  audience.
Whereof  I  became,  I  Paul,  a  minister  (vers.
24—29  ;  Ejih.  iii.  1—13 ;  1  Tim.  i.  11—14;
ii.  7;  2  Tim.  i.  11;  Rom.  i.  5;  xi.  13;  xv.
15—19 ;  1  Cor.  iii.  5,  10 ;  ix.  1,  2,  16,  17 ;  2
Cor.  iv.  1—6  ;  vi.  1—10 ;  Gal.  i.  1,  15, 16 ;
1  ThesB.  ii.  4 ;  Acts  ix.  15 ;  xsvi.  16—18).
(For"minister,''  see  ver.  7.)  The  later  Epislles
betray  a  markedly  heightened  sense  in  the
apostle  of  the  unique  dignity  and  importance
of  his  own  position,  and  those  who  question
their  authenticity  press  this  fact  against
them.  But  tlie  difference  of  tone  is  what
one  would  expect  in  "such  a  one  as  Paul
the  aged,  and  now  a  prisoner  also  of  Christ
Jesus  "  (Philem.  9).  As  the  Gentile  Churches
grew,  reverence  for  his  person  deepened ;  and
the  success  of  his  life-mission  became  more
assured,  especially  now  that  the  struggle
with  reactionary  Judaism,  signalized  by  the
Epistles  of  the  third  missionary  journey,  was
to  a  large  extent  decided  in  his  favour.  The
false  teaoliers  he  is  now  opposing  did  not,
we  should  gather,  attack  the  apostle  per-
sonally ;  but  may  rather  have  claimed  to  be
on  his  aide.

The  movement  of  thought  we  have  followed
in  vers.  15—23  proceeds  from  Christ's  re-
deeming work  to  the  experience  of  the  Golossiana
in  receiving  tt,  and  the  labours  of  the  apostle
in  publishing  it ;  and  is  parallel  to  that  of


Bph.  i.  20 — iii.   13.     Here,    however,   the

leconS,  of  these  topics  has  been  made  quite
subordinate  (vers.  21—23 :  comp.  Eph.  ii.)
The  third  is  the  subject  of  our  next  section.

Vers.  24 — 29. — Section  III.  The  Apostlh
AND  HIS  Mission.  Analysis :  (1)  The  apostle's
ministry  is  at  present  one  of  suffering  (ver.
24)  (2)  Christ,  the  Hope  of  the  Gentiles,  the
Secret  of  the  ages,  is  its  theme  (vers.  25^
27) ;  (3)  and  its  aim  the  individual  perfec-
tion of  all  to  whom  it  is  addressed  (ver.  28).
(4)  In  seeking  which  he  is  sustained  by  a
supernatural  power  (ver.  29).

Ver.  24.— Now  I  rejoice  in  my  snfferings
for  your  sake  (ch.  iv.  3 ;  Eph.  iii.  1,  13 ;  vi.
19,  20;  Phil.  i.  12, 16,  29;  ii.  17;  Philem.
9,  13;  2  Tim.  i.  11,  12;  Acts  ix.  16;  xxvL
29).  "  Who"  is  wanting  in  tlje  older  manu-
scripts. The  abruptness  of  expression  indi-
cates a  sudden  outburst  of  feeling  (comp.  2
Cor.  vii.  9;  1  Tim.  i.  12).  "Now— as  these
thoughts  fiU  my  mind"  (Lightfoot);  or,
better,  "In  my  [iresent  position  (with  the
chain  round  my  wrist : "  Eadie).  St.  Paul's
suiferings  as  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  and  in
defence  of  their  rights  in  the  gospel — so
"for  your  sake"  (comp.  Acts  xiii.  44 — 50;
xxii.  21,  22  ;  1  Thess.  ii.  14—16  ;  Rom.  it.
16  ;  Gal.  v.  11 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  7)— were  matter
of  joy  to  him  as  they  were  of  benefit  to  them.
And  am  filling  up  in  my  turn  the  things
that  are  lacking  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ
(Mark  x.  39;  John  xv.  20;  Rom.  viii.  17;  2
Cor.  i.  5 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  12 ;  Phil.  iii.  10).  "  Am
filling  up"  (hiiaitXT]p6(i>)  has  the  same  object
(ia-Tfpniia)  in  1  Cor.  xvi.  17 ;  Phil.  ii.  30
(comp.  2  Cor.  ix.  12 ;  xi.  9 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  10).
Here  it  is  further  compounded  with  avrl
("  over  against  "),  which  implies  some  sort
of  correspondence — between  defect  and  sup-
ply, say  Meyer,  Alford,  EUicott ;  but  this  is
surely  contained  in  the  idea  uf  filling  up,
whereas  ovt!  bears  as  a  rule,  and  always  in
St.  Paul,  a  distinct  and  pointed  reference  of
its  own.  "lie  says  not  simply  tivairKripSi,
but  avTavair\T)pa>,  that  is.  Instead  of  the  Lord
and  Master,  I  the  slave  and  disciple  "  (Pho-
tins).  Christ,  the  Head,  had  borne  his  part,
now  the  apostle  in  turn  fills  up  his  part,  in
the  great  sum  of  suffering  to  be  undergone
on  behalf  of  the  body  of  Christ  (see  parallels).
The  verb  being  so  understood,  then,  witli
Lightfoot,  we  infer  that  "the  afiSictions  of
Christ "  (a  phrase  peculiar  to  this  passage)
are :  (1)  Christ's  own  ministerial  sufferings,
endured  at  the  hands  of  men.  Affliction  is
a  common  term  for  all  that  Christians  suffer
as  being  in  "this  present  evil  world"  (2
Thess.  i.  4—6;  Eom.  v.  3;  2  Cor.  iv.  17:
comp.  John  xvi.  33).  Such  suffering  is
common  to  the  Master  and  his  servants
(John  XV.  20),  and  he  leaves  behind  to  each
his  fitting  and  correspondent  share  therein.
These  afflictions  are  "the  sufferings  of  the


16


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa  [oh,  1. 1— 2».


Christ "  in  their  ministerial  as  distinguished
from  their  mediatorial  aspect.  (2)  The  latter
sense  is,  howeyer,  put  on  the  phrase  by
Bomanist  divines,  who  quote  the  text  in
gupport  of  the  doctrine  of  the  merit  of  the
saints,  in  contradiction  to  the  uniform  teach-
ing of  St.  Paul  and  tlie  whole  New  Testa-
munt,  that  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  is  the  sole
meritorious  ground  of  salvation  for  all  men,
leaving  notliing  to  fill  up  (vers.  20 — 22;
Eph.  li.  16;  Eom.  iii.  25,  26:  2  Cor.  v.  18,
19  ;  Gal.  iii.  13 ;  Heb.  ii.  9 ;  ix.  26 ;  x.  14 ;
Aoti  iv.  12  ;  xiii.  38,  39 ;  John  i.  29 ;  1  John
iL  2;  1  Pet.  ii.  24,  etc.).  It  is  worthy  of
note  that,  unless  it  be  in  the  Epistle  to  the
Hebrews,  St.  Paul  never  uses  the  words
"  suifer,"  "  suffering "  (much  less  "  afflic-
tion ")  in  connection  with  the  atoning  sacri-
fice. He  dwells  rather  on  the  objective  fact
itself— "the death,"  "thp  cross,"  'the blood."
(3)  The  prevailing  interpretation  (Chryeos-
tom,  Augustine,  down  to  Alford,  EUicott)
finds  here  the  afflictions  of  the  Chwrch  (in-
cluding Paul's)  made  Christ's  hy  inystic
tympnthy  (Eph.  v.  23,  29).  But  this  view
identifles  Paul's  sufferings  with  his  Master's,
while  he  expressly  distinguislies  them ;  and
the  idea,  however  beautiful  in  itself,  is  wiih-
out  Pauline  analogy.  (4)  Meyer  holds  the
afflictions  to  be  Paul's  own  afflictions  which
are  Ohrisfs  by  ethical  identity,  as  belonging
to  the  same  class.  This  approaches  (1 ),  but
is  less  simple  grammatically,  and  again  con-
fuses the  antithesis  involved  in  the  pointed
in/Tl.  (5)  Other  modifications  of  this  view —
afflictions  coming  from  Christ,  on  account  of
Christ,  etc. — are  less  plausible.  Dr.  Gloag,
in  the  Expositor,  first  series,  vol.  vii.  pp.
224 — 236,  fully  discusses  the  passage  and
ably  defends  (3).  In  my  flesh  (2  Cor.  iv.  10,
II;  viL  5;  Gal.  iv.  13,  14);  for  St.  Paul's
physical  nature  felt  keenly  the  pangs  of
imprisonment,  the  chating  of  "  these  bonds."
And  thus  be  puts  honour  on  the  despised
fiesh,  as  capable  of  such  high  service  (see
note,  ver.  22).  On  behalf  of  his  body,  which
is  the  Church  (ver.  18;  ch.  ii.  19;  Eph.  i.
23;  iT.  16;  v.  23;  2  Tim.  ii.  10).  The
interests  of  the  Church  demanded  his  suffer-
ings. They  are  "  for  you  "  (Colossiun  Gen-
tiles); but,  in  his  view,  tie  Full  possession  of
the  gospel  by  the  Gentiles  and  the  existence
of  the  Church  itself  were  vitally  bound  up
together  (Ejih.  ii.  15,  21,  22;  iii.  6).  If
"Christ  loved  the  Church, and  gave  himeelf
for  her  "  (Eph.  v  25),  he  might  well  in  hia
turn  suffer  on  the  same  account.  The  mag-
nitude of  the  interests  inrolved  are  measured
by  his  greatness  whose  body  thu  Church  is
(vers.  15  — 18).  (On  "body,"  see  note,  ver.  18.)
Ver.  25. — Of  which  1  became  a  minister
(2  Cor.  iv.  5 ;  vi.  3—10 ;  li.  28,  29 ;  1  Thess.
ii.  1—12 ;  Acts  xx.  28 ;  I  Pet.  v.  1—4).  His
Bufferings  are,  therefore,  matter  of  duty,  m


well  as  of  joy.    As  the  Chnrch'B  mini$ler,

he  is  bound  to  toil  and  to  suffer  in  whatever
way  her  welfare  requires.  Elsewhere  he
styles  himself  "  minister  of  the  gospel "  (ver.
23 ;  Eph.  iii.  7),  "  of  God,"  "  of  Christ,"  "  of
anew  covenant " (2Cor.  iii.  6).  (On  "minister,"
see  note,  ver.  7.  According  to  the  steward-
ship of  God,  that  was  given  me  to  you-ward
(Ei.h.  iii.  1—13;  1  Cor.  iv.  1—4;  ix.  17;  I
Tim.  L  4,  E.V.;  iii.  15;  Luke  xii,  42;  xvi.
2—4 ;  Heb.  iii.  2—6;  I  Pet.  i v.  10).  Olxovonia
("  oeconomy  ")  is  first  "  house-management,"
then  "  administration"  generally;  the  o'wi'
vofws  ("  houte-steward  ")  was  a  confidential
upper  servant,  frequently  a  slave,  who  con-
trolled the  general  arrangements  of  a  large
establishment,  and  was  responsible  imme-
diately to  the  master.  Such  an  office  the
apostle  holds,  along  with  others  (1  Cor.  It.
1),  in  the  Church,  "  the  house  of  God  "  (Eph.
ii.  19—22;  I  Tim.  iii.  15;  2  Tim.  ii.  20:  this
conception,  like  that  of  "  the  body  of  Christ "
— oomp.  note  on  ver.  18 — is  fully  developed
only  in  the  later  Epistles).  In  this  office  he
"  ailministers  the  gospel "  (1  Cor.  ix.  17, 18),
"the  grace  of  God  "  (Eph.  iii.  2;  I  Pet.  iv.
10),  and  here  more  especially  "the  mystery"
of  vers.  26,  27  (comp.  Eph.  iii.  9,  E.V.).  In
Eph.  i.  10  and  iii.  2,  the  oixovoula  is  referred
to  God  himself,  the  supieme  Dispenser  in  his
own  house.  This  office  "  was  given  "  him,
and  specifically  as  "  toward  the  Gentiles  "
(for  "  you  "  points  to  the  Colossians  as  Gen-
tiles, vers.  24,  27,  notes ;  Eph.  iii.  1, 2 ;  Bom.
xi.  13  J,  when  he  first  became  a  Servant  of
Christ  (Acts  ix.  15 ;  xxii.  21 ;  xxvi.  16 — 18 ;
Gal.  i.  15,  16 ;  I  Tim.  i.  11—15 ;  Kom.  xv.
15, 1 6).  Some  interpreters  eonuent "  to  you-
ward"  with  the  word  "fulfil,"  but  less  suit-
ably (comp.  Eph.  iii.  2 ;  Eom.  xv.  16).  To  fulfil
the  word  of  God  (Eom.  xv.  16—19 ;  xvi.  25,
26).  "  To  fullil "  (see  vers.  9,  24,  and  "  ful-
ness,'' ver.  19 ;  also  ch.  ii.  9, 10;  iv.  12)  is  either
"  to  complete,"  to  give  full  development  and
extension  to  the  gospel  message  (vers.  5,  6 ;
2  Thess.  iii.  1 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  14—17 ;  Eom.  xv.
19;  Actsxx.  20,21,27);  or  "to  accomplish"
the  prophetic  word  (Eom.  ix.  24 — 26 ;  xv.  8
— 12 ;  Acts  XV.  15 — 17  J,  as  in  Acta  xiii,  27,
and  frequently  in  the  Gospels.  This  verb
TrAjjptiai,  however,  is  not  used  by  St.  Paul
elsewhere  in  the  latter  sense,  and  the  former
precisely  suits  the  context  (compare  parallels
from  Eoraans).  Other  interpretations —  "  to
preach  abundantly,"  "  to  continue  Christ's
preaching"  (Eph.  ii.  17;  Heb.  ii.  3),  "to
execute  the  Divine  commission  " — miss  the
sense  of  the  verb.  Ttie  word  which  it  is  the
object  of  the  apostle's  ministry  to  fulfil,  and
in  regard  to  which  he  had  a  special  eteward-
ship,  is  none  other  than —

Ver.  26. — The  mystery  which  hath  been
hidden  away  from  the  ages  and  from  the
generations  (Eph.  ii.  2, 3 ;  iii.  fi,9 ;  Bom.  xj\


m.  1. 1—29.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


17


»5,  26 ;  xi.  25, 26, 33).  The  word  "  mystery  "
plays  a  large  part  in  Onlossians  and  Epbe-
sians.  It  occurs  in  1  Corinthians,  and  twice
in  the  Eoman  Epistle,  written  from  Corinth.
Its  nae  in  Bom.  xvi.  25  Is  identical  with
that  of  the  passage  before  us.  The  Greek
mysteries  were  secret  religious  doctrines  and
1  ites  made  known  only  to  initiate.  I  persons,
who  formed  associations  statedly  assem-
bling at  certain  sacrcid  spots,  of  which  Eleusis
near  Athens  was  the  most  famous.  These
systems  exercised  a  vast  influence  over  the
Greek  miud,  and  Greek  literature  is  full  of
allusions  to  them;  but  their  secret  Las  been
well  kept,  and  little  is  known  of  their  rtal
character.  Some  of  these  mystic  systems,
probably,  inculcated  doctrines  of  a  purer
and  more  spiritual  type  than  those  of  the
vulgar  polytheism.  The  ascetic'  and
mystical  doctrines  ascribed  to  Pjthagorag
were  propagated  by  secret  societies.  The
language  and  ideas  connected  with  the
mysteries  were  readily  adopted  by  the  Jew-
ish Broad  Church  of  Alexandria,  whose
endeavour  it  was  to  expand  Judaism  by  a
symbolical  and  allegorizing  method  into  a
philosophic  and  universal  religious  system,
and  who  were  compelled  to  veil  their  i  nner
doctrine  from  the  eyes  of  their  stricter,
uneiilighteued  (or  unsnphiaticated)  fellow-
believers.  Muariipwy  appears  in  the  Apocry-
pha as  an  epithet  of  the  Divine  Wisdom
(Wisd.  ii.  22;  viii.  4;  etc.):  Ps.  xlix.  4;
Ixxviii.  2  (comp.Matt.  xiii  31,  35)  furnished
the  Old  Testament  basis  uf  this  usage.
(See  Philo, '  On  the  Cherubim,'  §  12  ;  '  On
Fugitives,'  §  16 ;  etc.,  for  the  place  oi  mystery
in  the  Alexandrine  theology.)  St.  Paul,
writing  to  men  accustomed,  either  as  Greeks
or  as  Hellenistic  Jews,  to  this  phraseology,
calls  the  gospel  "  a  mystery,"  as  that  which
is  "hidilen  from  the  natural  understanding
and  from  the  previous  aearehings  of  men"
(1  Cor.  ii.  6 — 16).  But  in  the  words  that
follow  he  repuiliates  the  notion  of  any
secrecy  or  exclusivenesa  in  its  proclamation
(comp.  2  Cor.  iii.  12 — iv.  6) ;  in  his  language,
"mystery  is  the  correlate  of  revelation."
The  thnce  repeated  airii  ("  from,"  "  away  "),
vvith  the  double  inrliration  of  time,  "gives
a  solemn  emphasis"  (Meyer)  to  the  state-
ment. Ages  are  successive  epochs  of  time,
with  their  states  and  conditions  (oomp.  Gal.
1. 4) ;  generations  are  successive  races  of  men,
with  their  traditions  and  hereditary  ten-
dencies. Bat  now  it  was  made  manifest
to  his  saints  (ch.  il.  2 ;  iv.  3 ;  Eph.  i.  9 ;  iii.
5 ;  vi.  19  ;  1  Tmi.  iii.  16  ;  1  Pot.  i.  20).  The
word  "reveal"  (liph.  iii.  5;  1  Cor.  ii.  10)
indicates  a  process,  "make  manifest"
points  to  the  result  of  this  Divine  act  (Eom.
xvi.  25, 26 :  comp.  Kom.  i.  17  with  iii  21 ;  lee
Trench's  '  Synonyms').  The  transition  from
the  participle  in  the  last  clause  to  the
COLOSSIANS.


■trohgly  assertive  finite  verb  in  this  almost
disappears  in  English  id.om  :  comp.  vers.  5,
6 ;  Eph.  i,  20  -22  (Greek) ;  and  see  Winer's
'  N.  T.  Grammar,'  p.  717,  or  A.  Buttmanu,
p.  382.  There  is  also  a  change  of  tense :
the  manifestation  is  a  single,  sudden  event
(aorist),  breaking  through  the  long  and
seemingly  final  concealment  of  all  previous
time  (present  perfect  participle) ;  similarly
in  Eom.  xvi.  26,  26  imd  1  Pet.  i  20  (oomp.
oh.  ii.  14,  note).  To  his  saints;  i.e.  to  the
Church  at  large  (ver.  2 ;  ch  iii.  12) ;  but  this
implies  a  spiritual  qualification  (1  Cor.  ii.
14).  "  His  saints "  are  the  recipients ;  "his
huly  apostles  and  prophets,  in  the  Spirit,"
the  organs  (  Eph.  iii.  5)  of  this  manifestation.
The  Church  had  long  ago  formally  accepted
this  revelation  (Acts  xi.  18) ;  it  was  St.
Paul's  ofSce  to  make  it  practically  effectual.
Ver.  27. — To  whom  God  willed  to  make
knovu  what  is  the  riches  of  the  glory  of
this  mystery  amongst  the  Gentiles  (Eph.  iii.
5—10;  Acts  xi.  17,  18;  Kona.  xi.  11,  12,  25
—32;  XV.  9—12).  "Willed"  stands  em-
phatically first  in  the  Greek.  The  revela-
tion was  so  momentous  in  its  issue,  so  signal
in  its  method,  and  so  contrary  to  human
foresight  and  prejudice,  that  it  proceeded
evidently  from  "  the  will  of  God  "  (vers  1,9;
ch.  iv.  12;  comp.  Rom.  ix.  18):  "Who  was
I,"  said  St.  Peter,  "  that  I  could  withstand
God?"  The  Ephesiau  letter  delights  to
dwell  on  God's  will  as  the  cause  of  the
whole  counsel  and  work  of  salvation.  The
Eevieers  have  rendered  the  verb  by  "was
pleased,"  the  equivalent  of  siSoit^ai  (ver.  19 ;
Eph.  i.  5,  9;  etc.).  There  is  no  need  to
seek  a  reference  to  free  grace  in  the  verb
"willeil;"  the  two  ideas  are  concurrent,
but  distinct  (see,  however,  Lightfoot).  The
apostle's  mind  is  tilled  with  amazement  as
he  contemplates  the  boundless  riches  which
the  salvation  of  the  Gentiles  revealed  in
God  himself  (oomp.  Eom.  xi.  33 — 36;  xvi.
25—27;  Eph.  iii.  8—10).  .  "The  glory  of
this  mystery  "  is  the  splendour  with  which
it  invests  tha  Divine  character  (on  ''  glory,"
see  note,  ver.  1 1 ;  and  for  ''  riches  of  glory,"
Eph.  i.  18  ;  iii.  16  ;  Phil.  iv.  19  ;  Eom.  ix.
23).  Amongst  the  Gentiles ;  "  semi  -  local
clause,  defining  the  sphere  in  which  the
riches  of  the  glory  is  more  specially  evinced"
(EUicott).  At  last  this  mystery  is  defined  :
which  is  Christ  in  yon  (ch.  ii.  2,  3 ;  1  Tim.
iii.  16;  Eph.  iii.  17;  Gal.  ii.  20;  iv.  19;
Eom.  viii.  10).  By  a  bold  metonymy,  the
mystery  is  identified  with  its  subject  or  con-
tent. It  is  "Christ"  himself  (see  oh.  ii.  2,
note),  the  Divine  secret  of  the  ages,  the
burden  of  all  revelation ;  and  "  Christ  iu
you"  (ch.iii.  11),  Christ  dwelling  in  Gentile
hearts — this  is  the  wonder  of  wonders  1  So
the  "sinners  of  the  Gentiles"  receive  "  tho
lilse  [equal]  gift"  with  the  heirs  of  th«

0


18


THE  EPrSTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


[CH.  1. 1—29.


,.i  iiimes  Acts  xi.  17).  By  a  further  and
v'<'t  oMd  apposition,  tliis  mystery  of  Christ
iiL  OihiK'^iaii  believere  is  m;idi'  one  with  the
hope  of  giory  (vei  s.  5,  23 ;  ch.  iii.  4 ;  Eph.

I.  J2— 14,  18;  Fhil.  iii.  20,  21;  Rom.  ii.  7 ;
viii.  18-25;  1  Cor.  xv.  43;  1  John  iii  2),
of  which  it  is  a  pledge  and  a  forttaste  (vers.
4,  5;  ch.  iii.  15;  Kph.  i.  13,  14;  Eom.  viii.
10  17).  This  glory  is  that  wliich  the
Chiistian  will  wear  in  his  perfected,
heavenly  state  (ch.  iii.  4;  1  Cor.  xv.  43;
Rom.  viii.  18),  when  he  will  fully  reflect
tlie  glory  he  now  bi  holds  in  God  through
Christ  ("  (he  glory  of  this  mystery ") :
compare  the  double  "  glory  "  of  2  Cor.  Iii.
18.  The  rights  of  the  Gentile  believer  in
Christ  are  therefore  complete  (Eph.  iii.  6).
Possessing  him  now  in  his  heart,  he  antici-
pates all  tliat  he  will  bestow  iu  heaven  (on
"  hi  pe,"  see  ver.  5).

Ver.  28. — 'Whom  we  proclaim,  admonishing
every  man,  and  teaching  every  man  in  all
wisdom  (ch.  iii.  16;  1  Tliess.  ii.  4—13;  1
Cor.  i.  23,  24;  iv.  1—5;  xv.  11  ;  2  Cor.  iv.
1—6;  v.  18— vi.  1;  Acts  xx.  18—35;  xxvi.
22,  23).  We  (emphatic,  like  the  "I"  of
vers.  23,  25)  includes  St.  Paul's  coadjutors,
Epaphras  in  particulai-  (ver.  9 ;  ch.  iv.  7,

II,  12 :  comp.  2  Cor.  i.  19).  KaTaryeAAio,  to
publish,  bears  a  wider  seuse  tlian  KTipiaaa>,
to  herald  (ver.  23),  St.  Paul's  f:ivourite
word.  "Admonishing  and  teaching"  are
the  two  essential  parts  of  the  apostle's
ministry,  related  as  repentance  to  faitli
(Lightfoot,  who  gives  interesting  classical
parallels).  Nouflere'to  (radically,  "  to  put  in
mind  "),  peculiar  to  St.  Paul  in  New  Testa-
ment (including  Acts  xx.  31),  may  denote
reproof  for  the  pabt,  but  more  especially
warning  for  the  future  (see  1  Cor.  iv.  14 ;
2  Thess.  iii.  15 :  comp.  note  on  ch.  iii.  16).
Thrice  in  this  verse  "every  man"  is  re-
peated, and  "  iu  all  wisdom  "  follows  "  teach-
ing "  with  a  marked  emphasis.  The  Colos-
sian  errorists,  as  we  should  jiresume  from
the  general  tenor  and  affinities  of  their
system,  sought  to  form  an  inner  mystical
school  or  circle  of  disoipleship  within  the
Church, initiated  into  a  wisdom  and  holinei-s
supposed  to  be  higher  than  that  attainable
by  ordinary  Christian  faith  (see  note  on
"mystery,"  ver.  26;  also  ch.  ii.  2,  3,  8).  An
intelleetval  caste-feeling  (see  note,  ch.  iii.  11)
was  springing  up  in  the  Church.  In  1  Cor.
ii.  6 — 16  the  apostle  denounces  the  pride  of
reason  which  claims  "the  things  of  God"
as  its  own ;  here  he  denounces  the  pride
of  intellect  which  refuses  the  knowledge  of
them  to  those  who  stand  on  a  lower  le\el  of
mental  culture.  To  every  man  the  Divine
wisdom  in  Christ  is  accessible  (ch.  ii.  3,  10;
iii.  10,  16  ;  Eph.  ii.  17 ;  iii.  IS,  19)  :  to  none
but  "  the  spiritual  man  "  (1  Cor.  ii.  6,  12 —
iii.  1).    "  Wisdom  "  here  is  not  subjective.


a  quality  of  the  apostle  (so  Meyer,  quoting
1  Cor.  iii.  10),  but  objective,  the  quulity  oi
the  truth  itself  (comp.  ch.  ii.  2,  23 ;  iii.  16 ,
Eph.  i.  18;  1  Cor.  i.  22—26;  u.  6,  7).
That  we  may  present  every  man  perfect  in
Christ  (ver.  22;  Eph.  iv.  13;  v.  25—27;  2
Cor.  xiii.  7—9 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  19,  20 ;  2  Tim.
ii.  10):  the  aim  alike  of  Christ's  redemp-
tion (ver.  22)  and  of  the  apostle's  ministry.
"Perfect"  (reAfios)  is  a  word  associated
with  the  Greek  mysteries  (comp.  1  Cor.  ii
6,  7 ;  and  quotations  in  Lightfoot),  and  in
common  use  (denoted  "  fuU-p-rown,"  "  grown
men,"  as  opposed  to  "  children  "  (Eph.  iv.  13,
14;  Phil.  iii.  12,  16;  Heb.  v.  11— vi.  1).
The  philosophic  Judaists  affected  this  term
considerably.  Philo  frequently  distin-
guishes between  the  "perfect"  or  "fully
initiated "  (reAEioi),  who  are  adnjitted  to
the  sight  of  God,  and  the  "advancing"
(wpoK6irToi'Tes:  comp.  Gal.  i.  14),  who  are
candidates  for  admission  to  the  Divine  mys-
teries ;  and  he  makes  Jacob  a  type  of  the
latter,  Israel  of  the  former  (see  'On  Drunken-
ness,' §  20;  'On  Change  of  Names,'  §  3;
'  On  Agriculture,'  §§  36—38).  The  apostle
maki  s  "perfect"  designidly  parallel  to  the
"holy  and  without  blemish"  of  ver.  22,
holding  out  a  spiritual  ideal  very  diflerent
from  that  of  Alexandrine  mystics;  and  de-
clares that  it  is  to  be  realized  "  in  Christ  "
(\ers.  2,  4),  as  in  ver.  22  it  appeared  to
be  wrought  "through  Christ"  and  "for
Christ"  (comp.  ver.  16).

Ver.  29.  -  To  which  end  also  I  toU  hard,
striving  according  to  his  working  (ch.  ii.  1 ;
iv.  12,  13 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  10 ;  Gal.  iv.  11 ;  Phil,
ii.  16;  1  Tim.  iv.  10  ;  Acts  xx.  35).  Kottiw,
to  labour  to  weariness,  often  used  of  niauv.al
labour,  is  a  favourite  woid  of  St.  Paul's  (1
Cor.  iv.  12 ;  2  Cor.  xi.  27 ;  1  The^s.  ii.  9 :
comp.  Eph.  iv.  28 ;  1  Thess.  i.  3 ;  John  U.
38).  The  figtuative  use  of  "stiiving"
("  agonizing,"  i.e.  "contending  in  the  arena")
is  only  Pauline  in  the  N  3W  Testament :
comp.  ch.  ii.  1 ;  iv.  12 ;  Phil.  i.  30 ;  1  Cor.  ix.
25  ;  1  Thess.  ii.  2  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  12  ;  2  Tim.
iv.  7 ;  also  Luke  xxii.  44  ;  in  1  Tim.  iv.  10
(R.V.)  it  is  again  connecttd  with  "toil"
(_KOTnda).  We  need  not,  with  Meyer  and
Ellicolt,  distinguish  inward  from  out-
ward ttriving  in  this  word.  The  apostle's
bodily  sufferings  (ver.  24)  and  his  mental
anxiety  (ch.  ii.  1)  alike  enter  into  the
mighty  struggle  which  he*  is  maintaining
on  the  Church's  behalf,  and  which  strains
every  fibre  of  his  nature  to  the  utmost
(comp.  2  Cor.  xi  28).  "Striving"  implies
opponents  against  whom  he  contends  (Eph.
vi.  12;  2  Thess  iii.  2;  2  Cor.  xi.  26);
"  toiling  hard,"  the  painful  efforts  he  has  to
make.  In  this  toil  he  is  divluely  sustained,
for  he  "strives  according  to  his  [Christ's:
comp.   Phil.  JT.    13]    working."    '^.vipyfia


OH.  1.1-29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIAN&


19


("energy,''  "operative  force,"  "power  in
action") — another  word  of  St.  Paul's  voca-
bulary (frequent  also  in  Aristotle) — is  used
by  him  only  of  supernatural  power,  "a
working  of  God,"  "of  Satan"  (2  Thess.  ii.
9, 11).  Which  worketh  in  me  with  power
(ver.  11 ;  Eph.  iii.  16;  Phil.  ii.  13;  iv.  13;
2  Cor.  xiL  9, 10).  The  "  energy  of  Christ "  is
such  that  it  "effectually  works"  in  the
ap'istle;  the  same  idea  is  repeated  in  noun
and  verb  (ver.  11,  note),  The  verb  is  middle
in  voice,  as  this  "  working  "  is  that  in  which


the  Divine  "  energy  of  Christ "  puti  itself
forth  and  eliows  what  it  can  do  (omp.  2
Cor.  xiii.  3 — 6) ;  see  note  on  "bearing  fruit,"
ver.  6,  and  Winer's  '  N.  T.  Grammar,'  p.  318
(dynamic  middle).  So  it  works  unmistak-
ably "in  [or, '  with']  power."  Never  do  we
find  this  consciousness  of  the  Divine  power
dwelling  in  himself  expressed  by  St.  Paul
with  such  joyous  confidence  as  at  this
period  (see  Phil.  i.  20,  21 ;  iv.  13 ;  Eph.  iii
9,  20 ;  and  comp.  note  on  ver.  23  b).


HOMILETICS,

Vera.  1 — 14. — Sect.1.  Introduction.  I.  The  salutation.  1.  Paul  and  Timoihy.  (1)
"  Paul,  apostle  of  Christ  Jesus  by  the  vfill  of  God  " — "  not  of  men,  nor  by  men  "  (Gal.  i.  1 ;
ii.  8 ;  1  Gor.  XV.  9,  10 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  7 ;  Acts  ix.  15),  as  every  true  minister  of  Christ  is
able  to  say,  holding  his  office,  not  by  his  own  seeking  or  scheming,  nor  by  election  of  the
Church  alone,  though  that  is  needful  in  its  place  (Acts  xiii.  1 — 3),  but  by  a  distinct
Divine  appointment  (John  xxi.  15 — 17  ;  Acts  xx.  28).  (2)  The  apostle  delights  to
honour  his  associates.  With  every  right  to  speak  simply  in  his  own  name,  yet  he  adds
that  of  "  Timothy  the  biother  "  (" my  fellow-worker,"  Eom.  svi.  21 ;  "  my  true  child
in  faitli,"  1  Tim.  i.  1).  Not  as  a  matter  of  courtesy  and  kind  feeling  only,  but  in  view
of  the  future  needs  of  the  Church,  its  older  and  more  responsible  officers  should  duly
recognize  young  brother  Timothy.  2.  Saints  and  faithful  brethren.  (1)  All  true
Christians  are  saints  by  their  very  calling,  as  persons  devoted  to  God  and  brought  near
to  him  (ch.  iii.  12  ;  1  Pet.  i.  15, 16 ;  ii.  5, 9 ;  1  John  i.  3  ;  Exod.  xix.  3—6)  through  the
blood  of  atonement  (Titus  ii.  14;  Heb.  ix.  14;x.  12,  14;  Rev.  i.  5,  6),  and  by  the
indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (2  Thess.  ii.  13;  Titus  iii.  5),  and  the  continued  influence
of  the  truth  (2  Thess.  ii.  13 ;  John  xv.  3,  4,  7 ;  xvii.  17).  A  spotless  moral  life  is  the
outcome  of  this  inward  sanctity,  which  belongs  to  body  as  well  as  soul — "  as  becometh
saints  "  (Eph.  v.  3 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  19—21 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  17 ;  1  Thess.  v.  23).  (2)  They  aie
Iretlirtn  to  each  other  "  in  Christ,"  having  access  through  him  "in  one  Spirit  to  the
Father,"  and  belonging  to  "  the  household  of  God"  (Eph.  ii.  18 — 22 ;  iv.  1—4;  ch.  iii.
11—14  ;  Gal.  vi.  10 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  9, 10  ;  John  xiii.  14  ;  xv.  '  2—17  ;  1  John  ii.  7—11 ;  iii.
23);  undfaithful  to  Christ  the  Head  and  to  the  brotherhooj,  whentheirfaithisassaulted
and  their  unity  endangered  (ch.  ii.  7,  19;  iii.  15  ;  iv.  3, 15 — 17 }  Phil.  i.  27).  3.  Grace
and  peace.  (1)  All  Divine  blessing  is  matter  of  grace  to  us  asdependent  creatures,  but
especially  as  fallen  and  sinful.  It  is  "the  grace  of  God  that  brings  salvation  "  (Titus
ii.  11;  Eph.  ii.  5),  which  " superabounded  where  sin  abounded"  (Rom.  v.  20),  and  is
the  source  of  all  good  in  man  (1  Cor.  xv.  10)  and  of  all  we  hope  for  (2  Thess.  ii.  16 ;
2  Tim.  i.  9, 10;  Acts  xv.  11).  It  is  the  outflow  of  God's  love,  of  his  "kindness  and
philanthropy  "  (Titus  iii.  4) ;  and  has  its  supreme  expression  in  "  Jesus  Christ  and  him
crucified  "  (Rom.  v.  8 ;  Heb.  ii.  9  ;  John  i.  17  ;  iii.  16 ;  1  John  iv.  10).  Our  everla.sting
Bongs  will  resound  "  to  the  praise  of  the  glory  of  his  grace  "  (Eph.  i.  6 ;  Rev.  i.  5,  6 ;
V.  12,  13 ;  vii.  10).  (2)  Peace  is  the  effect  of  grace  within  the  soul — the  end  of  its  war
with  God  in  forgiveness  of  sin  (vers.  14,  20 ;  Eph.  ii.  16 ;  2  Cor.  v.  19 ;  Eom.  v.  1),
the  restoring  of  inward  harmony  and  health  (Rom.  viii.  6),  freedom  from  fear  and
trouble  (ch.  iii.  15 ;  Phil.  iv.  7 ;  John  xiv.  27),  bearing  fruit  in  mutual  concord  and
amity  (Eph.  ii.  14 — 16  ;  Rom.  xv.  7 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  16).  It  is  the  gilt,  the  legacy  of
Christ  (Eph.  1. 2 ;  ii.  14, 17  ;  John  xiv.  27 ;  xvi.  33 ;  xx.  19,  26).  These  all-comprising
gifts  are  primarily  "  from  God  our  Father."  Grace  is  the  outgoing  of  the  Father's  love
toward  his  rebel  children  (Acts  xvii.  28;  Biih.  ii.  4,  5;  Luke  xv.  11—32),  and  peac*
the  reuniting  of  the  child  to  the  Divine  family  (Eph.  ii.  18, 19).

II.  The  THANKSGiviNa.  I.  The  essentials  of  the  OhristianHfe.  (Vers.  3 — 5.)  "Fides,
■mur,  spes :  summa  Christiaui.smi"  (Bcngel).  Com|iarc  tlie  order  and  relation  of
the  three  graces  here  and  in  1  Thess.  i.  3  ;  Eph.  i.  15 — 18  ;  with  1  Cor.  xiii.  13 ;  also
Uet>.  X.  22 — 25,  Bevised  Version.    (1)  "  To  hear  of  your  faith  in  C/Iirist  Jesus  "  is  good


20  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  00L0SSIAN3.  [ch.  1. 14-29.

newg  indeed.  So  in  the  case  of  a  child  or  friend ;  how  much  more  in  that  of  a  whole
coinniuuity  1  What  boundless  and  endless  possibilities  of  fiood  are  implied  in  this  single
fact !  It  is  the  birth  of  true,  eternal  life  (oh.  ii.  12,  13  ;  Eom.  vi.  1 — 11 ;  John  i.  12 ;
iii.  36  ;  vi.  47,  57 ;  xvii.  3),  the  entrance  into  a  fellowship  with  Clirist  (1  Cor.  i.  9)
which  brinu;s  a  happiness  and  power  to  which  there  is  no  measure  (1  Pet.  i.  8;  1  John
i.  3,  4  ;  John  vii.  38 ;  xy.  11 ;  xvi.  22 ;  Phil.  iv.  13).  (2)  "  Faith  worketh  by  love  "
(Gal.  V.  b)  ;  hearing  of  the  first,  if  it  be  genuine,  one  is  sure  to  hear  of  the  second.
Love  is  the  first  "  fruit  of  the  Spirit "  (Gal.  v.  22),  the  witness  of  a  1  )iv)ne  life  in  the
soul  (1  John  iii.  14;  v.  1).  This  love  is  catholic — a  family  afl'ection,  goini;  out  to  all
the  children  of  God,  the  saints  everywhere  and  of  all  times,  whenever  we  see  them  or
hear  or  read  of  them  ;  overleaping  every  national,  social,  or  (alas  that  we  should  have
to  add!)  ecclesiastical  barrier  (ch.  iii.  11;  Gal.  iii.  28).  (3)  But  the  present  state  and
character  of  Christians  call  for  thanksgiving  on  their  account,  most  of  all,  "  because  oi
the  hope  in  store  for  them  in  heaven."  Faith  and  love  are  unspeakable  lilcssings  even
now ;  but  what  "  if  in  this  life  only  we  had  hoped  in  Clirist "  (1  Cor.  xv.  19)  ?  It  is
the  thought  of  what  awaits  the  Colossian  believers  in  heaven,  the  conviction  that  they
have  "  Christ  in  them,  the  hope  of  glory  "  (ver.  27  ;  ch.  iii.  4),  that  fills  the  apostle's  heart
with  joy  (Phil.  i.  6  ;  2  Tliess.  i.  3—5  ;  1  Pet.  i.  3—7;  John  xiv.  2,  3  ;  xvii.  24).  So  in
regard  to  himself  (Pliil.  i.  21—23;  2  Cor.  v.  1—8;  2  Tim.  iv.  6 — 8).  Finis  coronat
o/ius.  It  is  the  grand  outlook,  the  glorious  prospect  beyond  death,  that  gives  security  and
diunity,  a  serene  calmness  and  a  buoyant  energy,  to  the  Christian  life  (Eoni.  v.  1 — 5;
viii.  18,  3.")— 39 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  58 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  16—18  ;  Phil.  i.  20 ;  2  Tim.  i.  12 ;  Heb.  xi.
13,  35  ;  Rev.  ii.  10).  This  hope  will  not  deceive  ;  it  is  founded  on  "  the  word  of  the
truth  of  the  gosiiel "  (1  Cur.  xv.  15 ;  2  Pet.  i.  16).  2.  The  progress  of  the  gospel.
(Vers.  6 — 8.)  (1)  It  spreads  by  its  inherent  fruitfulness,  hy  ike  living  energy  with
which  it  works  in  those  who  receive  it,  by  the  silent  contagion  of  conviction  and
example,  acting  continuously  as  leaven  on  the  surrounding  mass  of  the  world  (Matt.
xiii.  33).  The  fruit  it  produces  in  the  lives  of  those  who  receive  it  becomes  seed  in
its  turn  for  the  soil  around.  Epaphras  has  heard  the  gospel  from  St.  Paul ;  he  carries
it  home  and  teaches  and  practises  it  there,  and  the  Church  of  Colossas  springs  up  (comp.
1  Thess.  i.  8 — 10).  (2)  At  the  same  time,  it  has  its  special  messengers  and  advocate*
— "servants  of  Christ  and  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God"  (1  Cor.  iv.  1);  "Ye
learnt  from  Epaphras  "  (ch.  iv.  12 ;  Eom.  xii.  5 — 8 ;  1  Cor.  xii.  28 ;  Eph.  iv.  11,  12).
"A  faithful  minister  of  Christ:"  how  honourable  the  title!  how  great  the  reward,
(1  Pet.  V.  1 — 4)  I  We  note  the  care  of  the  apostle  to  commend  and  support  his  fellow-
servant,  and  the  grateful  and  graceful  way  with  which  he  refers  to  the  love  of  the
Colossians  to  himself.  The  progress  of  the  gospel  is  not  a  little  helped  by  mutual
recognition  and  confidence  of  this  kind  on  the  part  of  Christ's  servants  towards
each  other.

III.  Thb  opeiono  prater.  1.  Christian  knowledge.  (Vers.  9,  10.)  (1)  We  so  often
find  knowledge  divorced  from  action,  the  head  and  the  heart  at  variance,  that  we  are
apt  to  exclaim,  "  Knowledge,  alas  !  'tis  all  in  vain."  But  it  is,  nevertheles>i,  a  pre-
condition ol  all  saving  faith  and  all  right  action.  In  it  lies  the  beginning  of  the  soul's
life  (ver.  6  b),  the  means  of  its  growth  and  advancement  (ver.  10,  "  by  the  knowledge
of  God"),  and  the  end  towards  which  it  strives  (ch.  iii.  10 ;  1  Cor.  xiii.  12  ;  John  xvii.
3).  True,  "  we  know  in  part,"  and  are  "  rather  known  by  God  "  than  know  him  (GaL
iv.  9)  ;  and  knowledge,  therefore,  must  go  hand-iu-hand  with  the  "  faith  that  worketh
by  love."  Otherwise  it  "puffeth  up,"  and  needs  to  be  humbled  beneath  the  supremacy
of  love  (1  Cor.  viii.  1 — 3 ;  xiii. ;  1  John  iv.  7,  8 ;  John  xiii.  17  ;  xiv.  15 — 17  ;  xvi.  13).
But  it  is  possible  to  exalt  love  in  a  one-sided,  prejudicial  way ;  -and  then  the  prayer  of
Phil.  i.  9  should  be  called  to  mind.  (2)  Knowledge  in  the  form  of  a  sound  and  manly
understanding  (1  Cor.  xiv.  20),  an  instructed  and  well-ordered  comprehension  of  the
system  of  Christian  truth,  is  necessary  for  the  Church,  absolutely  necessary  for  her
teachers,  and  especially  in  times  of  mental  conflict,  such  as  that  on  which  the  Asiatic
Churches  were  then  entering,  and  such  as  that  which  is  now  reaching  na  acute  stage  in
our  modern  Christendom.  In  her  contention  witli  heresy  and  scepticism,  the  Church's
strength  depends  on  the  amount  of  "spiritual  wisdom  and  understanding"  possessed
by  her  members.  And  the  understanding  is  a  spiritual  faculty,  that  needs  to  be
inforsaed  and  guided  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  Spirit  of  truth.    (3)  Yet  Christian  Vnow


OH.  1. 1—29.]       rran  EPisTt^  f o  the  colossiai^s.  «i

leilge  can  never  be  merely  abstract,  terminating  in  the  intellect;  for  it  is  "  knowledge
of  God's  will."  All  its  doctrines  bear  on  practice ;  its  principles  of  tnitli  are  laws  of
life;  its  teachings,  commands.  It  concentrates  reason,  feeling,  will,  in  the  unity  of  a
spiritual  life,  where  each  predominates  in  turn,  and  every  faculty  sustains  and  quickens
every  other  (comp.  Bph.  iv.  13 — 15 ;  John  vii.  17 ;  xiv.  15 — 17).  2.  Christian
conduct.  (Vers.  10 — 12.)  (1)  Advancing  to  a  completer  knowledge  of  God's  will,
the  Christian  man  more  and  more  "  bears  fruit  in  every  good  work."  For  he  knows
that  God's  ivill  is  the  well-being  of  men,  and  that  he  cannot  please  him  better,
or  co-operate  more  effectually  with  his  gracious  purposes  towards  mankind,  than  by
"  doing  good,  as  he  has  oppoi'tunity,  to  all  men,  and  especially  to  those  that  are  of
the  household  of  fjiith"  (Gal.  vi.  10;  1  Tim.  ii.  3,  4;  Titus  iii.  8;  Heb.  xiii.  Ifi;
1  Pet.  ii.  12—15 ;  Matt.  v.  14—18, 44—48 ;  xxii.  36— 4'^).  (2)  And  in  him  "  patience  has
its  perfect  work."  "  In  all  power  he  is  strengthened,  according  to  the  might  of  God's
glory  " — to  what  end  ?  In  order  to  do  some  great  thing,  one  would  suppose ;  but  no,
it  is  "  unto  all  patience  and  long-suffering."  Patience  is  the  mark  of  strength.  In
suffering  human  nature  is  most  receptive  of  the  power  of  God.  And  on  th»t  lonely
sick-bed,  where  some  quiet  suiferer  lies,  may  oftentimes  be  witnessed  a  display  of  "  the
might  of  his  glory"  which  the  grandest  achievements  ot  the  Ohristian  hero  will  scarcely
equal  (2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10 ;  Rom.  v.  3 ;  Heb.  ii.  10 ;  v.  7—9 ;  xii.  1 — 3 ;  Jas.  i.  2 — 4 ;  Eev.
vii.  13 — 15).  Perhaps  imprisonment  had  helped  to  teach  the  ardent  and  restless  spirit
of  the  apostle  this  lesson.  He  endures  "  with  joyfulness,"  not  with  a  mere  passive  and
dumb  submission;  for  he  suffers  "by  the  will  of  God"  (Acts  ix.  16;  v.  41;  Heb.  xii.
5—10 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  17).  "  It  was  granted  "  him  (Phil.  i.  29,  lx<^picer),  "  made  matter  oi
grace  and  favour")"to  snffer  for  Christ's  sake;"  and  thus,  at  least,  he  can  glurify
him,  if  in  no  other  way  (1  Pet.  ii.  19,  20).  For  whatever  gifts  or  means  for  doing
good  may  be  wanting  to  us,  we  have  at  any  rate  the  capacity  of  suffering.  (3)  And
whether  doing  or  bearing  his  Lord's  will,  the  Christian's  life  will  be  a  constant  "  thanks-
giving to  the  Father."  At  the  thought  of  the  blessings  of  redemption  (vers.  12 — 14),  as
he  gains  a  deeper  insight  into  all  "  the  good  and  acceptable  ami  perfect  will  of  God,"  new
songs  of  prai.se  break  forth  ever  and  aga'u  from  his  soul.  He  is  a  child  and  heir  of
God  (Rom.  viii.  14 — 17),  joint-heir  with  Christ  and  with  his  saints  (Eph.  iii.  6  ;  Titus
iii.  7  ;  Gal.  iii.  29),  in  the  realm  of  light  where  his  soul  already  dwells,  and  whose  light
will  shine  tor  him  "  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day."  He  rejoices  "in  hope  of
the  glory  of  God."  How  shall  he  not,  therefore,  give  thanks  !  So  God  would  have  it
(1  Thess.  V.  16 — 18).  (4)  And  so  walking,  he  walks  "  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all
pleasing"  (Eph.  v.  10;  Rom.  xii.  2).  God's  smile  rests  upon  him  from  day  to  day.
"  The  Lord  taketh  pleasure  in  his  servants."  Christ  could  say,  "  I  do  ahvays  the  things
that  please  him  "  (John  viii.  29),  and  they  who  are  "  as  he  is  in  this  world  "  can,  in
their  measure  and  degree,  humbly  say  the  same.  They  abide  in  their  Saviour's  love
(John  XV.  9, 10).  They  have  "  confidence  towards  God  "  (1  John  iii.  21,  22) — confidenc"
even  in  the  thought  of  the  day  of  judgment  (1  John  iv.  17).  Pleasing  God  now,  they
will  be  accepted  then.  3.  The  nature  of  salvation.  (Vers.  12 — 14,21,22.)  For  that
inheritance  for  which  the  Ohristian  praises  God  he  was  "  made  meet,"  and  he  is  grateful
for  the  means,  as  well  as  for  the  end,  of  his  salvation.  He  holds  the  title-deeds  of  his
heritage  in  certain  acts  and  transactions  on  the  part  of  God  which  make  him  meet  for
it,  and  make  it  meet  for  the  Divine  Father  to  invest  him  with  it.  (1)  His  salvation  is  an
act  of  rescue — a  redemption  by  power.  For  men  were  captives,  under  a  dark  and  cruel
tyranny  (Eph.  ii.  2  ;  vi.  12 ;  2  Cor,  iv.  4 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  26  ;  Acts  xxvi.  18 ;  Heb.  ii.  14  ;
John  viii.  34 ;  xii.  31 ;  xiv.  30 ;  xvi.  11 ;  Luke  iv.  6,  18).  When  we  consider  how
inbred  and  inveterate  is  the  power  of  evil  over  mankind,  how  allied  with  the  disordered
course  of  nature,  and  how  its  working  in  this  world  is  a  part  of  a  vast,  mysterious  con-
federacy of  spiritual  forces  acting  powerfully  and  insensibly  upon  and  around  us,  we
need  not  wonder  that  our  salvation  is  represented  as  a  mighty  and  glorinus  achievement
•f  Divine  power,  one  with  that  exhibited  in  Christ's  victory  over  death  (Eph.  i.  19, 20 ;
ch.  ii.  12).  Delivered,  we  are  at  the  same  time  translated — carried  over  at  once  into
,the  opposite  camp  as  subjects  and  soldiers  of  Christ  Jesus ;  whose  kingdom  is  that
where  love  rules,  whose  means  and  ends,  counsels  and  agencies,  are  all  the  ministers  of
love.  Light  and  love  are  one,  as  darkness  and  hate  (1  John  ii.  9 — 11 ;  iv.  7 — v.  5).
1^2)  It  is  equally  an  act  of  ransom — redemftion  by  price.    God  cannot  deny  himself


39  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.         [oh.  l  1—29.

He  is  "a,  Just  God  and  a  Saviour."  His  power  works  on  the  lines  laid  down  by  his
righteousness.  He  would  have  destroyed  rather  than  saved  us,  would  have  violated
the  human  conscience,  had  he  (conceivably)  saved  us  without  forgiveness ;  or  without  a
forgiveness  rationally  grounded  on  some  act  of  propitiation  that  should  make  amends
for  the  guilty  past.  This  propitiation,  as  it  frees  us  from  the  power  of  Satan  and  of
death,  is  our  ransom.  The  Son  of  God's  love,  if  he  would  redeem  us,  must  pay  tha
price..  What  that  price  should  be.  Divine  justice  determines,  while  Divine  love  pro-
vides it.  He  bought  us  with  "his  own  blood"  (Gal.  iii.  13;  Acts  xx.  28;  1  Pet.  1.
18,  19) ;  "  gave  his  life  a  ransom  "  (Matt.  xx.  28 ;  Titus  ii.  14).  (3)  And  we  may  anti-
cipate what  follows  in  vers.  20, 21,  by  adding  that  it  is,  finally,  an  act  of  reconciliation.
God  lays  aside  his  holy  resentment  against  us  as  sinners,  accepting  the  sacrifice  of  Christ
which  he  himself  has  provided,  offered  on  earth  and  by  our  Representative,  as  a  just
and  countervailing  satisfaction  "  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world"  (Rom.  iii.  25  ;  John
i.  29;  1  John  ii.  2) ;  while  men  thereupon,  becoming  aware  of  this  (Luke  ii.  14;  Eph.
ii.  17),  cease  from  their  enmity  and  strife  against  him  (2  Cor.  v.  19, 20).  So  "  peace  is
made  through  the  blood  of  the  cross"  (Eph.  ii.  16 ;  Rom.  v.  1, 10, 11).  And  meeting
God  in  this  peace-making,  men  meet  each  other ;  the  broken  unity  of  mankind  is
restored  (Eph.  ii.  13—16;  ch.  iii.  11;  John  xi.  51,  52);  and  other  worlds,  it  may  be,
share  with  our  own  in  the  "  peace  "  established  "  on  earth  "  (ver.  20).

Vers.  15 — 23. — ^Sect.  2.  TTie  redeeming  Son  and  his  kingdom.  1.  Christ  the  Loeb
OF  UNIVERSAL  NATURE.  (Vers.  15 — 17.)  Colossian  error  was  undermining  the  Christian
system  by  introducing  into  it  a  false,  dualistic  theory  of  nature,  then  widely  prevalent  in
other  quarters.  And  the  leaders  of  Christian  thought  can  never  afford  to  be  indifferent
to  the  current  philosophic  views  of  their  day.  Indeed,  in  the  contact  of  Christian
teaching  with  philosophy,  and  in  the  reflection  of  thoughtful  men  at  all  times,  the
question  was  sure  to  arise  and  must  constantly  recur  in  new  forms,  "  What  is  the  rela-
tion of  Christ  to  the  universe  ?  At  what  point  does  he  enter  the  scheme  of  things  ?
He  who  died  on  Calvary,  who  claims  to  save  the  souls  of  men,  what  has  he  to  do  with
nature  and  the  common  world?"  If  this  question  could  not  be  ansNjiered,  or  if  any
inferior  and  limited  position  in  the  world  of  being  must  be  assigned  to  him,  then,  as
the  Colossian  heresy  shows,  his  spiritual  authority  and  the  efficacy  of  his  redemption
become,  in  the  same  degree,  limited  and  uncertain.  Hence  the  teaching  of  the  Epistles
of  this  group  (Colossiaiis,  Ephesians,  Philippiahs)  respecting  the  Person  of  Christ  is  the
logical  and  theological  sequel  of  that  of  the  second  (Galatians,  Romans,  1  and  2  Corin-
thians), respecting  our  salvation  through  him.  We  gather  from  the  apostle's  teaching
here :  1.  That  in  Christ  Qod  becomes  visible,  and  nature  hecomes  intelligible.  To
earnest  philosophic  thought,  as  to  sound  religious  instinct,  it  has  always  been  evident
that  "  what  is  seen  hath  not  been  maJe  out  of  things  which  do  appear"  (Heb.  xi.  3).
An  "everlasting  power  and  divinity  are  clearly  seen  from  the  creation  of  the  world"
— ^but  as  "invisible  things"  (Rom.  i.  20).  Our  latest  Agnosticism  is  but  a  despairing
echo  of  the  cry  of  Job :  "  I  go  towards  the  east,  but  he  is  not  there ;  and  westward,  but
I  oaimot  perceive  him ;  toward  the  north,  where  he  is  working,  but  I  cannot  see  him  ;
where  he  veileth  himself  in  the  south,  but  I  cannot  find  him"  (xxiii.  8,9).  God
effectually  hides  himself  behind  his  works.  All  visible  point  to  invisible  caiises,  all
finite  things  lead  up  to  the  Infinite,  all  phenomena  to  the  noumenal;  but  whither  they
point  we  cannot  follow.  Some  of  the  most  profound  and  minute  of  modern  scientific
inquirers  testify  most  strongly  to  this  (e.g.  M.  Dumas  and  M.  Pasteur,  in  their  addresses
at  the  French  Academy,  1880, 1882).  Prom  that  invisible,  Christ  comes  forth  to  testify
of  him  whom  "  no  man  hath  seen  nor  can  see  "  (John  i.  14,  18  ;  xiv.  9).  We  know
now  what  the  Maker  of  the  universe  is  like.  The  world  is  no  longer  orphaned.  The
unknown  God  proves  to  be  its  Father,  and  his  Son  its  elder  Brother.  Human  thought
has  a  visible  centre  around  which  to  move,  a  sun  which  sheds  light  and  warmth  over
all  its  speculations.  The  incarnation  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  with  the  whole  course
of  his  miracles  (his  signs),  assui'e  us  that  natural  law  is,  and  must  prove  itself  ultimately
to  be,  subservient  to  spiritual  law,  the  lower  to  the  higher  order,  the  material  world  to
the  moral  being  of  man.  His  miracles  and  parables  and  his  general  teaching  furnish
many  fruitful  hints,  some  that  lie  on  the  surface,  others  that  await  our  deeper  searching
or  future  need,  respecting  the  meaning  and  use  of  the  natural  world.    He  is,  after  iu,


CM.  1. 1-29.]  TAB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSlAUa  23

its  chief  Interpreter,  the  Master  of  poets  and  philosophers  of  nature  who  often  owe
most  to  him  when  they  are  least  aware  of  it,  as  well  as  of  religious  thinkers  and  social
reformers.  While  we  hold  fast  this  faith  in  the  "  Image  of  God  the  invisible,"  the
"  Firstborn  of  all  creation,"  we  may  witness  science  and  philosophy  pursuing  their
inquiries  without  misgiving,  and  we  may  follow  them,  warily  indeed,  but  without  mis-
trust ;  for  they  can  discover  no  truth  which  will  not  'n  the  end  support  the  "  truth  as
it  is  in  Jesus,"  and  they  labour,  though  they  know  tt  not,  only  to  add  their  own  to
the  "many  crowns"  that  are  preparing  for  the  hca.l  of  our  Immanuel.  2.  All  the
relations  which  nature  holds  to  God  centre  in  Christ.  (1)  If  the  world  rests  on  Ood,  is
grounded  in  him,  refers  secretly  and  everywhere  to  God  as  the  immanent,  perpetual
Cause  of  its  bsing  and  its  energy ;  if  in  him  "  we  live  and  move  and  are ; " — then  we
are  to  understand  all  this  of  Christ.  "  In  him  were  created,  in  him  consist  all  things"
(vers.  16, 17).  "  God  was  in  Christ "  creating  the  heavens  and  the  earth ;  is  "  in  Christ "
sustaining,  co-ordinating,  directing  the  march  of  the  circling  worlds,  the  evolution  of
their  teeming,  endlessly  varied  forms  of  life.  The  "  winds  and  the  sea"  that  "  obeyed
him,"  disease  and  death  and  the  mighty  spirits  of  darkness  that  fled  at  his  word,  knew
something  of  this  secret,  if  men  do  not.  (2)  If  through  Qod  the  universe  came  to  be
(Rom.  xi.  36) ;  if  he  supplied  the  agencies  of  creation,  the  matter  and  the  force  (unless
matter  is  really /oree)  out  of  which  it  was  generated,  the  laws  which  shaped  its  form
and  governed  its  development ; — then  it  appears  that  all  this  was  done  throtigh  Christ.
(3)  If  the  world  moves  towards  Ood  (Rom.  xi.  36),  in  spite  of  all  divergence  and
confusion ;  and  if  throughout  the  unmeasured  cycles  of  its  duration  past  and  to  come  it
advances  towards  the  fulfilment  of  its  destiny,  "that  God  may  be  all  in  all"  (1  Cor.
XV.  28) ; — then  its  course  is  directed  also  tmio  Christ.  The  will  of  God  respecting  the
kingdom  of  his  Son  was  the  secret  of  creation  (Bph.  iii.  9, 10).  Man's  sin  did  not  give
birth  to  that  purpose.  It  called  for  its  vindication  in  new  forms  of  superabounding
grace ;  but  from  the  beginning  it  was  "  the  Father's  will  that  all  should  honour  the  Son
as  they  honour  the  Father"  (John  v.  23).  He  is  "  the  Heir  of  all  things"  (Heb.  i.  2),
and  it  is  "the  glory  of  God  the  Father"  "that  every  knee  should  bow,of  things  in  heaven,
and  things  on  earth,  and  things  under  the  earth,  and  that  every  tongue  should  confess
that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord "  (Phil.  ii.  9 — 11).  So  far,  therefore,  as  we  can  trace  any
Divine  working  in  the  course  of  nature  or  history,  we  may  refer  it  to  Christ  as  truly
as  the  forgiveness  of  sius  or  the  resurrection  of  the  dead.  Nature  and  grace,  body
and  spirit,  history  and  revelation,  the  secular  and  sacred,  are  essentially  one,  are  parts  of
the  same  scheme,  each  being  the  complement  of  the  other  (instance  the  inseparable
connection  of  Christ's  miracles  of  healing  with  his  spiritual  work),  and  are  working
under  the  same  management  (Matt,  xxviii.  18),  towards  the  same  issue,  that  "  purpose
of  the  ages  which  God  purposed  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord,  to  sum  up  all  things  in
Christ"  (Bph.  i.  10  ;  iii.  9—11).

II.  Chkist  the  Head  of  the  Church.  (Vers.  18 — 23.)  1.  Into  the  world  created
to  be  "  the  kijjgdom  of  the  Son  of  God's  love,"  "sin  entered,  and  death  through  sin;  "
and  death  became  king,  sin  in  death  (Rom.  v.  12,  13,  21),  instead  of  "  the  Piince  of
life."  Hatred  was  planted  in  the  human  breast,  and  with  it  came  a  darkness  that
"apprehended  not  the  light  of  life"  (vers.  13,  21;  John  i.  4,  5 ;  1  .John  iii.  8,  il,
12) ;  and  men  fell  under  "  the  dominion  of  Satan  "  (Acts  xxvi.  18  ;  Eph.  ii.  2,  3 ;  Luke
iv.  6;  1  John  v.  19),  the  "  murderer,"  the  "  father  of  lies ; "  till  it  came  to  pass  that,
though  Christ  ever  "  was  in  the  world,  the  world  knew  him  not "  (John  i.  10).  Men
were  everywhere  "  cut  off  from  Christ,"  "  alienated,"  "  children  of  wrath  "  (ver.  21 ;
Bph.  ii.  3,  12) ;  how  rebellious  against  him,  his  advent  proved.  Then,  in  their
"  wicked  works,"  they  not  only  denied  the  Son  his  pre-eminence,  but  even  said,  "  Come,
let  us  kill  him"  (Matt.  xxi.  38;  Luke  xix.  U;  Ps.  ii.).  2.  And  he  submits  to  die,
that  he  may  "  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself."  The  Firstborn  of  ail  creation
becomes  Firstborn  out  of  the  dead.  So  high  he  was  in  his  Divine,  eiernal  birih,  so  low
he  stooped — to  the  Virgin's  womb,  to  "  a  servant's  form,"  and  "  unto  death,  yea,  the
death  of  the  cross"  (vers.  18,  20;  Phil.  ii.  7,  8;  Rom.  i.  3;  ix.  5;  2  Cor.  viii.  9;
Qal.  iv.  4;  Heb.  ii.  5 — 18),  to  restore  his  human  brethren,  to  recover  his  alienated
kingdom,  "  to  reconcile  all  things  unto  himself"  (vers.  18,  20 ;  Rom.  xiv.  9 ;  Phil  ii.
10,11;  Eev.  i.  5,  6,  Revised  Text).  3.  So  dying,  he  liven  again  that  he  may  give
us  life  (Rom.  vi,  4 — IX) ;  descending,  in  turn  he  ascends  and  lifts  us  with  him  (Eph,


24  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [ch.  1.1—29

iv.  8 — 10 ;  ii.  5,  6 ;  John  xii.  32) ;  emptying  himself,  he  gains  a  new  toveretgn  fulnest
(ver.  19;  Phil.  ii.  8;  Eph,  iv.  10;  i.  20— 23)  of  all  that  the  dark,  exiled,  broken,
miserable  woild  needs  to  restore  it  and  build  it  up  again  (ch.  ii.  9,  10;  Phil.  iv.  19).
4.  Round  himself  as  the  living  Centre,  he  gathers  a  new  htimanity  and  forms  a  new
world,  which  is  his  lody,  the  Church  (vers.  18,  24 ;  cb.  ii.  19  ;  Kph.  iv,  16 ;  v.  23 ;  John
XV.  1 — 8) — a  body  wider,  and  yet  narrower,  than  the  visible  (Matt.  xiii.  24 — 30;  John
X.  16);  "a  spiritual  lioiise,"  built  of  those  united  as  "  living  stones"  to  the  "living
Stone  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  4,  5),  which  "  groweth  unto  a  holy  temple  in  the  Lord  "  (Eph.  ii.  21),
So  he  is  the  Beginning  (ver.  18)  of  an  agelong,  world-wide  process  of  resurrection  and
reconstruction.  The  life  that  is  in  him  is  an  organic,  formative,  spiritual  energy,  with
a  "mighty  working"  in  it  that  is  "able  to  subdue  all  things  unto  itself"  (Phil.  jii.
21;  Eoin.  viii.  2 — 11);  a  leaven  destined  to  leaven  the  whole  lump  (Matt.  xiii.  31 — 33).
"The  kingdom  of  this  world"  must  "become  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  his
Christ"  (Rev.  xi.  15;  1  Cor.  xv.  25;  Dan.  ii.  34,  35;  vii.  13,  14);  "the  law  of  the
Spirit  of  life  in  Christ  Jesus"  must  penetrate,  transform,  and  dominate  every  sphere
of  human  thought  and  activity;  "the  works  of  the  devil"  everywhere,  and  in  every
form  and  shape,  must  be  "destroyed"  (1  John  iii.  8).  Then  only  will  he  have  "recon-
ciled all  things  on  the  earth  to  himself."  5.  For  ourselves,  as  individuals,  the  design
of  Christ's  reconciliation  is  the  perfection  of  our  personal  character  as  approved  hy  him-
self at  the  day  of  judgment  (vers,  22,  28).  This  is  true  also  of  the  Church  collectively
(Eph.  v.  27).  He  is  Judge  as  well  as  Saviour ;  and  his  justice  is  as  inflexible  as  his
incrcy  is  compassionate.  "The  King,"  for  as  Kinc;  he  will  then  appear,  desires  to  be
able  to  say  to  each  of  us,  "Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  pre-
pared for  you; "  "sit  with  me  in  my  throne"  (Matt.  xxv.  34;  Eev.  iii.  2l);  but  he
vpill  only  say  it  to  those  who  are  worthy  (Rev.  iii.  4,  5).  To  tliis  end  he  redeemed  us
by  his  blood,  bestowed  on  us  his  Spirit,  brought  us  into  his  kingdom,  subjects  us  to  its
discipline,  employs  us  in  its  service,  instructs  us  in  its  wisdom,  enriches  us  with  all
its  spirituMl  blessings — "  to  present  us  (on  that  day)  holy  and  without  blemish  and
nnreprovable  before  him  "  (Jude  24,  25 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  12, 13 ;  v.  23, 24).  6.  How  far  the
influence  of  this  reconciliation  extends  heyond  the  things  upon  the  earth ;  and,  if  it  does
so  extend,  in  whf>t  direction ;  whether  or  liow  it  touches  "  the  principalities  and  powers
in  heavenly  places," — ^we  cannot  tell,  and  dare  not  attempt  to  gness.  Origen,  on  the
warrant  of  this  passage  (ver.  20),  fondly  thought  that  even  Satan  himself  would  be
ultimately  reconciled  to  God.  At  any  rate,  when  he  "through  whom  and  unto  whom
all  things  have  been  created"  is  the  sacrifice,  and  when  the  evil  of  this  world  is  but  a
part  of  the  lealin  of  evil  above  and  around  us,  we  may  not  deny  the  possibility  of
others  sharing  with  us,  somehow,  in  the  atoning  virtue  of  his  death.  7.  Butall  this  is  so
far  stated  from  the  Divine  side,  as  matter  of  God's  general  purpose  and  plan  in  Christ
(Eph.  i.  10;  1  Tim.  ii.  4;  2  Tim.  i.  9;  Acts  iii.  21) ;  and  this  plan  will  certainly  be
carried  out ;  "  all  things,"  as  a  whole,  will  certainly  be  reconciled.  But  there  is  nothing
here  to  contrailict  the  possibility  of  a  self-exclusion  of  individuals,  belonging  to  this
Vforld  or  to  otlier  worlds,  from  the  licnefits  of  the  Divine  amnesty,  and  of  their  expul-
sion from  a  reconciled  universe  (2  Thess.  i.  9  ;  Matt.  xxv.  41 ;  Luke  xiii.  25 ;  John  xv.
6;  Eev.  xxii.  15).  Ver.  23  intimates  as  much  as  this.  "All  this  is  yours,"  the  apostle
virtually  sajs,  " if  ye  continue  in  the  faith,  not  being  moved  away  from  the  hope  of  the
gospel ; "  but  if  not,  what  then  ?  Contrast  2  Cor.  v.  19  and  20 ;  John  x.  10  and  v.  40.
Still  the  distressing  question,  "Lord,  are  there  few  that  be  saved?"  presses  on  us,  and
our  Lord's  reply  speaks  in  the  same  tones  of  stern  and  solemn  warning  (Luke  xiii.
23 — 30).  For  us  to  whom  the  message  of  reconcili-ition  is  now  addressed,  it  is  clear
that  "  now  is  the  day  of  salvation  "  (2  Cor.  vi.  2).  To  be  a  minister  of  this  recon-
ciliation, and  so  a  minister  of  the  Church,  a  builder  of  the  hou'te  of  God,  the  Body  of
Christ,  how  hia;h  and  responsible  the  office  (vers.  23 — 26;  1  (or.  iv.  1,  2;  2  Cor.  v.
11— vi.  10)1

Vers.  24 — 29. — Sect.  3.  The  apostle  and  his  mission.  1.  PAtrL  a  minister  or  Christ.
(Vers.  24,  25,  28,  29.)  In  this  passage  the  apostle  draws  a  picture  of  himself  which,
taken  with  the  delineations  furnished  by  him  elsewhere,  stands  before  the  Church  for
all  time  as  the  ideal  portrait  of  the  "  faithful  minister "  and  the  "  good  soldier  of  Christ
Jesus,"    The  account  he  gives  of  himself  here  concerns  his  calling,  hit  aim,  hit  work^


CH.I.1— 29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  TSE  C0L0SSIAN8.  «

and  his  experience.  1.  The  apostle  styles  himself  (1)  minister  of  the  gospel  (ver.  23  6),
of  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  for  all  men,  I'rom  all  sin,  in  Jesus  Christ  (Matt.  i.  '^1;
Luke  i.  68—79 ;  Acts  v.  31 ;  xiii.  38,  39,  47 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  3—7 ;  Titus  ii.  11-14),  "  the
gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  "  (Acts  xx.  24).  It  is  this  that  he  has  to  serve — to  publish,
explain,  apply  it,  to  carry  it  everywhere  and  to  all  its  practical  issues.  And  in  thus
serving  the  gospel,  he  knows  that  he  is  best  servinc;  the  interests  of  mankind  (Titus  iii.
3 — 8 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  6 ;  Bph.  v.  9  ;  Phil.  iv.  8,  9).  There  is  no  charge  so  serious  and
rtsponsible,  requiring  so  high  a  character  (1  Thess.  ii.  4)  or  so  much  boldness  and
power  of  utterance  in  its  minister  (Epli.  vi.  19,  20).  (2)  He  is  also  minister  of  the
Ghurch  (ver.  25),  pastor  and  teacher  as  well  as  evangelist  (Bph.  iv.  11).  And  minister
means  "  servant."  The  Church  does  not  exist  for  his  sake,  but  he  for  the  Church's  sake :
"  We  preach  ourselves  your  servants  [slaves]  for  Jesus'  sake  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  5 ;  comp.  ver,
24 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  6—8  ;  1  Pet.  v.  2,  3  ;  John  x.  9—15  ;  Ezek.  xxxiv.).  He  has  authority,
which  he  does  not  hesitate  to  use  when  need  arises  (1  Cor.  iv.  19 — ^v.  5  ;  2  Cor.  x.  2 — 6) ;
but  it  is  that  "  which  the  Lord  gave  for  edification  "  (2  Cor.  x.  8 ;  xiii.  10).  To  the
Ohureh  he  can  say,  "  I'seek  not  yours,  but  you ; "  "  whether  Paul,  or  A))ollos,  or  Cephas,
all  are  yours ;"  "  I  will  most  gladly  spend  and  he  spent  for  your  souls  "  (2  Cor.  xii.  14,  15;
1  Cor.  iii.  22  ;  Phil.  ii.  17 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  8).  And  well  may  he  do  this,  for  he  serves  the
Church  for  which  the  Lord  Jesus  "  gave  himself,"  which  he  "  loves,"  which  he  "  nourishes
and  cherishes  as  his  own  body"  (ver.  24:  Epii.  v.  25,  29).  He  follows  in  the  steps  of
"  the  good  Shepherd,"  who  "  giveth  his  life  for  the  sheep "  (John  x.  11).  (3)  His
ministry  is  a  Divine  trust,  a  stewardship  of  Ood  (ver.  25  ;  Eph.  iii.  2,  9 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  1 ;
ix.  17).  He  was  "  separated  from  his  mother's  womb  "  (Gal.  i.  15),  was  "  sent"  (Acts
xxii.  21),  "  was  put  to  ministry  "  (1  Tim.  i.  12), "  appointed  herald  and  apostle  and
teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  faith  and  truth  "  (1  Tim.  ii.  7).  And  in  accordance  with  his
inward  call,  he  was  "  separated  "  for  his  particular  work  by  "  the  Holy  Ghost,"  acting
through  the  officers  of  the  Church  at  Antioch  (Acts  xiii.  1 — 3).  He  is,  therefore,  a
"minister  of  Christ,"  a  "minister  of  God,"  and  "  steward  of  the  mysteries  of  God"  (2
Cor.  xi.  23  ;  vi.  4 ;  1  Cor.  iv.  1).  Hence  the  dignity  and  authority  of  his  office  (Gal.  i.
1, 11,  12),  and  the  power  with  which  it  invests  him  (ver.  29 ;  2  Cor.  x.  4,  8 ;  xii.  12 ;
xiii.  3 — 6),  and  his  responsibility  for  the  iinal  account  (1  Cor.  iv.  1 — 5 ;  2  Cor.  y.  11 ;
Phil.  ii.  16  ;  1  Thess.  ii.  19, 20 ;  Heb.  xiii.  17).  His  business  is  to  "  serve  the  Church,"
but  "to  please  God  "  (Gal.  i.  10).  2.  The  aim  of  his  ministry  is  twofold.  (1)  To  fulfil
the  word  of  Ood  (ver.  25) — to  give  it  the  widest  possible  extension  (vers.  6,  23;  Rom.
XV.  17 — 21 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  1),  to  carry  it  throuj^h  every  "  open  door  "  (ch.  iv.  3  ;  Eph.  iii.
9 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  9  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  12 — 14),  and  "  manifest  the  savour  of  the  knowledge  of
Christ  in  every  place,"  and  to  carry  it  on  to  its  full  issue  in  the  salvation  and  sanctifi-
cation  of  all  who  hear  it  (ver.  28 ;  Acts  xi.  27  ;  1  Thess.  ii.  11, 12 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  13—15).
And  so  his  aim  is  (2)  to  present  every  man  perfect  in  Christ.  (Ver.  28.)  This  is  his
endeavour  and  hope  regarding  every  man  to  whom  his  ministry  is  aMressei,  wnto  which
he  toils  hard  and  strives  (ver.  29).  His  supreme  reward  "  in  the  day  of  Christ,"  his
"joy  and  crown  of  glorying"  (1  Thess.  ii.  16  ;  Phil.  ii.  16),  will  be  found  in  the  saved
souls,  the  perfec'ed  and  ripened  Christian  characters,  whom  he  will  be  able  then  to
present  as  the  fiuit  of  "the  grace  of  God  that  was  with  him"  (1  Cor.  xv.  10;  Eph.  iii.
2,  8 ;  Rom.  i.  13).  3.  His  work  is  (1)  the  preaching  of  Christ  (ver.  29) — "  Christ  cruci-
fied "  (1  Cor.  i.  23 ;  ii.  2)  and  "  risen  again  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  3,  4  ;  Acts  xvii.  18),  "  made
unto  us  wisdom  from  God,  and  righteousness,  and  sanctiflcation,  and  redemption"  (1
Cor.  i.  30) ;  "  Christ  the  Image  of  God  "  (ver.  15 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  4),  the  "  Firstborn  of  all
creation  "  (ver.  15),  "  Head  of  the  Church  "  (ver.  18),  "  Lord  of  both  the  dead  and  the
living  "  (Rom.  xiv.  9),  "  all  and  in  all "  (ch.  iii.  11).  (2)  The  admonishing  and  teaching
of  every  man.  (Ver.  28.)  For  "all  have  sinned  "  and  need  Christ  (Bora.  iii.  23 — 26),
and  all  have  a  claim  on  his  salvation  (1  Tim.  iv.  10 ;  ii.  3,  4;  Rom.  iii.  29,  30;  i.  16 ;
Heb.  ii.  9;  John  iii.  16,  etc.).  He  "admonishes  every  man,"  therefore,  often  "with
tears  (Acts  xx.  31),  of  the  nature  and  the  penalties  of  sin,  of  the  day  of  judgment  and
"  the  fear  of  the  Lord  "  (2  Cor.  v.  11),  of  the  danger  of  falling  from  grace,  of  the  special
faults  or  errors  he  may  discern  in  him  (Gal.  iii.  1 — 4,  etc. ;  1  Cor.  i.  11,  etc).  He
teaches  in  all  wisdom,  supplying  instruction  apt  for  the  simplest  understanding  and  for
the  weakest  "  babe  in  Christ,"  and  also  speaking  "  wisdom  among  thf  perfect "  (1  Cor.
iL  6— iii.  2),  i°ekiitg  to  meet  every  stage  and  state  of  the  Christian  kfe,  and  Rtud^ng


26  THE  EtlSTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.         [oH.tl-2a

the  gentleness  and  patience  (2  Tim.  ii.  24 — 20  j  1  Thess.  ii.  7),  the  sympathy  and  adap-
tiveness  which  the  teacher's  work  requires  (1  Cor.  ix.  20 — 22),  "  teaching  publicly  and
from  house  to  house,"  "  keeping  back  nothing  thnt  was  profitable,"  but  everything  that
was  unprofitable  (1  Tim  iv.  6-8;  vi.  3—5;  2  Tim.  ii.  14—23;  Titus  iii.  8,  9),  and
plying  every  possible  means  to  promote  and  to  increase  in  all  men  "  repentance  toward
God  and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  "(Acts  xx.  18 — 21,  27).  4.  In  this  work:
(1)  Bis  labour  is  intense  and  painful.  (Ver.  29.)  Work  is  in  his  eyes  the  one  thing  for
which  the  Christian  ministry  is  to  be  valued  and  commended(l  Thess.  v.  12,  13).  H«
is  himself  "  in  labours  more  abundant,"  and  in  this  respect  chiefly  is  "  more  a  minister
of  Christ "  than  some  others  (2  Cor.  xi.  23 ;  comp.  1  Cor.  xv.  10).  No  kind  of  toil
comes  amiss  to  him,  for  Christ's  sake.  Claiming  his  "  right  in  the  gospel"  to  "  live  ot
the  gospel  as  the  Lord  ordained,"  yet  on  grounds  of  expediency  he  cheerfully  foregoes
it,  and  "  brings  himself  into  bondage  to  all,"  "  for  the  gospel's  sake  "  (1  Cor.  ix.  1 — 23).
"  These  hands,"  as  he  holds  them  up  hard  and  black  with  working  at  the  coarse  sail-
cloth, show  how  "  in  all  things  he  gave  us  an  example "  of  self-denying  toil  (Acts  xx.
34,  35).  .  (2)  And  now  Ms  sufferings  surpass  even  his  lahouri,  yet  they  fill  him  with
constant  joy.  (Ver.  24.)  He  is  a  prisoner,  and  his  flesh  rebels  against  "  these  bonds  "
(Acts  xxvi.  29).  He  cannot  preach  abroad,  or  visit  the  Churches  (ch.  iv.  3 ;  Eph.  vi.  19,
20 ;  Phil.  i.  25,  26),  whose  "  care  "  still  "  presses  on  him  daily  "  (2  Cor.  xi.  28).  Many
desert  him  (ch.  iv.  11),  and  some  even  who  "  preach  Christ"  do  it  to  injure  and  not  to
help  him  (Phil.  i.  16).  Yet  even  in  this  he  can  rejoice  (Phil.  i.  17,  18).  He  has  learnt
the  secret  of  contentment  (Phil.  iv.  11).  He  is  conscious  of  being  "  set  for  the  defence
of  the  gospel "  (Phil.  i.  16).  His  sufferings  are  evidently  tending  to  its  furtherance
(Phil.  i.  12 — 20).  The  cause  of  the  Grentile  Church  is  being  effectually  served  by  the
sacrifice  he  has  made  (Eph.  iii.  1,  13 ;  PhiL  ii.  17,  18).  Above  all,  he  feels  that  he  is
treading  in  the  steps  of  Christ,  suffering  in  the  same  interest,  carrying  on  the  same
cause ;  and  he  takes  it  as  a  gift  of  grace  (Phil.  i.  29)  that  he  has  thus  assigned  to  him  his
special  share  in  that  which  Christ  has  been  pleased  to  leave  for  his  servants  to  suffer
after  him.  How  shall  he  not  rejoice  to  be  " as  his  Master"!  In  the  two  words  itoxia
ayavi(6iiivos  (ver.  29),  whose  full  force  is  untranslatable,  the  apostle  paints  himself  to
the  life,  as  the  spiritual  athlete,  the  great  Christian  champion,  never  flagging  in  his
efforts  nor  shrinking  from  the  heavy  blows  that  fall  upon  him,  till  the  prize  of  victory
is  won  (comp.  1  Cor.  ix.  24—27  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  14—17 ;  iv.  7—18 ;  xi.  23—33  ;  Acts  xx.
24 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  7,  8).  But  while  we  look  at  him  with  admiration,  he  cries  out,  "  It  is
not  I,  but  Christ  living  in  me ;  and  in  my  poor  efforts  his  mighty  energy  displays
itself"  (ver.  29;  1  Cor.  xv.  10;  2  Cor.  xii.  8,  9  ;  Gal.  ii.  20).

II.  Cheist  the  Mystbey  or  God.  (Vers.  26,  27.)  This  is  the  glorious  theme  of
St.  Paul's  ministry.  1.  It  is  the  burden  of  the  old  revelation,  the  secret  of  ancient  his-
tory. The  great  heroes  of  the  Old  Testament — patriarchs,  lawgivers,  prophets,  kings
— were  fragmentary  types  of  him,  in  their  character,  achievements,  or  sufferings  (Heb.
V.  10;  Acts  vii.  37, etc.).  The  highest  aspirations  and  anticipations  of  "holy  men  of
old,  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,"  were  directed  mysteriously  all  along  to  him,  to  his
birth,  teaching,  sufferings,  resurrection,  to  "  the  glory  that  should  follow,"  to  "  the
preaching  of  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  to  all  nations  in  his  name"  (Luke  xxiv.
26,  27,  44 — 47).  The  Jewish  system  of  worship  and  discipline,  in  its  construction
and  design,  prefigured  and  prepared  for  his  advent,  who  was  himself  meanwhile  secretly
acting  in  it  and  speaking  through  it  to  his  people  (John  i.  10, 11 ;  1  Cor.  x.  4,  9;  Heb.
ii.  10 — 12 ;  xi.  26).  The  whole  history  of  Israel  and  the  development  of  the  Old  Tes-
tament system  unerringly  pointed  to  this  goal,  where  it  met  the  blindly  groping,  half-
articulate  desire  of  all  nations.  In  Christ  the  lines  of  promise  and  of  preparation,
converging  from  the  most  distant  ages  and  widely  separated  peoples,  meet  and  are
focuss^  in  this  "  fulness  of  the  times."  2.  But  the  goal  was  hidden  from  the  ages
and  from  the  generations,  who  stood  with  straining  sight  seeking  to  pierce  the  darkness
of  the  future  (1  Pet.  i.  10 — 12 ;  Matt.  xiii.  17).  Seeing  but  a  part  of  the  promise,
"  afar  off,"  and  "  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  manners,"  they  could  not  forecast  its
issue,  nor  piece  together  its  scattered  intimations.  The  Gentiles  knew  that  they  needed
a  Divine  Saviour,  and  their  need  had  become  consciously  extreme  and  desperate  (1  Cor.
i.  19 — iii ;  Eph.  ii.  12 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  13 ;  Acts  xvii.  '^3,  27).  The  Jews  knew  that  he
would  come,  but  little  suspected  in  what  guise.    They  knew  sot  bow  great  and  iuward


OH.  1. 1—29.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANi  Vt

was  their  own  need  of  him.  Least  of  all  did  they  expect  or  wish  that  he  should  be  for
"a  light  of  the  Gentiles,  and  fur  salvation  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth"  (Acts  xiii.  iT),
Those  who  knew  most  of  his  coming  were  least  prepared  to  believe  this.  It  is,  alas !  still
a  mystery  to  them  (Eph.  iii.  4 — 6 ;  Rom.  xi. ;  2  Cor.  iii.  12 — 16).  3.  I'his  mystery
Irings  to  Ood^s  saints,  not  only  a  Christ  revealed  to  them,  the  open  secret  of  the  Old
Testament,  but  a  Christ  manifested  in  them  (ver.  27 ;  Gal.  i.  16),  Gentiles  and  Jews
alike  (Acts  xi.  17),  which  is  a  deeper  secret  still.  How  "  rinh  "  is  the  Divine  "  tiha-y  "
displayed  in  this !  With  what  "  might "  do  our  weak  hearts  need  to  be  "  strengthened
that  Christ  may  dwell  through  faith  "  therein,  that  so  we  may  be  "filled  with  all  this
fulness  of  God"  (Eph.  iii.  16 — 19)1  4.  And  therefore  this  mystery  of  Qod  is  not
finished  yet.  (Rev.  x.  7  ;  xxi.  1 — 8.)  "  Christ  in  you  is  the  hope  of  glory  "  (ver.  27).
Every  saint  of  God  is  a  new  mystery  to  the  world,  and  even  to  himself  (oh.  iii.  3  ;  1  John
iii.  1,2).  "  1'he  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God"  (Rom.  viii.l9)  has  still  to  come,  when
their  hidden  life  will  be  made  visible.  The  soul  united  to  Christ  and  like  to  him  will  b«
mated  with  "  a  spiritual  body  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  44),  a  "  body  of  glory  "  (Phil.  iii.  21).  Then
at  last  the  inward  and  the  outward,  character  and  condition,  will  harmonize  and  be
fitly  matched,  and  "  we  shall  be  manifested  with  him  in  glory  "  (ch.  iii.  3, 4).  This  is
the  Christian  hope,  of  which  "  Christ  in  you  "  is  the  abiding  pledge  (ch.  iii.  15,  note ;
Eph.  i.  13, 14;  Rom.  viii.  11).

HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  3 — 8. — The  apostles  thanksgiving  for  the  spiritual  progress  of  the  Cohssiant.
Notwithstanding  the  dangerous  speculations  of  a  Judseo-Gnostic  philosophy  which  had
sprung  up  at  Colossse,  threatening  the  integrity  of  their  faith,  the  apostle  is  yet  able  to
express  his  thankfulness  for  the  faith  and  love  which  animated  the  Christian  brother-
hood in  the  valley  of  Lyons.  He  is  thankful  for  their  continued  allegiance  to  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  the  one  satisfaction  of  all  their  yearnings,  the  one  solution
both  of  their  speculative  questionings  and  of  their  religious  wants.

I.  Thanksgiving  is  a  constant  bxekcisb  op  the  Christian  heart,  as  it  is
ALSO  a  true  part  OP  PRAYBB.  "  We  give  thanks  to  God  the  Father  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ,  praying  always  for  you."  1.  It  ought  to  mingle  with  every  prayer.  We
never  pray  but  we  have  cause  for  thankfulness,  and  we  never  give  thanks  but  we  have
cause  to  pray.  And  whatever  may  be  the  subject  of  our  rejoicing  ought  to  be  matter
for  thanksgiving.  Prayer  with  thanksgiving  was  the  apostle's  constant  recommenda-
tion (Phil.  iv.  6).  2.  It  is  to  be  addressed  to  Ood  the  Father  in  Christ.  (1)  Because
we  are  commanded  to  "  enter  his  gates  with  thanksgiving,"  "  to  be  thankful  to  him
and  to  bless  his  Name"  (Ps.  c.  4).  (2)  Because  it  is  only  from  him  that  we  have  all
good  (Jas.  i.  17).  (3)  Because  it  is  only  by  him  we  are  preserved  from  all  sin  (Ps.
cxxi.  7).  (4)  Because  he  only  is  good  in  himself  (Luke  xviii.  19).  3.  Seasons  for
thanksgiving.  (1)  It  is  the  only  requital  G-od  expects  or  we  can  make  for  his  mercies
(Ps.  1.  10,  14 ;  Ixix.  30,  31).  (2)  We  cannot  expect  a  blessing  unless  we  are  thankful
for  it.  (3)  'J'he  more  thankful  we  are  for  mercies  received,  the  more  ground  we  have
for  expecting  more  of  them.  4.  We  ought  to  be  thankful  as  well  as  prayerful  for  otheri
as  well  as  ourselves,  (Eph.  vi.  18 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  1.)  What  a  treasury  of  prayers  belongs
to  the  saints !

II.  The  subjects  op  the  apostle's  thanksgivino — the  faith  and  love  op  the
CoLOSSiANS.  "  Having  heard  of  your  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  and  of  the  love  which  ye  have
toward  all  the  saints."  It  is  interesting  to  remark  that  the  apostle,  in  the  two  Epistles
written  at  tlie  same  time  as  this  to  Colos'^se,  expresses  thankfulness  for  similar  blessings
fEph.  1.  15 ;  Philem.  5).  1.  Their  faith  in  Christ  Jesus.  (1)  It  was  not  merely  faith
resting  upon  him  and  finding  its  nurture  and  support  in  him.  (2)  But  it  centred  in  him
as  the  sphere  in  which  it  had  its  due  exercise.  In  this  sense,  Christ  "  dwells  in  the
heart  by  faith  "  (Eph.  iii.  17),  and  believers  "rejoice  in  him  "  (Puil.  iii.  3,  7).  Such  a
faith  is  a  merciful  preservative  against  doctrinal  errors.  2.  Thrir  love  to  all  the  saints.
(1)  The  nature  of  this  love.  It  includes :  (a)  "  Doing  good  to  all,  especially  to  those  of
the  household  of  faith  "(Gal.  vi.  10),  and  "  distributing  to  the  necessity  of  saints"
(Bom.  xii.  13).  (6)  Loving  fellowship  (Acts  ii.  42).  "  Not  forsaking  the  assembling  ol
©urselves  together "  (He b.  X,  25).  (c)  Bearing  with  their  infirmities.  "Love  covereth


89  tfiE  tePISTLE  fO  TflE  COLOSStANS.         toH.i.l— 8».

ihe  multitude  of  sins  "  (1  Pet.  iv.  8).  We  are  not  to  grieve  our  brother  with  our  meat,
else  "we  walk  not  charitaWy  "  (Rotn.  xiv.  15).  (tZ)  Cherishing  a  forgiving  spirit  (Eph.
iv.  31).  (2)  The  manner  of  this  love,  (o)  It  is  to  be  brotherly.  We  are  "  to  love
the  brotherhood  "  (1  Pet.  ii.  22).  (6)  It  is  to  be  sincere.  "  Witlioiit  dissimulation  "
(Rom.  xii.  9) ;  "  Not  in  word  and  in  tongne,  but  in  deed  and  in  truth  "  (1  John  iii.  18).
(c)  It  is  to  be  from  "  a  pure  heart "  (1  Tim.  i.  5).  (d)  It  is  to  be  fervent.  "  Have  fervent
charity  among  yourselves  "  (1  Pet.  iv.  8).  (e)  It  is  to  be  full  of  labours  (1  Thess.  i.  3).
(/)  It  is  above  all  to  be  catholic.  "  All  the  saints,"  without  distinction.  (3)  The  reasons
for  this  love,  (a)  Christ's  example  and  command  (John  xiii.  34).  (6)  It  is  a  sign  of
grace.  It  is  a  tolten  that  "we  are  translated  from  death  to  life"(l  John  iii.  14).
David's  deli'iht  was  "  in  the  saints  "  (Ps.  xvi.  3).  (c)  It  is  the  "  fulfilling  of  the  Law  "
(Rom.  xiii.  10).  (c/)  There  is  comfort  in  it  (Phil.  ii.  1).  (e)  It  commends  the  gospel  to
the  world.  We  ought,  therefore,  to  be  "  sound  in  love  "  (Titus  ii.  2),  and  "  to  provoke
one  another  to  love  and  good  works"  (Heb.  x.  24).  3.  The  relation  hefween  faith  atid
love.  They  are  necessarily  joined  together ;  for :  (1)  Faith  "  worketh  by  love  "  (Gal.  v.
6)  and  ought  never  to  work  without  it.  (2)  The  grace  of  God  abounds  in  "  faith  and
love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesns  "  (1  Tim.  i.  14).  Faiih  nnd  love  are  the  two  members  of
the  Christi  I  n  religion.  4.  The  graces  of  the  saints  are  easily  known  and  heard  of.  The
apostle  heard  of  the  faith  and  love  of  the  Colossians.  "  Since  the  day  we  heard  of  them."
They  ought,  therefore,  to  be  bright  in  their  heavenly  lustre.

III.  The  motive  or  impulsive  cause  op  these  qbaces.  "  Because  of  the  hope
which  is  laid  up  for  you  in  the  heavens."  1.  The  nature  of  Ihis  hope.  (1)  The  sense
of  the  word  oscillates,  it  has  been  observed,  between  the  subjective  feeling  and
the  objective  realization;  yet  the  thing  hoped  for  is  rather  more  prominent  in  the
passage.  It  centres  in  the  inheritance,  in  "the  recompense  of  the  reward,"  in  " the
good  foundation  against  the  time  to  come,"  in  "the  eternal  life  that  God,  who  cannot
lie,  promised  before  the  world  began."  (2)  It  is  Di\ine  in  its  origin,  unlike  the  false
hopes  of  men.  We  are  "  begotten  to  a  living  hopv  "  (1  Pet.  i.  3).  (3)  Its  true  fulcrum,
or  point  of  support,  is  in  the  merits  of  Christ  (1  Tim.  i.  2;  Hcb.  vi.  19,  20).  2.  The
security  of  tins  hope.  "Which  is  laid  up  for  you  in  the  heavens."  It  is  secure
because:  (1)  It  is  laid  up  in  the  country  where  ourFatlier  dwells.  And  who  can  destroy
it  in  such  keeping?  ('/)  It  is  linked  to  "  the  two  immutable  things" — the  oath  and
the  promise  of  God,  which  are  fastened  within  the  veil  by  our  Forerunner,  even  Jesus
(Heb.  vi.  19).  (3)  It  is  where  the  devil  cannot  come.  (4)  It  is  in  heaven,  not  on
earth,  and  therefore  Tree  from  all  the  corruptions  that  the  moth  and  rust  of  the  world
may  inflict.  3.  The  quickening  power  of  ihis  hope.  It  has  great  influence  u|ion  our
faith  and  love.  God  makes  one  grace  cause  another.  "  It  is  hope  that  plucks  up  the
heart  of  nnan  to  a  constant  desire  of  union  with  God  by  faith,  and  of  communion  with
man  by  love."  Moses  had  respect  to  the  recompense  of  the  reward  (Heb.  xi.  25,  26).
The  saints  will  find  that  it  is  not  in  vain  to  serve  the  Almighty.  They  ought,  there-
fore, to  lemeuiber  (1)  that  their  hope  is  not  in  this  world ;  (2)  that  they  should  walk
as  "pilgrims  and  strangers,"  using  the  world  as  if  they  used  it  not;  (3)  that  they
should  despise  the  scorn  and  hate  of  a  world  which  "will  always  love  his  own."  4.
How  is  this  hope  to  he  increased  ?  Though  it  cannot  be  made  more  secure,  it  may  be
more  fully  realized.  To  this  end,  we  need  (1)  true  grace,  for  we  can  only  have  "a  good
hope  through  grace"  (2  Thess.  ii.  16);  (2)  experience  (Uom.  v.  4);  (3)  patience  and
comfort  of  the  Scriptures  (Rom.  x\.  1);  (4)  joy  and  peace  in  believing  (Rom.  xv.  18).

IV.  The  soubce  op  our  Divine  hope.  "  Whereof  ye  heard  before  in  the  Word  of
the  truth  of  the  gospel,  which  is  come  unto  you."  1.  It  is  hy  the  hearing  of  the  Word
we  learn  of  our  hope.  There  is  no  other  way  of  learning  it.  'J'he  Lord  has  sent  us  the
news  of  salvation.  Nature  tells  us  nothing  of  a  Divine  hope.  The  importance  of
this  hearing  is  manifest,  because :  (1)  It  is  the  source  of  faith.  "  Faith  cometh  by  hear-
ing, and  hearing  by  the  Word  of  God  "  (Bom.  x.  14) ;  "  Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live  "
(Isa.  Iv.  4).  (2)  It  opens  men's  hearts  (Acts  xvi.  14),  (3)  It  causes  the  stony
heart  to  melt,  and  the  proud  heart  to  tremble  (Isa.  Ixvi.  2).  (4)  The  afflicted  con-
science is  cured  by  it  (Ps.  Ii.  8).  Let  us,  therefore,  thank  God  for  it,  love  his  gospel,
receive  his  con}mands,  and  submit  to  his  guidance.  2.  The  preciousness  of  the  Word.
It  is  "  the  Word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,"  As  if  to  signify  the  contrast  between  the
simple  truth  taught  them  by  Epaphras  and  the  errors  of  the  false  teachero.     It!


OH.i.  1— 2?.]  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  M

precionsness  lies  in  its  truth.  (1)  It  reveals  to  us  the  troe  mind  of  the  Lorrl  as  to  the
way  of  salvation.  "It  is  a  true  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation"  (I  Tiin.  i.  12).
(2)  It  exhibits  to  us  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Truth,  as  "  him  that  is  true,"  as  "  the  faithful
and  true  Witness."  (3)  It  reveals  to  us  the  gospel ;  for  "  it  is  the  Word  of  the  truth  of
the  gospel."  This  gospel  is  (a),  the  power  of  God  to  salvation  (Rom.  i.  16).  (6)  It
brings  life  and  immortality  to  light  (2  Tim.  i.  10).  (c)  It  brings  abundance  of
blessings  (Rom.  xv.  14).  (d)  It  is  a  witness  to  all  nations  (Matt.  xxiv.  14).  (4)  It
works  truth  in  us  by  working  knowledge  in  us  and  enabling  us  to  do  the  truth  (.Joba
iii.  22  ;  Jas.  iii.  17).  Therefore  believers  ought  to  pray  God  to  give  them  the  Spirit  of
truth,  that  "  they  miiy  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth"  (2  Tim.  ii.  25),  and  never
think  of  resting  in  the  mere  form  of  truth  (Rom.  ii.  20;  John  iii.  22).  3.  The
accessibility  of  the  Word.  It  is  "  come  unto  you."  It  came  without  their  seeking  it  or
sending  for  it.  The  Colossians  sat  in  darkness  and  the  shadow  of  death,  estranged
" from  the  life  of  God  through  ignoiance,"  till  God  caused  the  light  to  shine  into  their
hearts.  We  ought,  therefore,  (1)  to  acknowledge  the  free  grace  of  God  in  sending  us
such  good  tidings ;  (2)  to  rejoice  in  the  gospel  and  walk  by  the  light  of  it.

V.  'i'HE    FKUtT-BBARIN»  POWER   AND   EXPANSIVENBS8  OF   THE   GOSPEL.      "  Even  aS  it

is  also  iu  all  the  world,  bearing  fruit  and  increasing."  These  words  set  forth  at  once
the  efficacy  and  the  rapid  growth  of  the  gospel,  its  inner  working  and  its  outward
expansion.  1.  Its  fruit-bearing  power.  (1)  This  was  according  to  promise  (Isa.  Iv.
10,  23).  ('")"  It  was  its  design—"  to  gather  fruit  which  might  abide  to  everlasting  life  "
(.John  XV.  16).  (3)  It  was  to  produce  fruit  "in  all  the  world  " — in  all  climates,  among
all  races,  in  all  ages  of  the  world,  as  if  to  mark  its  universal  adaptability  to  the  wants
of  men.  In  this  respect  it  differed  from  the  false  gospels,  which  were  esoteric  or  limited
in  their  application.  It  is  the  grand  verification  of  the  gospel  that  it  continues  to  bear
fruit  age  alter  age  (Ezek.  xlviii.  12).  2.  Its  expansiveness.  Its  rapid  pr6i;rcss  in  the
days  of  the  apostles  is  one  of  the  wonders  of  history ;  for  "  the  Word  of  God  grew  and
m\dtipUed"  in  the  face  of  the  opposition  of  magistrates,  the  persecution  of  Jewish  zealots,
the  perversions  of  false  teachers,  and  the  inconsistencies  of  Christian  professors  them-
selves. Though  the  Word  was  not  yet  announced  to  all  nations,  the  whole  world  was
the  area  of  its  increasing  power.

VI.  The  EFFECTS  of  the  gospel,  pakticularlt  at  CoLosaa.  "  As  it  doth  in  you
also,  since  the  day  ye  h^ard  and  knew  the  grace  of  God  in  truth."  1.  The  hmring  it
necessary  to  the  knowledge  of  the  grace  of  Ood,  yrt  there  is  a  hearing  that  is  resuUless  of  all
good.  To  hear  with  profit,  we  must(l)  become  fools  that  we  may  bewise(lCor.  iii.  18);
(2)  come  with  a  purpose  to  be  reformed  by  it  (Ps.  xxv.  14);  (3)  listen  with  a  meek  and
humble  spirit  (Jas.  i.  22) ;  (4)  hear  with  faith  and  assurance  (Heb.  iv.  1 ;  1  Thess.  i.  5).
2.  Tlie  true  hnowledye  of  the  grace  of  Qod  is  fruitful  in  all  the  growths  of  righteousness.
(1)  The  gospel  as  taught  at  Colossse  was  an  offer  of  free  grace,  as  opposed  to  the  false
go.spels,  which  were  codes  of  rigorous  prescription.  We  must,  therefore,  be  careful
(a)  not  to  receive  the  grace  of  God  in  vain  (2  Uor.  vi.  1) ;  (6)  to  appreciate  "  the  grace
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Chi'ist,  who,  though  he  was  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  became  poor,
that  ye  through  his  poverty  might  be  rich"  (2  Cor.  viii.  9);  (o)  to  avoid  those  who
would  "make  void  the  grace  of  God"  (Gal.  ii.  21);  (d)  to  find  our  constant  standing
in  this  grace  (1  Pet.  v.  2).  (2)  The  gospel  at  Colossse  had  produced  much  spiritual
fruit  to  the  praise  of  God's  glory.  Epaphras  makes  special  mention  of  their  "love  in  the
Spirit."  It  refers  to  all  the  love  which  is  wrought  in  the  heart  by  the  Spirit,  (a)  This
love  is  a  chief  gift  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22 ;  Rom.  xv.  30).  (b)  It  is  of  necessity
sincere  (Rom.  xii.  13),  the  outcome  of  a  pure  heart  (1  Tim.  i.  5),  and  practical  in  its
scope  (1  John  iii.  18).  (c)  It  is  inconsistent  with  the  idea  of  working  evil  to  a
neighbour  (Horn.  xiii.  10)  or  of  offending  a  brother  in  a  thing  indifferent  (Rom.  xiv.
15).  3.  2'Ae  early  and  continuous  experience  of  this  grace  is  a  good  sign  of  spiritual
growth.  "Since  the  day  ye  heard  and  knew  the  grace  of  God  in  truth."  This  language
implies  that  the  work  of  God  wrought  speedily  upon  the  Colossians,  and  that  it  con-
tinued to  work.    Their  goodness  was  not  as  the  morning  dew.

VII.  The  FOUNDEiR  of  Colo^sian  Christianity — Epaphrab.  "  As  ye  learned  from
Epaphras,  our  beloved  fellow-servant,  who  is  a  faithful  minister  of  Christ  on  our  behalf,
who  also  declared  unto  us  your  love  ia  the  Spirit."  1.  His  character  and  position  as  a
mni$ter,    (1)  The  apostle  gives  him  the  right  hand  of  fellowship,  and  mentions  biw


30  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  [oh.  1. 1—29

with  loving  regarrl,  that  he  may  strenitVien  his  influence  among  the  people  of  Coloss».
He  would  thus  be  better  beloved  and  more  useful.  (2)  The  commendation  presents
Epaphras  in  a  twofold  relation,  (a)  To  the  apostle  himself,  (a)  as  "  our  beloved  fellow-
servant,"  working  in  the  sei'vice  of  the  same  Master  and  in  loviug  relationship  to  all
his  servants;  ($)  as  the  representafive  particularly  of  the  apostle  himself,  being  "a
minister  of  Christ  on  our  behalf,"  preaching  atColossae  instead  of  the  apostle,  and,  there-
fore, not  to  be  displaced  by  the  new  school  of  Judseo-Gnostio  sectaries;  (7)  perhaps,
also,  as  "  a  fellow-prisoner,"  for  Epaphras  appears  in  this  light  in  the  contemporary
Epistle  (Philem.  23).  (&)  To  the  Colossian  Church.  "  Who  is  a  faithful  minister  of
Christ."  (a)  He  was  called  a  minister  of  the  Colossiaus ;  for  Christ  is  our  true  Master,
and  Epaphras  is  his  minister.  It  is  by  his  authority  ministers  act  in  the  people's
service.  (3;  His  faithfulness  is  to  be  specially  noted.  He  was  faithful  to  Chrijit,  to
the  truth,  to  the  souls  of  men.  It  is  "  faithful  men  "  who  will  be  "  able  to  teach  others
also  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  2).  It  is  necessary  for  "  a  steward  of  the  mysteries  "  to  he  "  fonnd  "
faithful.  2.  Eia  continued  interest  in  their  welfare.  (1)  Epaphras  tells  the  apostle
something  that  would  tend  to  hind  the  flock  at  Colossae  more'  closely  together.  "  He
declared  unto  us  your  love  in  the  Spirit."  A  faithful  minister  is  always  glad  to  give
a  good  report  of  his  people,  and  especially  of  what  good  things  God  has  vsTought  by
him.  He  has,  no  doubt,  to  make  report  of  corruptions  in  opinion  and  worship  at
Colossse,  but  he  is  careful  to  make  first  mention  of  their  spiritual  graces.  (2)  He
labours  for  them  in  prayer  (ch.  iv.  12),  that  "they  may  stand  fast,  perfect  and  complete
in  the  whole  will  of  God."— T.  C.

Vers.  9 — 11. — The  apostle's  prayer  for  the  enlargement  and  completion  of  their  spiritual
life.  I.  The  ubgent  spirit  or  this  pratbb.  "  For  this  cause  we  also,  since  the  day
we  heard  it,  do  not  cease  to  pray  and  make  rcqu-st  for  you."  1.  It  is  the  duty  as  well
as  the  desire  of  ministers,  not  only  to  teach  their  flocks,  but  to  pray  for  them.  They  must
say,  like  Samuel,  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  .  .  .  cease  to  pray  for  you  "  (2  Sam.  xii.
23).  The  prayer  of  Moses  was  more  influential  against  Amalek  than  all  the  weapons  of
Israel.  "  The  prayer  of  a  righteous  man  availeth  much  "  (Jas.  v.  16).  2.  They  ought
to  he  unceasing  in  their  supplications.  There  must  be  "  perseverance  in  supplication
for  all  saints  "  (Bph.  vi.  18).  We  must  give  God  no  rest ;  for  he  often  delays  the  answer
to  increase  our  importunity  (Luke  xviii.  3,  4 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  8,  9).  3.  The  reason  for
ctmstant  supplication.  "  For  this  cause  we  also,  since  the  day  we  heard  it,  do  not  cease
to  pray  .  .  .  for  you."  The  apostle  had  heard  of  their  faith  and  love,  and  was  naturally
concerned  for  their  growth  in  grace,  for  the  free  course  of  the  Word  among  them,  and
for  their  freedom  from  all  error.  He  heard  they  were  good,  and  he  prayed  that  they
might  be  better.

II.  The  substance  of  the  apostle's  peayeb.  "  That  ye  may  be  filled  with  the
Isnowledge  of  his  will  in  all  spiritual  wisdom  and  understanding."  1.  The  Divine  will
is  the  supreme  subject  of  knowledge  to  a  believer.  It  is  not  mere  speculations  about
God's  nature  or  his  counsels,  but  his  will,  that  we  are  to  study.  This  is  God's  will  as
it  is  made  known  to  us  either  in  Scripture  or  experience.  (1)  It  is  his  determining
will  (Eph.  i.  5).  (2)  It  is  his  prescribing  will,  including  Law  and  gospel,  and  especially
the  nature  of  faith  and  repentance  (Acts  xxii.  9 ;  Uph.  i.  9  ;  Rom.  xii.  2.)  (3)  It  is
his  will  of  approval  (Gal.  i.  4 ;  Matt,  xviii.  14).  (4)  It  is  his  providential  wiU  (1  Cor.
i.  1 ;  Rom.  i.  10).  We  have  much  to  learn  concerning  God's  will  in  these  four  respects.
2.  The  knowledge  necessary  to  understand  it  is  instinct  with  "  spiritual  wisdom  and
understanding."  Knowledge  is  power,  but  it  may  work  for  evil  as  well  as  good.  It
must  be  regulated  by  wisdom  and  understanding.  (1)  Wisdom ;  not  that  which  has
"  a  show  of  wisdom,"  and  springs  from  vanity  nurtured  by  the  fleshly  mind  (ch  ii.  18,
23);  not  fleshly  wisdom  (2  Cor.  i.  12);  much  less  that  which  is  "earthly,  sensual,
devUish"  (Jas.  iiL  17);  but  spiritual  wisdom — the  knowledge  of  the  true  end  of
life,  such  as  God  gives  to  the  simple  (Ps.  xix.  7),  enabling  them  to  penetrate  the
mysteries  of  Divine  truth  (1  Cor.  ii.  6)  and  to  understand  their  duty  to  6x)d  and  man
in  all  the  relations  of  life.  It  is  "from  above"  (Jas.  iii.  17);  it  presupposes  the
existence  of  faith  and  love ;  it  is  a  subject  of  Christian  prayer.  (2)  Understanding  is
the  faculty  of  spiritual  insight  which  takes  in  the  bearings  of  things.  It  fits  us  for  the
i>ervice  of  God  on  earth  and  for  the  glory  of  God  in  heaven.    As  it  is  spiritual,  it  >•


OH.1. 1— 29.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO    THE  COLOSSIANS.  81

touclied  with  meekness  and  humility.     3.  The  measures  of  this  hnowledge.    "  That  yo
may  be  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  his  will."     Tliere  is  no  limit  assigned  to  it.    (1)
We  cannot  rest  with  mere  rudiments ;  we  must  be  "  filled  with  all  knowledge  "  (Kom.
XV.  14).   (2)  There  will  always  be  something  wanting  in  this  life.  "  We  know  in  part"
(1  Cor.  xiii.  11).     (3)  Kothingbut  the  knowledge  of  the  will  of  God  will  ever  satisfy
the  deep  hunger  of  man's  heart.    4.  Motives  to  this  fuller  hnowledge.    (1)  It  is  the
glory  of  the  saints  to  have  it  (Jer.  ix.  24).     (2)  It  is  their  special  privilege  to  have  it
(Mark  iv.  11.)     (3)  To  want  it  is  a  sin  and  a  sorrow  (Hosea  iv.  6).    (4)  It  is  the  most
excellent  of  all  knowledge ;  for  it  is  eternal  life  itself  (John  xvii.  3).     5.  Design  of  thit
knowledge.     "  To  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all  pleasing,  bearing  fruit  in  every
good  work,  and  increasing  by  the  knowledge  of  God;  strengthened  with  all  might,
according  to  the  power  of  his  glory,  unto  all  patience  and  long-suffering  with  joyful-
ness."     The  design  is  twofold  as  it  bears  respectively  upon  action  and  upon  suffering.
(1)  The  knowledge  of  God's  will  is  to  influence  conduct.     Its  true  end  is  practical
obedience.     We  are  "to  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all  pleasing."    (a)  Walking
worthy  of  the  Lord.    This  is  not  (a)  with  a  worthiness  of  merit,  for  we  are  all  of  us
unpiofitable  servants  (Luke  xvii.  10);  (|8)  but  with  a  worthiness  of  meekness  such  as
is  becoming  when  we  consider  the  dignity  of  our  calling,  the  glory  of  the  kingdom  of
God,  the  supplies  of  grace  which  the  gospel  affords,  and  the  blessed  hopes  laid  up  for
us  in  heaven.     (7)    It  is  a  worthiness  "unto  all  pleasing."     We  must  "so  serve  God
that  we  may  please  him "  (Heb.  xii.  28 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  3l).    (i.)  He  that  seeks  not  to
please  him  in  all  things  seeks  not  to  please  him  in  anything,     (ii.)  If  we  please  him  he
will  make  our  very  "  enemies  at  peace  with  us  "  (Prov.  xvi.  7).    (iii.)  "  Men-pleasing  "
IS  inconsistent  with  God-pleasing  (ch.  iii.  22).    (iv.)  It  would  be  sinful  and  ungrateful
to  displease  him.    (v.)  Pleasing  God  is  the  work  of  heaven  (Ps.  ciii.  20,  21).    (6)  A
twofold  aspect  of  worthy  walking,    (o)  Christian  fruitfulness.    "  Bearing  fruit  in  every
good  work."     (i.)  The  necessity  of  it.     (a)  It  is  for  God's  glory  (John  xv.  18).     (b)
As  a  proof  of  our  faith  (Jas.  ii.  18,  26).     (c)  The  edification  of  others  (Matt.  v.  16 ;
Titus  iii.  8).     (d)  The  increase  of  our  final  reward  (2  John  8).     (ii.)  The  means  of  it.
(a)  We  must  abide  in  the  true  Vine,  Jesus  Christ  (John  xv.  4 ;  Phil.  i.).    (b)  We  must
dwell  beside  the  rivers  of  water  (Ps.  i.  3).     (iii.)  The  extent  of  it — "in  every  good
work."     We  must  be  harmoniously  developed  in  our  obedience  as  in  our  inward
experience  (Phil.  iv.  8).    (/3)  Increase  in  moral  stature — "  increasing  by  the  knowledge
of  God."    We  grow  in  grace  just  as  we  grow  in  knowledge  (2  Pet.  iii.  18).    There  is  a
mutual  interaction  between  knowledge  and  grace.    We  are  to  add  to  our  faith  virtue,
and  to  our  virtue  knowledge  (2  Pet.  i.  5),  just  as  we  are  to  grow  in  all  spiritual  graces
by  knowledge.     Knowledge  promotes  the  sanctification  of  our  callings  and  our  food
,  (1  Tim.  iv.  3),  enables  us  to  discern  things  that  differ  (Phil.  i.  10),  and  keeps  down
corrupt  affections  (Isa.  xi.  7,  9).    (2)  The  knowledge  of  God's  will  tends  to  strengthen
patience  in  suffering,     (a)  The  need  of  abounding  strength — "strengthened  with  all
might."    (o)  The  afflictions  of  life  tend  to  weaken  us.    (;8)  Our  adversaries  are  many.
(7)  Our  faith  is  fitful.     (5)  We  are  often  unsettled  and  tossed  about  by  the  wind  of
contrary  doctrine  (Bph.  iv.  14).    (e)  We  are,  perhaps, "  babes  in  Christ,"  and  unskilful
in  the  word  of  righteousness  (Heb.  v.  12,  13).  (J)  The  source  of  our  strength — "  accord-
ing to  the  power  of  his  glory ;"  his  glury  being  the  manifestation  of  his  love  to  man
(Eph.  iii.  16).     We  "can  do  aU  things  through  Christ  which  strengtheneth  us"  (Pi)iL
iv.  13).     He  "giveth  strength  to  his  peo|le"  and  "strength  is  of  the  Lord"  (Pa.  Ixii,
11).     "They  that  wait  upon   the  Lord  shall  renew  their  strength"  (Isa.  xl.  31).
"  Glorious  power  will  be  victorious  power."    It  is  God's  revelation  of  himself  to  us
that  gives  us  our  greatest  strength.     It  is  his  glory  that  sets  his  power  to  work,  as  it  is
by  promise  pledged  to  his  people.  Therefore :  (a)  Let  us  pray  for  knowledge  and  faith  to
iiscern  God's  promise  and  power  (Eph.  i.  8).     (/3)  Let  us  hold  fast  the  truth  of  the
gospel,  eschewing  "  winds  of  doctrine."    Let  us  "  follow  the  truth  in  love."     (c)  The
fruit  of   our  strength — "  unto    patience  and  long-suffering  with  joyfulness."     (a)
Patience  or  endurance,    (i.)  It  is  the  grace  which  does  not  easily  succumb  under
suffering,  and  is  one  of  the  most  blessed  fruits  of  the  tree  of  life.    It  is  the  result  of  the
bracing  effect  of  affliction  (Jas.  v.  11),  and  is  opposed  to  despondency  or  cowardice,
(ii.)  Our  patience  will  grow  (a)  through  the  word  of  patience,  for  the  comforts  of  the
Scriptures  beget  both  patience  and  hope  (Rom.  xv.  4).    (b)  We  must  cultiv»to  a


32  THE  EPrSTLB  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN3.  [oh.  1. 1—29.

hnmWe  and  constant  trust  in  the  Lord  (Ps.  xxxvii.  3).  (c)  We  must  continue
instant  in  prayer  (Hum.  xii.  12).  (/3)  Long-suffering  is  a  temper  of  gentleness  and  self-
restraint,  closely  connected  with  patience,  (i.)  It  is  the  Lord's  command  that  we
should  suffer  long  (Matt.  v.  21,  22j.  (ii.)  There  are  injuries  that  hefall  us  in  Divine
providence  (2  Sam.  xvi.  10).  (iii.)  A  revengeful  spirit, is  a  hindrance  to  prayer  (1  Tim.
ii.  8)  and  to  the  due  power  of  the  Word  (Jas.  i.  21),  and  it  lets  the  devil  into  the  heart
(Eph.  iv.  21).  Therefoin,  let  us  practise  this  grace  of  long-suffering.  (7)  Joyfulness.
"  They  that  sow  in  tears  shall  reap  in  joy."  It  is  possible  to  be  "  sorrowful,  yet  alway
rijoicing"  (2  Cor.  vi.  10).  (i.)  Our  patience  and  long-suffering  must  be  balanced  with
joy  so  as  to  sustain  their  true  temper,  (ii.)  It  is  possible  to  be  joyful  in  tribulations
(Jas.  i.  2).  (iii.)  It  is  commanded  by  Christ  (Matt.  v.  12)  and  enforced  by  his  own
example  on  tlie  cross  (Heb.  xii.  2).  (iv.)  Its  ground  is  our  fellowship  with  Christ  in
Ids  sull'erings  (1  Pet.  iv.  13),  and  the  expectation  of  a  heavenly  inheritance  (,Heb.  x.
14).    (v.)  It  is  one  of  the  fruits  of  God's  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22),— T.  0.

Ver.  12. — Divine  meetnesa  of  the  saints  for  their  inheritance.  "  Giving  thanks  to
the  Father,  who  made  us  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light."

I.  The  nature  and  glokt  op  the  inheritance.  Whether  we  understand  by  it
heaven  or  the  blessings  of  the  kingdom  is  immaterial,  but  the  original  suggests  the
iilea  of  a  joint  inheritance,  of  «hioh  each  individual  enjoys  a  part.  1.  Jt  is  an  ancient,
inheritance.  For  "  it  is  a  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  tbe  world  "
(Matt.  xxT.  34).  Its  "Builder  and  Maker"  is  God  himself  (2  Cor.  v.  1).  2.  Jt  is
hound  up  with  the  coheirship  of  Christ.  (Rom.  viii.  17,  18;  rs.  ii.)  God  makes  us
"heirs  and  rich  in  faiih"  (Jas.  ii.  5).  By  virtue  of  the  coheirship,  it  is  a  free,  sure,
satisfying,  durable  inheritance.  3.  It  it  a  holy  inheritance.  It  is  "  with  the  saints."
Only  saints  enjoy  it  with  one  another.  "  The  pure  in  heart  shall  see  God"  (Matt.  v.  8).
Is  o  unclean  thing  shall  enter  into  God's  kingdom  (Acts  xx.  32;  xxvi.  18;  1  Thess.
i.  10).  4.  Jt  is  an  inheritance  "  in  light."  (1)  The  Lamb  is  the  Light  of  heaven  (Rev.
xxi.  23).  (2)  There  will  be  clear  vision  in  heaven's  light.  Whatever  "  makes  manifest
is  light."  "  In  thy  light  we  shall  see  light."  We  shall  "  know  even  as  we  are  known."
We  shall  "  see  face  to  face."  We  shall  dwell  for  ever  "  iu  the  light  of  God's  coun-
tenance."   There  will  be  no  darkness  there.

II.  The  meetness  fok  the  inheritance.  1,  It  is  implied  that  we  have  no  natural
irueinetisfvr  it.  We  could  not  merit  it  by  our  righteousness,  and  our  spirits  are  out  of
harmony  with  its  joys.  There  is  nothing  in  us  but  "enmity  against  God"  (Rum.  viii.
7).  The  spirit  which  is  in  moral  darkness  cares  not  for  the  light.  2.  The  meetness  is
given  to  us.  (1)  We  are  made  meet  by  our  calling,  by  our  justification,  by  our  adop-
tion. (2)  We  are  made  meet  for  it  by  our  sanctification.  The  Father  gives  us,
along  with  the  kingdom,  the  disposition,  inclination,  behaviour  of  heirs,  sons,  kings,
and  priests.

III.  The  AtJTHOK  of  this  meetness.  "The  Father."  1.  It  is  he  who  hath  begotten
IIS  to  the  inheritance.  (1  Pet.  i.  3.)  2.  It  is  he  only  who  can  pardon  us  and  accept  us.
3.  It  is  he  who  is  the  Fountain  of  all  holiness.  4.  It  is  he  who  is  stronger  than  all  to
pnsei-ve  us  to  the  end  and  crown  us  with  final  glory.     (Jude  24;  Eph.  i.  17.)

IV.  The  duty  of  thanksgiving.  "  Giving  thanks  to  the  Father."  1.  A  sanctified
heart  is  ready  to  acknowledge  the  instrument  hy  which  good  is  received,  yet  more  the
Author  of  blessiny.  2.  It  honours  God  to  thank  him.  "  Whoso  offi-reth  praise  glorifieth
me  "  (Ps.  1.  23).  3.  A  thankful  heart  is  sure  of  a  gracious  hearing.  The  more  thankful
we  are  for  mercies  received  the  more  ground  have  we  to  expect  more  mercies.-^T.  0.

Ver.  13. — Translation  into  Christ's  kingdom.  The  apostle  now  proceeds  to  show
how  the  Father  makes  us  meet  for  the  inheritance  of  saints.  "  Who  delivered  us  from
the  power  of  darkness,  and  tianslated  us  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  his  love."

I.  The  obiginal  condition  of  all  men.  They  are  under  "  the  power  of  darkness."
1.  Consider  the  meaning  of  this  darkness.  There  is  a  darkness  that  is  seasonable,-
which,  in  the  economy  of  nature,  brings  rest  and  recovery  to  man.  This  darkness  is
lar  different.  (1)  It  is  the  darkness  of  ignorance  apart  from  "  the  light  of  life"  (John
viii.  12;  Eph.  v.  13).  (2)  It  is  the  darkness  of  sin  (Rom.  xiii.  12;  2  Cor.  iii.  14),
blinding  men  %gainst  the  truth.    (3)  It  is  the  darkness  of  misery  (Isa.  viii.  22).    (4)


OH.  1. 1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN3,  33

II  is  the  darkness  of  death  (Ps.  Ixxxviii.  12).  (6)  It  is  the  darkness  of  hell — "  utter
darkness."  2.  It  is  darkriess  organized  for  the  ruin  of  men.  It  is  "  the  power  of  dark-
ness "—an  arbitrary,  usurped  power,  and  not  "  a  true  kingdom."  The  prince  of  dark-
ness is  at  the  head  of  this  dreary  realm  and  strives  to  keep  all  his  slaves  in  darkness,
lest  "the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of  Christ  Jesus  should
shine  into  them  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  4).

II.  The  rescue  from  this  power  op  darkness.  "  Who  delivered  us."  None  but
God  can  do  this  work.  The  strong  man  will  keep  his  own  till  the  stronger  come
(Luke  xi.  22).  He  delivers  us  in  our  effectual  calling.  1.  He  enlightens  our  mindu  in
the  knowledge  of  Christ,  who  is  "  the  trtK  Light."  (.lohn  viii.  12.)  2.  He  persuades  and
enables  us  to  embrace  Christ  as  offered  in  the  gospel.  (John  vi.  44r ;  Phil.  ii.  13.)  3.  Ha
renews  our  wills  and  causes  as  to  "  walk  in  the  light  as  he  is  in  the  light."  (1  John  i.  7.)
4.   He  clothes  us  "  with  the  armour  of  light."    (Rom.  xiii.  12.)

III.  The  new  kingdom  op  the  bksciied  captives  and  its  new  relations.  "  And
translated  us  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  his  love."  The  word  usually  suggests
the  transplanting  of  races  and  the  settlement  of  them  in  a  new  territory.  1.  The
significance  of  tAe  translation.  (1)  It  implies  separation  (a)  from  the  world,  (ft)  from
sin,  (c)  from  the  devil.  "  Go  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye  separate  "  (2  Cor.  vi.  17).
(2)  It  implies  the  assumption  of  entirely  new  relations.  The  believer  is  a  member
of  a  new  society — "  the  kingdom  of  gi-ace ; "  is  "  a  fellow-citizen  with  the  saints ; "  is
heir  of  the  kingdom  of  glory.  He  has  a  new  name,  new  hopes,  new  friends,  and  works
for  a  new  heaven.  2.  'ITie  new  kingdom  of  the  saints.  "  The  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  his
love."  (I)  It  is  not  the  kmgdom  of  inferior  angels,  as  eiTorists  might  fancy  (oh.  ii.  8),
but  that  of  God's  own  Son.  (2)  It  is  a  kingdom  already  in  existence.  (3)  It  is  a
kingdom  that  cannot  be  shaken  like  the  kingdoms  of  earth  (Heb.  xii.  28).  (4)  It  is  a
kingdom  that  will  endure  to  the  end  (Luke  i.  33).  (5)  It  is  a  kingdom  in  which  the
ntimber  of  the  possessors  will  not  diminish  the  blessings  enjoyed  by  each.  (6)  It  is  a
kingdom  in  which  Christ  now  reigns  by  his  Word  and  Spirit ;  the  saints  rejoicing  to
have  him  reigning  over  them.  (7)  AH  the  subjects  of  this  kingdom  are  kings
(Rev.  L  6).— T.  0.

Ver.  14. — Eedemption  through  the  blood  of  Christ.  "  In  whom  we  have  our  redemp.
tion,  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins."    (See  homiletical  hints  on  Bph.  i.  7.) — T.  C.

Vers.  15 — 17. — Christ's  headship  over  nature.  The  Gnostic  errorists  at  Colossas
taught  that  the  gulf  between  the  infinite  God  and  finite  man  was  bridged  across  by
subordinate  angelic  agencies.  The  apostle  teaches  that  the  gulf  is  bridged  by  Jesus
Christ,  who,  being  both  God  and  Man,  touches  both  and  is  the  Reconciler  of  God  and
man.  He  shows  that  Christ  has  a  double  sovereignty,  a  twofold  mediatorial  function
— in  relation  to  the  universe  and  in  relation  to  the  Church.  Thus  we  have  a  most
pregnant  statement  concerning  the  doctrine  of  the  person  of  Clirist  with  the  view  of
showing  that  there  is  a  real  mediation  between  God  and  creation.

I.  His  relation  to  the  invisible  Father.  "  Who  is  the  Image  of  the  invisible
God."  Christ  is  likewise  called  "  the  Brightness  of  the  Father's  glory,  the  express
Image  of  his  person  "  (Hob.  i.  3).  1.  The  meaning  of  this  image.  (1)  Christ  is  not  a
mere  likeness  of  the  Father,  like  the  head  of  a  sovereign  stamped  on  a  coin,  or  as  a
son  bears  the  features  of  his  father.  (2)  But  he  is  an  essential  manifestation  and
embodiment  of  the  Father.  Thus  the  invisible  God  becomes  visible  to  man,  according
to  our  Lord's  own  words,  "No  man  hath  seen  God  at  any  time ;  the  only  begotten  Son,
who  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  he  hath  revealed  him "  (John  i.  18}..  "  He  that
hath  fieen  me  hath  seen  the  Father  "  (John  xiv.  9).  (3)  It  implies  his  perfect  equality
with  the  Father  in  respect  to  substance,  nature,  and  eternity.  The  Son  is  the  Father's
Image  except  in  respect  that  he  is  not  the  Father.  2.  Lessons  to  be  drawn  from  this
representation  of  Chrisfs  glory.  (1)  If  we  would  know  the  Father,  we  must  get
uito  Christ  by  faith  (2  Cor.  iv.  4).  (2)  As  it  is  Christ's  glory  to  be  God's  Image,  be
it  our  honour  to  be  Christ's  image,  in  knowledge  (ch.  iii.  10),  in  holiness,  in  righteous,
ness  (Eph.  iv.  21).  We  are  "predestinated  to  be  conformed  to  the  image  of  his  Son"
(Rom.  viii.  29).  (3)  How  great  a  sin  it  is  to  turn  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible  God
into  the  image  of  corruptible  creatures  "  (Bom.  L  23)  1

COLOSSIAHa.  S


34  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oh.  i,  1—29.

II.  Christ's  kelation  to  the  universe.  He  is  "  the  Firstborn  of  all  creation."
As  his  being  God's  Image  implies  his  eternal  unity  with  God,  so  his  being  the  only
begotten  Sou  of  God  implies  the  distinctness  of  Ids  Person.  The  apostle  thus  guards
the  truth  on  one  side  against  Arianism,  on  the  other  side  against  SabeUianism.  There
are  two  ideas  involved  in  this  statement.  1.  Christ  has  a  priority  to  all  creation.
Arians  refer  to  the  passage  as  implying  that  he  is  only  one,  though  the  very  first,  of
created  beings.  But  (1)  he  is  said  here  to  be  begotten,  not  created.  (2)  He  is  declared
in  the  context  to  be  "before  all  things,"  and  therefore  he  is  no  part  of  them.  (3)  "All
things"  are  declared  to  be  "  made  by  him,"  but  he  is  himself  necessarily  excepted  from
the  number  of  the  things  he  created.  (4)  The  Scriptures  elsewhere  declare  his  eternal
pre-existence  and  Godhead.  2.  Christ  is  sovereign  Lord  of  creation  by  right  of  primo-
geniture. The  word  "  Firstborn "  is  used  of  the  Messiah  almost  as  his  technical
designation  (Ps.  ii.  7),  as  we  see  by  Heb.  i.  6,  "  When  he  bringeth  the  First-begotten
into  the  world."  As  such  he  is  "  Heir  of  all  things  "  (Heb.  i.  2 :  Bom.  iv.  14).  There
is  thus  implied  a  mediatorial  function  in  the  world  as  well  as  in  the  Church.  3.  Christ
is  the  actual  Creator  of  all  things.  "  For  in  him  were  all  things  created,  in  the  heavens
and  upon  the  earth,  things  visible  and  invisible,  whether  thrones,  or  dominions,  or
principalities,  or  powers."  These  words  justify  the  title  of  "  Firstborn  of  all  creation."
They  were  all  created  "  in  him,"  not  merely  "  by  him" — as  if  the  germ  of  all  creative
power  and  wisdom  lay  in  his  infinite  mind,  as  the  sphere  of  their  operation.  The
words  impliedly  exclude  the  Gnostic  idea  that  Christ  was  an  inferior  agent  of  the
infinite  God.  He  was  the  creative  centre  of  the  universe.  Mark:  (1)  The  extent  of
creation — "  things  in  the  heavens  and  things  upon  the  earth."  This  includes  aU  creation
as  described  by  locality.  (2)  The  variety  of  the  creation — ^"  Whether  things  visible  or
invisible."  This  division  would  include  the  sun,  moon,  stars,  the  earth  with  all  its
visible  glories,  in  one  class ;  the  angels  and  the  souls  of  men  in  the  other  class.  (3)
The  orders  of  creation,  "whether  thrones,  or  dominions,  or  principalities,  or  powers."
As  Gnosticism  placed  Christ  among  the  higher  intelligences,  the  apostle  places  him
far  above  all  angelic  intelligences  of  every  order.  It  is  not  possible  to  say  whether  these
sanies  represent  various  grades  of  a  celestial  hierarchy,  but  it  is  probable  that  they  do ;
"thrones  and  dominions"  belonging  to  the  first  order,  "principalities  and  powers"
standing  next,  as  including  spirits  both  good  and  evil.  Christ  made  the  angels.  4.
Christ  is  himself  the  End  or  final  Cause  of  creation.  "All  things  have  been  created
through  him  and  for  him."  All  things  were  created  by  him  as  well  as  for  him — for  the
manifestation  of  his  glory.  "  He  that  was  the  first  Cause  must  be  the  last  End."  The
final  destination  of  the  imiverse  is  referred  to  the  Son,  just  as  it  is  elsewhere  ascribed
to  the  Father  (Rom.  xi.  36).  The  Son  is  the  Centre  of  the  world's  final  unity.  5.
Christ  is  the  Sustainer  of  the  universe.  "  And  by  him  all  things  consist."  The  con-
tinued existence,  as  well  as  the  creation,  of  all  things,  depends  upon  him.  "  My  Father
worketh  hitherto,  and  I  work  "  (John  v.  17).  He  "  upholds  all  things  by  the  word  of
his  power "  (Heb.  i.  3).  The  sustaining  unity  of  the  creation  is  in  him  (1)  became
he  maintains  its  order,  appointing  all  things  to  their  respective  ends ;  (2)  because  he
sustains  the  operation  of  all  things,  correlating  means  with  ends ;  (3)  because  he
secures  the  co-operation  of  all  things,  so  that  all  things  work  together  for  his  glory;
(4)  because  he  maintains  the  perpetuity  of  all  things.  Thus  Christ  maintains  the
cohesion  of  the  universe.

III.  Lessons  to  be  drawn  from  Christ's  relation  to  his  Father  and  to  the
iiNivERSE.  1.  We  delight  in  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  divinity,  which  is  the  doctrine  of
Christendom.  2.  Jf  he  made  angels  and  men,  they  may  well  worship  him.  3.  Bit
relation  to  creation  encourages  us  to  hope  that  he  will  overrule  all  the  power  of  nature
for  the  growth  of  his  Church.  Even  wicked  men  will  have  no  power  to  destroy  his
Church.  The  creation  proves  his  power,  and  his  love  proves  his  good  will.  4.  The
knowledge  of  his  glory  ought  to  deter  from  all  creatwe-worship.  5.  We  should  ever
pray  that  he  would  direct  the  work  of  our  hands  continually.  (Ps.  xc.  7.)  6.  We  ought
not  to  fret  at  Divine  providence.  (Ps.  xxxvii.  2,  3.)  The  creative  and  administrative
work  of  Christ,  in  the  natural  order  of  things,  is  the  comfort  of  all  believers. — X.  0.

V«r.  18. — Christ's  headship  of  the  Church.  He  is  the  head  of  the  new  creation  as
veil  S8  of  the  natural  creation.    "  And  he  is  the  Head  of  the  body,  the  Church :  who


CH.1. 1— 29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  85

is  the  Beginning,  the  Firstborn  from  the  dead  ;  that  in  all  things  he  might  have  the
pre-eminence."

I.  Consider  what  is  involved  in  this  headship  of  the  Church.  Tliere  is  a  real
essential  union  of  the  Head  and  the  members.  1.  Christ  is  the  Centre  of  the  Church's
life.  He  is  its  Life.  "  Because  I  live  ye  shall  live  also  "  (John  xiv.  19).  The  union  is
strictly  vital.  "  The  second  Adam  is  a  quickening  spirit "  (1  Cor.  xv.  45).  2.  He  is
the  Centre  of  its  unity.  Believers  are  all  one  in  Christ  Jesus  (I  Cor.  xii.  12).  We  are
baptized  by  the  Spirit  into  one  body  (1  Cor.  xii.  1 3).  3.  Ee  is  the  Source  of  all  its
blessings  and  comforts.  (1)  He  loves  it  (Bph.  v.  27).  (2)  He  sympathizes  with  its
distresses  (Matt,  xviii.  5).  (3)  He  supplies  it  with  abundant  grace.  "  Of  his  fulness
have  we  all  received,  even  grace  for  grace  "  (John  i.  16).  3.  Be  is  the  Mainspring  of
all  its  holy  activity.  "  I  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  which  strengtheneth  me  "
(Phil.  iv.  13)  ;  "Without  me  ye  can  do  nothing  "  fjohn  xv.  5).

n.  Consider  what  is  involved  in  the  subjection  of  the  bodt  to  the  Head.  1.
The  Church  must  own  no  other  Head  than  Christ.  There  are  under-currents  of  priestly
domination  in  our  day  subversive  of  this  headship.  The  Pope  is  not  and  cannot  be
thi  head  of  the  Church  in  any  sense.  We  can  be  in  subjection  to  no  other  than  Christ.

2.  We  must  do  nothing  to  dishonour  our  Head  either  in  flesh  or  spirit.  (2  Cor.  vi.  15 — 18.)

3 .  We  must  use  all  means  to  grow  up  into  our  Head  in  all  things,  that  "  there  may  be
increase  of  the  body  unto  the  building  up  of  itself. in  love"  (Eph.  iv.  16).  4.  We  must
dwell  with  our  fellow-members  in  love  and  humility.  "  Keeping  the  unity  of  the  Spirit
in  the  bond  of  peace  "  (Eph.  iv.  3).  The  members  must  sympathize  with  one  another
(1  Cor.  X.  24).

IIL  The  oriqin  of  the  headship  of  Christ.  "  Who  is  the  Beginning,  the  First-
born from  the  dead."  1.  Christ  is  the  Beginning  of  the  new  creation.  Two  ideas  are
implied  in  the  expression.  (1)  Priority  in  time.  He  is  "  the  Kirstfruits  of  them  that
have  fallen  asleep  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  20).  (2)  The  origination  of  spiritual  life.  As  he  is
"  the  Beginning  of  the  creation  of  God"  (Rev.  iii.  14),  he  is  the  Beginning  of  the  new
creation.  He  is  the  "  Prince  of  life  "  (Acts  iii.  14),  the  "  Author  of  salvation  "  (Heb.  ii.
10).  2.  Christ  is  Head  through  hit  resurrection.  He  is  "  the  First-begotten  from  the
dead."  Consider :  (1)  That  he  was  among  the  dead.  Thus  he  made  expiation  for  our
sins.  (2)  That  he  was  begotten  from  among  the  dead,  because  he  was  raised  from
death  to  life  "  for  oar  justification "  (Bom.  iv.  23,  24).  (3)  That  he  was  the  first  so
begotten,  (o)  Others  were  translated  or  died  again.  (6)  He  rose  to  die  no  more  (Bom.
vi.  9).  (e)  His  resurrection  involves  the  resurrection  of  all  his  saints.  (4)  His  resur-
rection is  his  title  to  headship  (Eph.  i.  20 — 23).  (6)  Let  us  realize  "  the  power  of  his
resurrection  "  (Phil.  iii.  10)  in  a  holy  life.

rV.  The  design  of  the  Father  was  that  alike  in  the  spiritual  and  the
natural  order  Christ  might  have  the  pre-eminence.  "That  in  all  things  he
might  have  the  pre-eminence."  Both  in  nature  and  in  the  Church  he  is  pre-eminent ;
and  the  Father's  design  will  be  yet  more  fully  accomplished  when  all  things  are  put
under  his  feet  and  "  the  kingdoms  of  this  world  have  become  the  kiugdom  of  oar  Lord
and  his  Christ "  (Kev.  xi.  15).  Thus  our  Bivine  Redeemer  is  "Alpha  and  Omega,  the
Beginning  and  the  Ending,  the  First  and  the  Last"  (Rev.  L  8, 11, 17, 18).— T.  0.

Ver.  19. — The  fulness  of  the  Godhead  in  Jesus  Christ.  "  For  it  pleased  the  Father
that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell."  Tho  apostle  thus  explains  the  headship  alike
of  the  Church  and  of  the  universe,  for  he  says  the  indwelling  of  Deity  was  the  ground
of  both.

L  The  nature  of  this  fulness.  1.  It  is  not  the  mere  manifestation  of  Godhead.
'J.  It  is  Godhead  itself  in  the  totality  of  its  powers  and  attributes.  It  is  "  the  complete
fulness  and  exhaustless  perfection  of  the  Divine  essence."  It  is  elsewhere  described;
"  In  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily  "  (oh.  ii.  9).  Christ  is  indeed
"  God  manifest  in  the  flesh  "  (1  Tim.  iii.  16).  The  Judteo-Gnostics  taught  that  the
fulness  of  the  Godhead  was  distributed  or  dispensed  among  several  spiritual  agencies—
"  thrones,  dominations,  pr  incedoms,  virtues,  powers  " — so  as  to  introduce  grades  of
augulic  mediators  between  God  and  man.  The  apostle  declares  that  the  fulness  of  the
Godhead  rests,  not  in  them,  but  in  Christ  as  the  Word  of  God.  Thus  he  it  no  mere
emanation  from  the  Divine  Being.


M  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oh.  i.  1—29.

IL   ThBBB  18  A  PERMATTBNTLT  INDWBLLINO   FULNESS  W  HIM.      "  That  in  Mm  all  th«

fulness  should  have  its  penuanent  abode."  This  is  the  force  of  the  original  word,  which
ia  very  suggestive  in  the  light  of  later  Gnostic  heresies.  The  false  teachers  held  that
the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  as  dispersed  among  spiritual  agencies  was  partial  like  a
blurred  image,  and  also  temjiurary.  The  apostlB  teaches:  1.  That  the  totality  of  Divine
powers  abides  in  Christ.  2.  2'hat  it  abides  in  him  permanently  and  remains  for  ever,  not
coming  and  going  like  a  transient  phenomenon.  Therefore  we  have  an  inexhaustible
supply  for  all  the  needs  of  the  Church.

III.  The  PBECionsNESs  op  this  indwelling  fulness  to  us.  1,  It  was  of  the
Father's  "  good  pie  (sttre  "  that  it  should  abide  in  his  incarnate  Son  for  the  welfare  of  the
Church,  2.  We  are  to  receive  "  of  his  fulness  and  grace  for  grace."  (John  i.  16.)  We
are  to  grow  "  unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ "  (Eph.  iv.  13).
The  standard  is  nothing  short  of  the  fulness  of  Christ.  3.  The  Church  is  his  very  ful-
ness— "  the  fulness  of  him  who  fiUeth  all  in  all,"  because  his  fulness  is  communicated
to  her  (Eph.  i.  23).

IV.  Lessons  to  be  dbawn  fboh  this  tboth.  1.  Oreat  is  the  mystery  of  godliness.
(1  Tim.  iii.  16.)  2.  Oi-eat  is  the  comfort  of  the  ielievwin  virtue  of  this  ij^nite  fulness.
There  is  fulness  of  wisdom  to  keep  us  from  error,  fulness  of  grace  to  subdue  our  sin,
fulness  of  joy  to  keep  us  from  despair,  fulness  of  mercy  and  pity  to  succour  us  in  our
distresses.  "Therefore  let  no  man  take  thy  crown"  (Eev.  iii.  11);  "Cast  not  away
your  confi(!euce  "  (lleb.  x.  35).  3.  Great  is  the  security  of  the  belieuer.  It  is  a  perma-
nent fulness. — T.  C.

Yet.  20. — The  reconciliation  effected  hf  Christ.  "And,  having  made  peace  through
the  blood  of  the  cross,  by  him  to  reconcile  all  things  to  himself."

I.  The  natube  op  this  eecokciliation.  1.  Jt  implies  a  prior  estrangement.  M:ui
"departed  from  the  living  God"  (Heb.  iii.  12).  He  is  "alienated"  from  God  (ver.
21).  "The  carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God"  (Rom.  viii.  7).  Even  God  himself
waii  anary  with  man  (Ps.  vii.  11).  But  this  prior  estrangement  implies  an  antecedent
friendship.  2.  Though  man  was  first  in  the  breach  of  this  friendship,  Ood  was  first
in  the  reconciliation.  This  blessed  restoration  of  broken  relations  is  traced  to  "the
good  pleasure"  of  the  Father.  It  is  a  mistake  to  say  that  Christ  is  the  cause  of  his
Father  making  to  us  the  offer  of  reconciliation.  The  atonement  is  not  the  cause,
but  the  effect,  of  God's  love.  3.  There  was  reconciliation  on  Ood^s  side  as  well  as
man's.  There  is  a  change  in  the  Divine  relation  or  mood  of  mind  toward  us;  for  he
himself  "made  peace  by  the  blood  of  the  cross,"  and  his  reconciliation  of  all  thiiij;s
to  himself  is  represented  as  based  upon  the  peace  thus  made.  The  death  of  Christ
was  a  true  satisfaction  to  Divine  justice  for  sin,  so  that  God  could  be  "just  and  the
Justificr  of  the  ungodly."

IL  The  means  op  this  beconciliation.  "  Having  made  peace  through  the  blood
of  the  cross."  The  reconciliation  was  not  absolute  or  without  mediation.  It  was
"  tlirou^h  the  blood  of  the  cross " — the  first  term  suggesting  a  comparison  between
Christ's  death  and  the  Old  Testament  sacrifices ;  the  second,  the  penal  nature  of  the
Eudeemer's  death  as  that  of  a  curse-bearing  Substitute.  The  apostle  emphasizes  this
aspect  of  truth,  because  tlie  errorists  of  his  time  denied  alike  a  real  incarnation  and
a  real  atonement.

III.  The  univebsalitt  op  this  beconciliation.  "By  him  to  reconcile  all  things
to  himself;  by  him,  whether  they  be  things  iu  earth  or  things  in  heaveu.  1.  "  Tlnngs
in  earth  "  may  include  more  than  man.  (1)  It  may  include  the  whole  visible  creation,
wliich  is  "  groaning  and  travailing  together  in  pain  until  now,"  and  "  waiting  for  the
manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God"  (Horn.  viii.  19—21).  The  curse  passed  to  the
ground  through  man's  sin;    through  man  will  the  blessing  reach  it  again.     It  is  a


-  upon  Guds  reconciliation

to  man.  It  was  in  virtue  of  Christ's  death  that  the  Holy  Spirit  came  to  change  the
hearts  of  men  and  bring  them  into  harmony  with  God.  2.  "  Things  in  heaven."
Kot  angels,  as  some  suppose,  for  they  were  never  estranged  from  God  and  Christ
and  the  Head  of  angels  as  well  as  men  is  never  represented  as  the  Mediator  of  angels!


CH.  1.1-29.]         TSE  EPtSTLE  TO  TfiE  0OLOSStAlJ9.  8T

A  mere  increase  of  knowledge  or  blessedness  on  their  part,  or  the  confirmation  of  them
in  their  heavenly  obedience,  can  hardly  be  covered  by  the  term  "  reconciliation."  Tha
word  must  be  used  in  its  ordinary  sen^e.  The  apostle  has  described  Christ's  mediatorial
function  as  twofold :  as  exercised  in  the  natural  creation  and  in  the  spiritual  creation — •
in  the  universe  and  in  the  Church.  His  object  is  not  to  show  the  extent  either  of  the
creation  or  of  the  reconciliation,  but  the  pi  rson  of  the  Creator  and  the  Eeconciler,  and
the  Church  marks  the  glorious  sphere  of  the  reconciliation  as  it  is  seen  in  its  two
great  divisions  of  living  and  dead  saints.  The  "  things  in  heaven  "  seem,  therefore,  to
apply  to  the  saints  in  glory. — T.  0.

Vers.  21 — 23. — Application  of  the  reconciliation  to  the  special  case  of  the  Colos-
sians.  I.  The  natural  state  op  the  Colossians.  "And  you,  being  in  time  past
estranged  and  enemies  in  your  mind  in  evil  works,  .  .  .  hath  lie  reconciled."  1.  I'hey
were  estranged  from  Ood.  The  original  term  denotes  that  they  had  fallen  from  a
prior  relationship  of  amity.  It  points  suggestively  to  the  original  innocence  of  man  in
Eden,  and  to  the  deplorable  effects  of  the  Fall,  as  separating  between  God  and  man
(Isa.  lix.  2).  They  had  become  strangers  to  God,  (1)  because  strangers  to  the  life  of
Uod  (Eph.  iv.  17);  (2)  because  they  followed  strange  gods  (Dent,  xxxii.  16;  Eom.  i.
25);  (3)  because  they  were  "aliens  from  the  commonwealth  of  Israel"  (Eph.  ii.  12).
2.  They  were  hostile  to  Ood  loth  in  thought  and  deed.  A  strange  thought  that  man
stionld  cherish  a  living  enmity  in  a  dead  heart!  It  is  enmity  to  God  as  Lawgiver  and
Punisher  of  sin.  (1)  Mark  the  reality  of  this  enmity,  (a)  The  threatening  of  the  second
command  asserts  it:  "Them  that  hate  me"  (Exod.  xx.  5).  (6)  The  friendship  of  the
world  involves  it :  "  Whosoever  will  be  a  friend  of  the  world  will  be  an  enemy  of  God  "
(Jas.  iv.  4).  (c)  The  carnal  mind  is  full  of  it  (Eom.  viii.  7).  (d)  All  scoffs  and
blasphemies  manifest  it  (Ps.  Ixxiv.  18).  (2)  The  seat  of  this  enmity.  "  In  your
mind."  It  is  an  essentially  carnal  mind.  The  enmity  lies  deep  down  in  the  heart,
which  is  a  "chamber  of  imagery,"  full  of  all  shapes  of  hatred  to  God  and  man.
Strange  that  there  should  be  hatred  to  him  who  is  Author  of  our  being  and  Pountaia
of  our  happiness!  We  need,  indeed,  in  regeneration  to  be  "renewed  in  our  mind"
(Eph.  iv.  2B),  that  we  may  exchange  our  hatred  for  love.  (8)  The  practical  sjjhere  of
this  eninity.  "In  evil  works."  The  enmity  is  not  caused  by  evil  works,  but  is  mani-
fested through  them  (Matt.  xv.  19).  They  whose  "mind  and  conscience  are  defiled"
are  "unto  all  good  works  reprobate"  (Titus  i.  16).

II.  The  keoonciliation  of  the  Colossians.  "  Yet  now  hath  he  reconciled  in  the
body  of  his  flesh  through  death."  The  reconciliation  has  been  already  explained.  The
means  of  it  are  here  expressively  set  forth  by  the  apostle.  The  passage  suggests :
1.  That  the  atonement  was  a  great  historic  fact ;  so  that  no  person  might  conclude  that
the  reconciliation  was  effected  apart  from  the  person  of  the  incarnate  Son  or  after  his
return  to  glory.  2.  That  he  was  a  real  man  in  a  human  hody,  as  if  to  refute  Gnostic
theories  as  to  a  phantom  body  or  as  to  the  body  being  essentially  evil.  It  was  a  heresy
to  say  that  "Jesus  Christ  had  not  come  in  the  flesh"  (1  John  iv.  2,  3).  3.  That  he
carried  about  with  him  on  earth  a  sin-hearing  humanity.  It  was,  therefore,  a  "  weak,
abased,  and  suffering  humanity"  (Eom.  viii.  3).  4.  That  his  life  was  consummated  by
death,  as  the  completion  of  his  atoning  sacrifice  for  sin.

III.  The  fbuit  oe  effect  of  the  eeconciliation.  "To  present  you  holy  and
without  blemish  and  unreprovable  before  him."  1.  We  see  that  sanctification  follows
reconciliation  and  does  not  precede  it.  It  confounds  the  relations  of  things  and
perverts  Christian  doctrine  to  reverse  the  order.  2.  TJie  atonement  provides  for  our
sanctification..  It  purchased  for  us  all  the  communications  of  Divine  life.  Christ  is
made  to  us  at  once  "  Wisdom,  Eighteousness,  Sanctification,  and  Eedemption"  (1  Cor.  i.
30).  3.  TJte  nature  of  this  scmctification.  "  Holy  and  without  blemish  and  unreprov-
able." The  words  point,  not  to  the  relative  standing  before  God,  but  to  the  externally
observable  advances  in  spiritual  life.  These  are  represented,  first,  positively — "  holy ; "
and  then  negatively — "  without  blemish  and  unreprovable;"  4.  The  end  of  this
sanctification.  "  To  present  you  holy  and  without  blemish  and  unreprovable  before  him."
Not,  as  some  allege,  at  the  day  of  judgment,  but  for  his  personal  approbation,  implying
(1)  that  all  we  do  is  in  God's  presence  (Luke  iL  18;  xiii.  26;  Acts  x.  33);  (2)  that
G  id  is  the  Witness  of  all  our  acts  (Luke  viii.  47;  2  Cor.  vii.  12  ;  Gal.  i.  20)  j  (3)  that


88  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.         [oh.  1. 1—29.

Grod  not  only  accepts  what  is  in  any  measure  good  (Luke  i.  75),  but  highly  esteem)
what  is  good  in  the  saints  (Luke  i.  25 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  2,  3 ;  v.  4).

IV.  An  exhoktation  to  pkesbvebanob  in  connection  with  the  provision  fob
THBIB  EECONCILIATION.  "  If  at  least  ye  continue  in  the  faith  grounded  and  steadfast,
and  are  not  constantly  shifting  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel,  which  ye  heard,  which  was
preached  in  all'  creation  under  heaven."  1.  2%ere  ts  nothing  strictly  hypothetical  in
this  passage,  as  the  tense  clearly  indicates ;  yet  warning  is  needed  as  the  divinely
ordered  means  of  averting  failure.  There  were  risks  to  faith  in  the  presence  of  Jud«o-
Gnostic  teachers.  We  need  to  be  reminded  that  "  he  that  endureth  to  the  end  shall
be  saved  "  (Matt.  xxiv.  13) ;  but  God  himself  provides  for  us  the  grace  of  continuance.
2.  The  mode  of  this  continuance.  "  Grounded  and  steadfast."  (1)  Marking  its  positive
side,  (o)  We  must  be  built  on  the  true  Foundation  (Bph.  ii.  20).  We  must  be
grounded  in  the  doctrines  of  grace  as  well  as  "built  as  living  stones"  on  "the  precious
Corner-stone "  laid  in  Zion  (1  Pet.  ii.  6).  Otherwise  we  shall  be  swept  away  in  the
rising  floods  of  judgment  (Luke  vi.  48,  49).  (i)  We  must  be  steadfast  as  the  result
of  this  grounding.  An  ungrounded  Christian  cannot  be  a  growing  Christian.  It  is
well  to  be  settled  in  the  faith  if  we  would  make  progress  in  Christian  life.  Suffering
has  its  influence  in  increasing  our  stability.  Therefore  our  a])ostle  prays  that  the  God
of  grace,  "after  that  ye  have  suffered  a  while,"  may  "make  you  perfect,  stablisb,
strengthen,  settle  you"  (1  Pet.  v.  10).  (2)  Marking  its  negative  side.  "And  are  not
constantly  shifting  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel,  which  ye  heard,  which  was  preached  in
all  creation  under  heaven."  (a)  The  apostle  points  to  the  danger  of  drifting.  When
the  anchors  are  lifted,  it  is  impossible  to  know  where  the  ship  may  go  on  a  dangerous
shore.  The  false  teachers  were  subtle  and  plausible  and  speculative.  It  may  have
been  hard  to  resist  their  logic.  But  the  end  of  their  speculations  was  death — the
sacrifice  of  the  hope  of  the  gospel.  (6)  He  points  to  a  sure  anchorage — "  the  hope
of  the  gospel,  which  ye  heard,  which  was  preached  in  all  creation  under  heaven."
(a)  This  hope  may  have  been  that  of  the  resurrection,  of  which  the  false  teachers  said
it  "  was  past  already  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  18),  and  thus  out  up  by  the  roots  the  true  expecta-
tions of  the  Christian.  (j8)  It  was  more  probably  the  "  hope  of  the  gospel "  generally,
which  is  described  in  Eph.  i.  18  as  "  the  hope  of  our  calling,"  including  all  the  blessings
of  redemption  with  resurrection  itself,  (y)  It  was  a  hope  (i.)  made  known  by  the
yospel ;  (ii.)  imparted  to  them  by  Epaphras,  the  delegate  of  the  apostle — "  which  ye
heard ; "  (iii.)  and  proclaimed  as  the  univerral  hope  of  man  to  all  creation.  It  was  not,
therefore,  reserved  for  a  select  coterie  of  men.  "  Its  universal  tendency  was  already
realized,"  and  its  wide  publicity  was  not  to  be  called  in  question.  (3)  Consider  the
importance  of  religious  steadfastness.  "  We  must  hold  fast  the  confidence  and  rejoicing
of  hope  unto  the  end"  (Heb.  iii.  6).  Let  us,  therefore,  bless  God  that  "he  has
begotten  us  to  a  lively  hope"  (1  Pet.  i.  3).  (4)  Seek  wisdom  from  on  high  "to  know
what  is  the  hope  of  our  calling"  (Eph.  i.  18).  (5)  Let  us  read  the  Scriptures  prayer-
fully, that  "through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures  we  may  have  hope"
(Eom.  XV.  4).  (6)  Let  us  acknowledge  that  "truth  that  is  according  to  godliness"
(Titus  i.  1,  2).— T.  C.

Vers.  24 — 27. — 3%e  mission,  tufferingt,  gospel,  and  preaching  of  the  apostle.  Ha
introduces  here  a  somewhat  abrupt  reference  to  himself,  not  to  vindicate  his  authority
as  an  apostle,  which  was  not  challenged  at  Colossse,  but  to  emphasize  his  mission  as  the
apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  and  to  draw  the  Colossians  into  closer  relations  of  sympathy
with  himself.

L  Thk  apostle's  sufferings  foe  the  Church.  "  Who  now  rejoice  in  my  suffer-
ings for  you,  and  fill  up  that  which  is  lacking  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  in  my  flesh
for  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the  Church."  1.  The  nature  of  his  sufferings.  Thesa.
are  to  be  understu  .d  by  his  frequent  reference  to  the  afflictions  of  Christ.  (1)  The
afflictions  of  Christ  are  not  (a)  afflictions  borne  on  account  of  Christ ;  (6)  nor  afflictions
imposed  by  Christ ;  (c)  nor  afflictions  which  resemble  those  of  Christ ;  (d)  nor  the
afflictions  which  the  apostle  endures  instead  of  Christ,  as  supplementing  his  afflictions;
bat  the  afflictions  which  Christ  endures  in  his  suffering  Church.  The  Messiah  was  "to
be  afflicted  in  all  their  afflictions"  (Isa.  Ixiii.  9).  (2)  How  the  apostle  filled  up  that
which  WM  lacking  of  Christ's  afflictions.    Kot  as  if  Christ  did  not  suffer  all  that


CH.  I.  1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  89

was  necessary  to  the  salvation  of  men,  but  left  something  to  be  suffered  by  membera
like  the  apostle  as  a  means  contributory  to  tlieir  own  salvation.  Roman  Catholics  base
upon  this  passage  their  doctrine  of  su[.ererogatory  merit  and  indulgences.  Some  Pro-
testant diviaes  think  this  position  is  to  be  met  by  distinguishing  part  of  Christ's
sufferings  as  vicariously  satisfactory  and  part  as  merely  edifying  by  way  of  example,
and  represent  the  apostle  as  supplementing,  not  the  first,  but  the  last  kind  of  suffering.
This  view  is  subject  to  the  grave  objection  that  there  were  no  sufferings  of  Christ  that
were  not  vicariously  satisfactory,  as  there  were  none  that  were  not  likewise  designed  for
edification,  comfort,  and  example.  The  Roman  Catholic  view  is  unsound,  (a)  because  it
contradicts  the  whole  tenor  of  Scripture  (John  xix.  30;  Heb.  x.  1 — 15);  (/8)  because
it  is  absurd,  for  if  the  apostle  supplied  in  his  suffering  what  Christ  failed  to  supply,
nothing  remains  for  other  saints  to  supply  by  their  sufferings.  (3)  The  apostle  shows
in  the  context  that  his  work  was  not  to  redeem,  but  to  edify  the  Church.  What,  then,
is  the  meaning  of  the  apostle's  statement  ?  That  the  sufferings  of  the  members  of
Christ  are  the  sufferings  of  Christ;  for  the  Church  is  his  body,  in  which  he  exists,  lives,
and  therefore  suffers.  All  the  tribulations  of  the  body  are  Christ's  tribulations.  2.
The  design  or  intent  of  the  apostles  sufferings.  "  For  his  body's  sake,  which  is  the
Church."  It  was  for  the  extension  and  edification  of  the  Church.  He  suffers  in  his
natural  body — "in  my  flesh" — for  the  mystical  body.  He  teaches  us:  (1)  That  we  are
to  seek  the  advancement  of  the  cause  of  Christ  above  our  own  personal  comfort.  (2)
Tiiat  we  ought  to  endure  sufferings  because  they  concern  the  good  of  others  more  than
ourselves.  (3)  That  we  are  not  to  take  care  for  the  flesh  or  serve  the  flesh.  (Rom.  xiii.
14 ;  Gal.  vi.  8.)  3,  The  spirit  in  which  the  apostle  bore  his  varitd  sufferings.  "  1  now
rejoice  in  my  sufferings  for  you."  (1)  Because  they  were  the  means  of  unspeakable
blessing  to  the  Gentiles;  (2)  because  they  would  confirm  the  faith  of  the  Culossians
and  encourage  them  to  bear  suffering  with  like  patience ;  (3)  because  they  would  con-
tribute to  the  apostle's  own  ultimate  blessedness  (Heb.  x.  34  ;  1  Pet.  i.  6,  7).

II.  The  special  dispensation  assigned  to  this  apostle  foe  the  benefit  of  the
Gentiles.  "Whereof  I  was  made  a  minister  according  to  the  dispensation  of  God
which  was  given  me  to  you-ward,  to  fulfil  the  Word  of  God ;  even  the  mystery  which
hath  been  hid  from  all  ages  and  generations,  but  now  hath  it  been  manilested  to  his
saints,  to  whom  God  was  pleased  to  make  known  what  is  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  this
mystery  among  the  Gentiles;  which  is  Christ  in  you,  the  H"pe  of  glory."  1.  The
apostle's  peculiar  mission  to  the  Oentiles.  He  calls  himself  here  "  a  minister  of  the
Church,"  as  he  has  just  called  himself  "  a  minister  of  Christ."  His  commission  is
from  God  himself.  "  A  dispensation  of  God  is  given  to  me."  God  is  the  Dispenser  of
all  good  things  to  his  Church.  Hence  we  infer  (a)  that  the  efficacy  of  the  Word
depends  much  upon  God's  appointment  of  his  servants ;  (6)  that  his  servants  ought  to
be  regarded  with  confidence  and  love,  because  they  are  God's  ambassadors  and  make  the
Word  of  God  their  supreme  rale  in  dispensing  the  things  of  God  ;  (c)  that  the  commis-
sion ought  to  be  executed  with  all  faithfulness  and  diligence  (2  Tim.  iv.  1,  2 ;  2  Cor.
ii.  17 ;  iv.  2).  2.  The  design  of  the  dispensation  given  to  the  apostle.  "  To  fulfil  the
Word  of  God."  That  is,  to  give  its  complete  development  to  the  Word  of  God — "  to
give  its  fullest  amplitude  to,  to  fill  up  the  measures  of,  its  foreordained  universality."
Every  minister  is  bound  "  to  fulfil  the  Word  of  God"  in  his  ministry,  (1)  by  preaching
the  whole  counsel  of  God  (Acts  xx.  27) ;  (2)  by  rightly  dividing  the  Word  of  truth
according  to  the  wants  of  the  heareis ;  (3)  by  the  application  of  the  jiromises  of  the
Word  (Luke  iv.  21) ;  (4)  by  bringing  men  to  fulfil  it  in  a  gospel  obedience  (Rom.  xv.
18).  3.  ITie  long-hid  but  now  revealed  mystery  of  the  gospel.  (1)  It  is  "  Christ  in  you,
tise  Hope  of  glory."  Here  is  the  true  mystery  of  gotUiness.  It  is  not  Christ,  but  Christ
freely  given  to  the  Gentiles,  (a)  Christianity  is  Christ  in  the  heart.  "  He  dwells  in
Dur  hearts  by  faith  "  (Eph.  iii.  18).  He  lives  in  us  (Gal.  ii.  20).  He  is  in  us  (2  Cor.
xiii.  5)  if  we  are  not  reprobates.  If  he  is  in  us,  then  (a)  we  must  continue  to  live  by
faith  (Gal.  ii.  20) ;  {$)  we  may  expect  to  receive  "  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and
knowledge "  that  are  "  hid  in  him "  (ch.  ii.  3)  ;  (7)  we  may  look  for  larger  measures
of  his  love  (Eph.  iii.  18) ;  (S)  we  must  keep  holy  hearts,  for  he  will  not  dwell  in  an
"evil  heart  of  unbelief" — "The  heart  is  Christ's  chamber  of  presence:  shall  we  not,
therefore,  keep  it  with  all  diligence  ?  "  (e)  the  grace  of  Christ  will  be  efficacious  against
all  temptations  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).    (5)  Christ  in  the  heart  is  the  Hope  of  glory.    (■)  He  la


4d  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSTANS.         [oh.  1. 1-29,

exiiressly  called  "  our  Hope  "  (1  Tim.  i.  2 ;  ch.  1.  4,  23).     (,8)  He  is  the  Hope  of  glory

because  he  has,  as  our  Forerunner,  rai'ried  the  anchor  of  our  hojie  withuT  the  veil,  and
fastened  it  to  the  two  immutable  things — the  oath  and  the  promise  of  God — in  which
it  was  impossible  that  he  should  lie.  (7)  The  resurrection  of  Christ  establishes  this
hope  (1  Cor.  xv.  19),  We  should  be  of  "  all  men  most  miserable  "  wilhout  it.  (8)  We
should  read  the  Word,  that  "  through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  Scriptures  we  may
have  hope  "  (Eom.  xv.  4),  seeing  Christ  therein  as  the  ground  of  our  hope  for  eternity,
(e)  There  is  no  hope  for  man  apart  from  Christ  (2)  The  mystery  was  long  hid  from
the  world.  "  Hid  from  ages  and  from  generations."  (a)  This  does  not  mean  that  the
future  salvation  of  the  Gentiles  was  unknown  in  ancient  times;  for  the  prophets  are  full
of  it  (Isa.  Ix.  3  J  Ixii.  2 ;  liv.  1 — 3).  (h)  But  the  mystery  was  that  the  Gentiles  should
be  admitted  to  the  blessings  of  salvation  on  equal  terms  with  the  Jews.  (3)  The
mystery  was  at  last  made  known  to  the  saints  (a)  by  revelation  to  the  apostle  (Eph.
iii.  5);  (b)  by  preaching  (ch.  iv.  4 ;  Titus  i.  3) ;  (c)  by  jTophetic  exposition  (Rom.  xvi.
26);  and  (d)  by  the  actual  conversion  of  the  Gentiles  themselves  without  their
conformity  to  Jewish  usages. — T.  0.

Vers.  28,  29. —  The  manner  in  which  the  apostle  discharged  hit  divinely  given  trust.
"  Whom  we  proclaim,  admonishing  every  man,  and  teaching  every  man  in  all  wisdom;
that  we  may  present  every  man  perfect  in  Chiist :  whereunto  I  labour  also,  striving
according  to  his  working  who  worketh  in  me  mightily."

I.  The  ddtt  op  MiNrsTBKS.  It  is  to  preach  Christ.  1.  It  is  not  to  preach  mnraliiy.
Though  it  is  right  and  necessary  to  exhibit  moral  duties  in  the  light  of  the  cross.  2.
It  is  not  to  preach  a  philosophy  or  a  thaumaturgy.  (1  Cor.  i.  22 — 24.)  3.  It  is  to  preach
Christ  crucified.  (1  Cor.  ii.  3.)  Some  preach  Christ's  incarnation  as  the  grand  hope  of
man,  but  this  is  to  present  a  broken  hope,  if  it  is  not  supplemented  by  the  death  of
Christ.  4.  It  is  to  preach  Christ  as  the  only  Saviour.  "Neither  is  there  salvation  in
any  other"  (Acts  iv.  12).  'Ihere  is  no  salvation  in  ordinances,  in  saints,  in  angels,  ia
images,  in  pictures,  in  works  of  righteousness,  5.  It  is  to  preach  Christ  as  a  sufficient
Saviour.    He  is  mighty  to  save,  and  "able  to  save  to  the  uttermost."

If.  The  manner  in  which  Cheist  is  to  be  peeached.  1.  "Admonition."
"  Admonishing  every  man."  This  implies:  (1)  The  duty  of  rebuke  in  the  case  of  those
who  repair  to  other  saviours  than  Christ.  Preachers  must,  likewise,  rebuke  sin  (Isa.  Iviii.
1 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  17 ;  Heb.  ix.  10).  (2)  Preaching  is  to  set  forth  examples  of  admonition
(1  Cor.  X.  11).  (3)  Great  is  the  profit  of  admonition  to  those  who  receive  it  aright  (Prov.
xxviii,  13).  (4)  It  implies  that  all  men  need  admonition,  for  all  are  apt  to  err  or  sin.
2.  Teaching.  Chti&tianity  is  not  a  thaumaturgy,  not  a  spectacular  religion;  it  is  the
exhibition  of  Christ  through  the  gospel  of  truth.  The  understanding  must  be
informed.  (1)  There  is  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  to  lead  us  into  all  truth  (John  xiv.
26).  (2)  There  is  the  Word  of  truth,  which  preachers  are  rightly  to  divide  (2  Tim.  ii.
15).  (3)  We  need  to  be  instructed,  for  we  are  ignorant  and  prejudiced.  (4)  There  is
immense  variety  in  truth.  "In  all  wisdom.''  Preachers  must  preach  wisely — not  in
the  "wisdom  of  words"  (1  Cor.  i.  17),  hut  in  the  truly  Divine  wisdom  which  enables  us
" to  understand  our  own  way"  (Prov.  xiv.  8),  which  teaches  us  hun)ility — "becoming
fools  that  we  may  be  wise"  (1  Cor.  iii.  18) ;  "  to  walk  not  as  fools,  but  as  wise"  (Eph.
V  15) ;  and  "  to  consider  our  latter  end,  that  we  may  apply  our  hearts  unto  wisdom  "
(Ps.  xc.  12).

III.  The  design  op  this  pbbaohino  of  Christ.  "That  we  may  present  every  man
perfect  in  Chii.st."  1.  Perfection  is  the  aim.  It  will  be  attained  in  glory.  It  implies
perfection  in  knowledge  as  well  as  holiness.  We  are  to  seek  perfection  (1)  in  doctrine
(Heb.  vi.  1);  (2)  in  faith  (J as.  ii.  22);  (3)  in  hope  (1  Pet.  i.  13);  (4)  in  love  (1  John
iv.  18);  (5)  in  understanding  (1  Cor.  xiv.  20).  2.  Ferjectiun  is  only  to  he  realized  in,
Christ.  (1)  Its  ultimate  realization  comes  through  him  (Phil.  i.  6).  (2)  This  thought
ought  to  miike  saints  seek  a  closer  intercourse  with  Christ.  3.  It  is  a  perfection  designed
for  all  saints.  "  Every  man."  It  is  not  for  an  inner  circle  of  discijiles,  an  initiated  few,
but  for  "every  man."  This  universality  of  blessing  marks  the  distinction  between  the
gospel  of  Christ  and  the  schools  of  Judaao-Gnostlc  speculation.

IV.  The  spirit  in  whioh  minibtees  ought  to  labour  in  the  gospel  of  Christ,
1,  Tliey  must  lahour  and  strive.    The  ministry  is  a  severe  labour  to  body,  mind,  and


CB.  1.1— 29.1         fHE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSTAN8.  41

spirit.  The  apostle  "laboured  more  abundantly  than  they  all."  The  Lord's  work
cannot  be  done  negligently  (2  Tim.  iv.  1 — 3;  1  Thess.  v.  12).  2.  Ministers  must
labour,  not  in  their  own  strength,  hut  in  the  Lord^s  strength.  "Striving  according  to  his
working,  who  worketh  in  me  mightily."  It  is  the  Lord  who  worlts  in  his  ministers  for
the  salvation  of  souls.  Paul  may  plant,  and  Apollos  water,  but  "  it  is  God  that  giveth
the  increase"  (1  Cor.  iii.  6).— T.  C.

"Vers.  1 — 8. — The  hope  laid  up  in  heaven.  This  Epistle,  written  from  Home  to  meet
and  overmaster  the  "  Colossian  heresy,"  begins  with  a  salutation  somewhat  similar  to
those  at  the  beginning  of  other  Epistles.  There  is  the  assertion  of  Paul's  apostleship  as
direct  from  Christ;  there  is  the  statement  of  the  brotherhood  of  Timothy,  and  the
desire  that  grace  and  peace  may  be  the  constant  portion  of  the  saints  and  faithful
brethren  at  ColossiB.  But,  having  thus  started,  Paul  immediately  passes  to  an  account
of  their  character  as  he  had  got  it  from  Bpaphras,  and  how  this  character  had  been
produced.  He  is  thankful  for  it,  and  he  wishes  them  to  remember  how  it  had  been
formed  within  them.     And  here  we  have  to  notice  that —

I.  Jesus  Chbist  is  the  Object  of  the  Colossians'  faith.  (Ver.  4.)  They  had
happily  been  led  to  this — ^to  trust  in  the  personal  Savionr.  It  is  not  the  promises,  but
the  Promisor;  not  the  proposition,  but  tlie  Person  pledging  himself  to  the  fulfilment  of
the  proposition,  in  whom  we  believe.  Now,  the  heresy,  which  will  appear  more  clearly
afterwards,  made  a  good  deal  of  angelic  and  intermediate  personages ;  there  was,  in  fact,
a  tendency  to  a  mystic  peopling  of  the  unseen  with  needless  forms,  explanatory,  as  the
Colossians  supposed,  of  the  mysteries  of  creation.  It  was  important  in  these  circum-
stances to  state  with  precision  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  great  Object  of  faith.  Faith  in
such  a  Being  becomes  a  glorious  simplicity.  It  is  a  simple  extension  of  that  trust  to
him  which  we  extend  to  our  fellow-men.  But  his  glorious  personality,  embracing  a
Divine  as  well  as  human  nature,  makes  all  the  difference  between  faith  in  men  and
faith  in  him.    The  latter  is  true  saving  faith.

II.  The  saints  weeb  the  special  objects  of  the  Colossians'  love.  (Ver.  4.)
While  faith  goes  out  to  a  personal  Saviour,  it  worketh  by  love  towards  all  the  saints.
For  it  cannot  but  be  that,  in  trusling  and  loving  the  perfect  Saviour,  we  learn  almost
instinctively  to  love  those  in  his  image.  The  saints,  all  the  saints,  are  seen  to  have
their  claim  upon  the  believer's  love.  The  love  of  good  men  is  the  note  of  a  true
Christian.

III.  Heaven  was  ikdispensable  to  the  consummation  of  their  hope.  (Ver.  5.)
It  is  the  chaiacteristio  of  the  Christian  system  to  relegate  a  goodly  portion  of  its
promise  to  the  world  to  come.  It  has  certainly  a  promise  for  the  life  that  now  is,  but
chiefly  has  it  a  promise  for  that  which  is  to  come.  In  heaven  the  hope  is  laid  up.
And  into  tliis  hope  the  Colossians  heartily  entered.  They  lookeil  for  more  to  follow —
for  a  purity,  for  a  power,  for  a  perfection  impossible  in  the  present  life.  There  is  thus
a  faith,  a  love,  and  a  hope  characteristic  of  the  saints  at  Coloss®  as  well  as  elsewhere.

IV.  This  hope  had  been  communicated  through  the  preached  gospel.  (Vers.
6 — 8.)  Had  the  Colossians  not  had  the  gospel  preaohed  to  them,  they  would  never
have  entered  into  such  glorious,  heavenly  hopes.  The  word  of  the  gospel  is  fruit-bearing.
It  kindles  the  hopes  of  men.  Everywhere  it  has  the  same  blessed  effects  in  lifting
men's  hearts  to  heaven.  It  would  seem  that  Bpaphras  had  been  the  instrument  in  the
Lord's  hand  in  evangelizing  the  Colossians.  He  had,  as  a  faithful  minister  of  Christ,
preached  the  Word  to  them,  and  they  had  received  it  and  become  the  loving  disciples  he
represented  them  to  be  in  his  report  to  Paul.  "  Love  in  the  Spirit "  was  the  leading  idea
in  their  lives.  All  this  was  matter  for  profound  gratitude  to  God,  and  so  the  apostle
pours  out  his  thanksgiving  to  God  the  Father  (ver.  3)  because  of  it.  In  such  circum-
stances it  surely  becomes  us  to  see  that  we  rise  on  the  wings  of  hope  to  heaven  and
appreciate  the  glorious  consummation  which  there  awaits  us.  We  need  such  a  hope  to
complete  the  demands  of  our  immortal  being.  We  cannot  be  satisfied  with  the  seen,
with  the  present  life,  with  the  present  world ;  we  must  have  more.  And  thia  the
gospel  gives  us  in  that  hope  which  is  liud  up  fur  us  in  heaven.— B.  M.  E.

Vers.  9 — 14. — The  kingdom  of  Ood's  dear  Son.  From  the  thanksgiving  presented
Itecause  of  the  faith,  hope,  and  love  of  the  Colossians,  Paul  next  proceeds  to  inter-


42  THE .  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [ch.  1. 1—29.

cession  for  their  spiritual  progress.  There  is  considerahle  similarity  between  the
intercession  he  makes  for  the  Eplicsians  (Eph.  iii.  14 — 21)  and  the  intercession  he  here
makes  fur  the  Colossians.  In  both  he  appeals  to  the  Father  that  the  most  intimate
nnd  loving  relations  may  be  estublished  between  the  persons  prayed  for  and  "  his  dear
Son."  He  gives,  however,  in  the  case  before  us  a  magnificence  to  his  conception  ot
Christ  which  is  not  found  in  the  longer  Epistle.  In  this  way  he  could  best  meet  and
overcome  the  Gnostic  tendency  at  Colossae.  Let  us  consider  the  truth  embodied  in  the
intercession  in  the  following  order : —

I.  Wb  shall  considbb  the  Eino  heeb  bbpekred  to.  (Ver.  13.)  Paul  has  already
presented  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Object  of  the  Colossians'  faith.  But  in  the  present  section
he  presents  him  as  "  God's  dear  Son,"  or  "  the  Son  of  his  love  "  (yloS  ttjs  aydirns  airod),
in  possession  of  a  kingdom.  This  kingdom  is  the  antithesis  of  "the  power  of  darkness;"
it  is,  in  fact,  a  kingdom  of  light.  The  sphere  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saintly  subjects
is  said  to  be  light  (ver.  12).  Hence  Jesus  is  brought  before  us  in  this  prayer  much  as
he  is  brought  before  us  in  the  Apocalypse,  as  the  light-giving  Lamb  (Rev.  xxi.  23).
"  I  am  the  Light  of  the  world,"  he  said ;  and  as  the  greater  light  rules  the  day,  so  does
Jesus  rule  in  his  kingdom  (John  viii.  12 ;  Gen.  i.  16).  The  sun  is  now  known  to  be
the  source  of  all  the  light  and  heat  enjoyed  on  the  earth ;  to  his  genial  beams  we  owe
spring  and  summer  and  autumn,  and  all  the  precious  fruits  of  the  earth ;  so  is  it  to
Jesus  Christ  we  owe  all  the  procession  of  seasonable  blessing  which  his  kingdom
affords.  He  is  King,  then,  over  such  a  realm  as  Pilate  could  not  appreciate — over  a
kingdom  of  truth,,  whose  rights  interfered  not  with  the  rights  of  CKsar  (John  xviii.  33 —
38 ;  Matt.  xxii.  21).  The  light  in  which  our  spirits  are  bathed  is  truth — the  truth  as
it  is  in  Jesus.  From  his  glorious  Person  there  radiates  the  benign  and  healing  beams
which  enable  the  recipients  to  grow  even  as  the  calves  of  the  stall  (Mai.  iv.  2).

II.  Let  us  consideb  the  subjects  secured  fob  this  Kma.  (Vers.  13, 14.)  Now,
Paul  in  this  prayer  speaks  of  the  Father  providing  subjects  for  his  dear  Son.  And,
strange  to  say,  he  finds  them  in  the  kingdom  of  darkness,  and  by  translation  he  popu-
lates the  kingdom  of  his  Son.  He  finds  the  raw  material  in  sinners  who  need  redemp-
tion and  pardon,  and  they  become  Christ's  subjects  through  receiving  at  his  hands
these  indispensable  blessings.  Truly  it  is  a  strange  arrangement  that  the  King,  God's
dear  Son,  should,  before  entering  upon  his  reign,  first  die  and  provide  through  the
shedding  of  his  blood  the  redemption  and  forgiveness  the  subjects  need.  Yet  so  it  is.
The  Father  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  Sacrifice  to  take  away  sin,  and  from  the  altar  he
passes  to  the  throne.  We  here  can  see  how  endeared  the  King  must  be  to  his  subjects.
Having  lived  and  died  to  redeem  us,  we  feel  it  to  be  only  just  that  we  should  live,  and,
if  need  be,  die  for  him.  Hence  the  consecration  of  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God  is  upon
all  the  subjects.  It  is  a  kingdom  of  redeemed  and  pardoned  and  blood-bought  souls
over  whom  Jesus  reigns.

III.  Consideb  next  the  cooupations  of  this  kingdom.  (Vers.  9 — 11.)  We  can
now  see  clearly  that  the  duty  of  the  blood-bought  subjects  of  King  Jesus  is,  in  one
word,  to  do  his  mil.  But,  before  we  can  do  his  will,  we  must  know  it.  Hence  Paul
prays  that  these  Colossians  may  be  "  filled  with  the  knowledge  of  his  will  in  all
wisdom  and  spiritual  understanding."  The  cry  of  the  blood-bought  soul  is  "Lord,
what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  We  place  ourselves  at  the  disposal  of  our  King  and
ask  him  to  shew  us  his  will.  As  a  rule,  we  shall  not  be  left  long  in  doubt  regarding
it.  In  the  darkest  hour  the  light  ariseth  for  the  upright  (Ps.  cxii,  4),  If  we  straight-
forwardly want  to  know  what  Christ's  will  is,  we  shall  soon  find  it.  But  this  know-
ledge of  Christ's  will  is  that  the  Colossians  may  "  walk  worthy  of  the  Lord  unto  all
pleasing,  being  fruitful  in  every  good  work,  and  increasing  in  the  knowledge  of  God."
Jesus  indicates  his  will  that  his  blood-bought  people  may  walk  worthily.  High  moral
principle  is  to  characterize  them  constantly.  And  every  good  work  will  find  in  them
willing  hands.  The  servants  of  Christ  have  been  always  in  the  van  of  philanthropic
effort.  And  this  morality  and  zeal  will  not  be  allowed  to  hinder  progress  in  the
knowledge  of  God.  Education  is  not  withheld  from  any  of  Christ's  subjects  by  reason
of  the  multiplicity  of  other  claims.  The  real  education,  which  is  in  the  knowledge  of
Qoi — for  the  world  and  all  that  it  contains  constitute  in  the  last  analysis  simply  a
revelation  of  his  power  and  Godhead  (Eom.  i.  20) — goes  hand-in-hand  with  moral
earnestness  and  effort.    But  yet  again,  the  subjects  of  Christ's  kingdom  find  the  need


CH.  1. 1— 29.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  48

of  patience  and  long-suffering ;  they  cannot  get  along  without  hearing  a  good  deal  from
worldly  people — sneers,  insolence,  persecution,  and  in  extreme  cases  death.  Yet  the
King  strengtlions  his  people  with  might  according  to  his  glorious  power,  so  that  they
are  able  "joyfully"  to  hear  and  suffer  what  is  sent.  It  is  here  that  the  occupations
of  the  kingdom  constitute  a  power.  The  world  wonders  at  the  saints  who  can  he  so
joyful  in  their  King,  in  spite  of  the  drawbacks  and  difiSculties  to  which  they  are  exposed.
IV.  Consider  again  the  compensations  of  the  kinqdom.  (Ver.  12.)  What  is
"the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light"?  Does  it  mean  a  heavenly  woild  where  light
Buch  as  only  shines  on  tropical  lands  shall  bathe  emancipated  men,  and  they  shall  be
enabled  to  lie  like  lotus-eaters  amid  the  glory,  and  never  further  roam  ?  It  is  to  ha
feared  that  the  current  notions  of  heaven  partake  of  the  dreamy  "  sofa-religion,"  which
to  earnest  worldly  natures  is  so  repulsive.  Let  us,  on  the  contrary,  remember  that  the
doing  of  our  Lord's  will  is  its  own  reward.  Heaven  will  afford  no  higher  enjoyment
than  this.  Our  souls  are  not  rightly  balanced  when  they  look  for  something  else  or
more.  "  We  are  saved,"  says  Archer  Butler,  "  that  we  may  for  eternity  serve  God ;
salvation  itself  would  be  misery  if  unaccompanied  by  a  love  for  that  service."  In  the
pleasing  of  our  King,  therefore,  all  the  compensations  of  the  kingdom  lie.  The  outward
conditions  and  circumstances  would  be  changed  in  vain  if  we  were  not  animated  by
this  loyal  and  loving  spirit.  May  such  meetness  for  the  inheritance  be  our  present
experience,  as  it  was  that  of  the  Colossians. — B.  M.  B.

Vers.  15 — ^20. — The  glories  of  King  Jetus,  The  apostle,  having  in  his  prayer  pleaded
for  the  Colossians  that  they  may  be  worthy  members  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  proceeds
to  speak  of  the  glories  which  belong  to  their  King.  His  purpose,  like  that  of  every  true
preacher,  is  to  make  Christ  pre-eminent.  The  central  thouglit  of  the  passage  is  that
God  is  invisible,  but  Christ  is  the  visible  Manifestation  of  the  Father's  perfections.  In
him  as  the  perfect  "  Image  "  we  may  "  see  God."

L  Jebus  as  the  aiiOKious  Ckeatoh  revealed  the  mind  or  God.  (Vers.  15, 16.)
We  are  apt  to  think  of  Christ's  revelation  of  the  Godhead  solely  in  his  incarnation.
Doubtless  it  was  the  climax  of  the  "exegesis "of  the  invisible  God  (cf.  John  i.  18,
^ilT^ffaTo).  But  there  were  previous  revelations,  and  this  is  Paul's  idea  here  that  crea-
tion is  a  revelation  of  God  through  the  power  of  Christ.  Now,  one  thing  is  certain
about  the  creation,  that  it  addresses  itself  to  mind.  If  men  imagined  it  was  thtyughtles),
they  would  not  spend  two  minutes  more  in  its  investigation.  All  science  proceeds  on
the  postulate  of  creation  being  thinkable,  intelligible,  an  appeal  to  mind.  If  creation,
then,  embodies  thought,  we  have  further  to  notice  that  it  is  thought  of  the  same  order
as  human  thought.  After  all  the  weary  investigation,  therefore,  which  tries  to  blink
the  fact  of  creation  being  a  revelation  of  God,  we  are  reduced  in  the  last  analysis
exactly  to  this  idea.  Of  course,  we  have  not  succeeded  in  interpreting  the  revelation
in  nature  with  either  accuracy  or  fulness ;  but  every  year's  honest  work  carries  us  on
towards  the  fuller  understanding  of  the  Divine  Thinker  who  speaks  to  his  creatures  in
all  the  work  of  his  hands.  The  fascination  of  science  lies  in  the  fact  that  a  deeper
Thinker  than  any  of  the  investigators  is  behind  the  work,  and  is  calling  for  interpreters.
1'he  wonderful  creation  is  from  end  to  end,  in  heaven  above  and  in  earth  beneath,
Christ's  exposition  of  the  mind  of  God.

II.  HiSTOBY   IS   ALSO  AN  EXPOSITION  BT   ChRIST  OF  THE  DiVINB  MIND.      (Ver.   17.)

For  not  only  did  Christ  as  Creator  give  the  system  a  start,  but  as  the  Upholder  of  the
system  he  makes  it  a  continuous  revelation.  The  philosojihy  of  history  lies  in  the
assurance  of  the  great  procession  of  facts  being  under  the  constant  control  and  direction
of  Divinity.  Of  course,  as  in  the  former  case  of  the  interpretation  of  nature,  we  may
be  and  are  very  far  from  a  full  grasp  of  the  significance  of  history.  Yet  undoubtedly  a
reverential  study  of  the  course  of  events  brings  us  daily  nearer  the  understanding  of
the  whole.  It  adds  to  our  interest  to  take  with  us  this  assurance — that  Jesus  Christ  is
at  the  back  of  all  being,  upholding  it,  sustaining  the  system,  and  reducing  it  to  an
orderly  exposition  of  the  Divine  thought.  Amid  the  apparently  chaotic  course  of
events,  in  consequence  of  the  freedom  and  frailty  of  the  creature,  there  is  the  really
orderly  procession  of  the  whole  towards  that  "  one  Divine  event  to  which  the  whole
creation  moves."

III.  ChBISt'B  ECCLESIASTICAL  HEADSHIP  IS  A  TUBTHEB  BEVELATION  OF  GoD.     (Vcft


44  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.         [ott.t.1— 29.

18.)  For  not  only  has  Christ  been  Creator,  not  only  has  he  been  and  is  the  Preserver
of  the  system,  but  he  has  also  been  constituted  Head  of  a  special  class  of  beings,  united
in  what  is  called  "  the  Church."  Many  ot  his  creatures  do  not  recognize  either  lilm  or
his  relations  to  the  universe.  They  act  as  if  he  were  not,  and  his  control  of  them  ia
-without  their  leave  and  in  spite  oftentimes  of  their  opposition.  But  others  hapj^ily
have  come  to  recognize  hira  as  Lord  of  all,  and  consequently  of  themselves  as  well.
Believers  in  him,  adorers  of  him,  they  have  learned  to  lo'k  on  life  as  simply  a  longer  or
shorter  opportunity  of  doinc;  his  will  or  of  suffering  "  his  good  pleasure."  And  as  Christ
comej  into  tenderer  and  closer  relntions  to  the  believers  of  the  world  than  he  can  come
into  towards  the  unbelievers,  lie  is  as  closely  bound  to  his  believing  people  as  the
ruling  and  sovereign  "  head"  is  to  the  subject  and  obedient  "  members  " of  the  one
body.  And  this  headship  of  Christ  is  a  revelation  unto  men  of  the  mind  of  God.  Of
course,  in  this  case,  as  in  the  previous  cases,  there  is  only  an  approximation  to  the
tmderstaniiing  of  God's  mind  and  will  as  thus  revealed.  But  we  are  progressing  stea.iily
towards  the  ideal  of  perfect  light  and  perfect  submission.  I'he  Churches  may  but
imperfectly  grasp  what  God  in  Christ  means ;  they  may  be  very  wayward  and  arbitrary
in  many  of  their  interpretations  ;  but  the  desire  to  know  and  obey  Christ  brings  them
along  the  line  of  privilege  and  duty  with  increasing  appieciation  and  success.

IV.  In  Christ's  beconciliation  oc  all  things  ukto  God  he  fubthbr  reveals
TO  THE  UNIVERSE  THE  MIND  OF  GoD.  (Vers.  18 — 20.)  Now,  just  as  philosophy  is  the
reduction  of  the  multiform  in  fact  to  the  uniform  in  idea,  so  is  there  in  the  system
administered  by  Christ  provision  made  for  the  reconciliation  of  all  things  to  the
Supreme,  that  the  unity  of  all  things  may  be  the  last  thought  of  God.  This  is  the
meaning  of  the  cross  and  the  blood  shed  upon  it,  and  all  the  redemptive  system  which
centres  around  it.  This  is  the  purpose  of  Christ's  resurrection  to  immortal  life  the  first,
that,  as  the  pre-eminent  One,  he  might  gather  in  his  embrace  a  reconciled  universe  and
lay  it  at  the  Father's  feet.  Of  course,  the  prerogative  of  creaturely  freedom  is  snch  as
to  refuse  the  reconciliation  and  to  crystallize  into  hostility  in  some  sad  cases.  It  would
be  contrary  to  the  Divine  plan  to  force  the  will  and  ride  rough-shod  over  the  deter-
miniitions  of  the  creature.  Some  consequently,  it  would  seem,  are  to  be  allowed  to  take
their  own  course  and  remain  incorrigible ;  yet  in  the  unifying  idea  of  God  their  discord,
as  in  the  music  of  the  great  masters,  will  be  made  to  contribute  to  and  to  emphasize
the  aeneral  harmony.  Meanwhile,  how  grand  the  idea  is  of  the  unity  of  all  things  1
Surely  we  should  not  allow  ourselves  to  conflict  consciously  with  it  in  our  dealings
with  men.  We  should  back  it  up  as  the  goal  and  far-off  Divine  event  to  which  all
things  are  made  to  move.  The  blood  of  the  cross  cries  really  for  the  reconciliation  of
the  universe  to  God. — E.  M.  B.

Vers.  21 — 29. — The  indwelling  Christ  the  leliever's  Hope  of  glory.  The  apostle  now
passes  fi  om  the  general  idea  of  the  reconciliation  in  Christ  of  all  things,  to  its  particular
application  to  the  Colossians.  We  may  allow  the  idea,  by  its  very  vastness  and  grandeur,
to  become  indefinite.  We  need,  therefore,  to  see  its  application  to  the  individual  soul.
Paul  consequently  brings  the  reconciliation  home  to  every  heart.   And  here  we  notice —

I.  The  Colossians'  natural  state.  (Ver.  21.)  They  were  "  alienated,"  and  the
alienation  passed  into  downright  enmity,  which  manifested  itself  in  "  wicked  works."
Not  only  were  they  alienated  from  God,  but  from  one  another  and  even  from  them-
selves. For  sin  is  such  a  separating  power  that  it  not  only  cuts  us  off  from  God  and
from  our  fellow-men,  but  also  from  ourselves,  so  that  we  are  divided  and  dissipated  in
the  faculties  and  energies  of  our  souls.  Hence  we  find  ourselves  incurring,  not  only  the
Divine  anger  and  the  anger  of  our  fellows,  but  we  become  angry  with  ourselves.  It
will  be  seen,  therefore,  that  the  reconciliation  needed  is  a  very  wide  one.

II.  Their  gracious  reconciliation.  (Vers.  22 — 27.)  The  reconciliation  has  been
brought  about  at  no  less  a  cost  than  the  death  of  the  Son  of  God.  It  must  be  precious.
And  now  we  are  to  notice  how  real  it  is.  For  just  as  the  alienation  and  enmity  have
been  towards  God  and  men  and  self,  so  the  reconciliation  brings  us  into  unity  i».i*.h  God,
unity  with  men,  and  unity  with  self.  We  are  reconciled  to  God;  we  are  reconciled  to
cur  fellow-men  ;  we  are  reconciled  to  ourselves.  This  is  secured  by  Christ's  indwelling,
go  that  he  becomes  our  Hope  of  glory  (ver.  27)  and  the  Source  of  that  holiness  and
blauielcssness  which  are  the  characteristics  of  redeemed  men.    Let  UB  look  at  tbif


OH.  1. 1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  46

reconciliation  through  atonement  and  indwelling.  1.  We  are  reconciled  to  Ood  by  it,
I'he  Divine  hatred  to  siu  found  fitting  outlet  iu  the  cross  of  Jesus,  and  in  consequence
Christ's  Spirit  comes  and  dwells  in  the  believer  as  the  Source  and  Fountain  of  a  holy
character.  The  inspired,  Christ-inhabited  soul  becomes  the  object  of  restored  fellowship
and  complacency  ;  God  looks  down  iu  love,  and  he  and  man  are  one.  2.  We  are
reconciled  to  our  fellow  men  by  it.  The  indwelling  Christ  leads  us  to  peace-making,
and  we  refuse  to  continue  at  war  with  those  around  us.  We  rather  rejoice  in  the
assurance  that  the  atonement  and  inspiration  of  Christ  are  intended  to  bring  about
peace  and  concord  among  men.  3.  We  are  reconciled  to  ourselves  by  it.  For  in  siu,
as  we  have  seen,  we  are  divided  and  dissipated;  but  grace  comes  and  we  are  united  to
fear  God's  Name.  We  doubtless  battle  with  our  sins,  but  we  realize  that  this  is  the
way  to  regain  our  true  selves  and  put  internal  discord  away.

III.  Thbib  expected  perseverance  and  perfection.  (Vers.  23 — 28.)  This  faiih
in  Christ,  this  body  of  truth  through  which  we  have  been  brought  into  such  intimate
relations  to  Christ,  is  that  in  which  we  are  grounded  and  settled.  We  expect  to  con-
tinue therein,  and  this  is  the  meaning  of  our  perseverance.  Now,  if  Christ  dwells  within
us  by  liis  Spirit,  our  progress  is  assured  through  his  inspiration,  and  perfection  in  him
i»  the  goal  we  are  to  reach  at  last.  This  perftction  which  Paul  aims  at  for  the  Colos-
sians  is  not  the  imputed  perfection  which  "  completeness  in  hitn  "  implies,  but  the  per-
fection of  sanctification  which  his  inspiration  secures  in  due  season.  Only  thus  are  we
brought  into  complete  harmony  with  the  universe  of  God.

IV.  The  apostle's  painpul  ministry  in  secdrino  this.  (Vers.  24, — ^29.)  As  the
minister  or  servant  of  the  Colossian  Church,  he  had  taken  "  pains  "  to  instruct  them
properly.  In  this  respect  every  good  and  noble  work  is  painful;  unless  we  take  pains
we  cannot  do  it  well.  But  over  and  above  this,  Paul  was  called  upon  to  suffer  special
trials.  He  was  a  prisoner  at  this  time  at  Rome.  He  was  a  suffering  member  in  Christ's
mystical  body.  N(jw,  one  member  often  suffers  in  the  interests  of  other  members.  The
atonement  of  Christ  was  the  suffering  of  the  Head  in  the  interests  of  all  the  members.
In  this  none  of  the  members  can  have  any  share.  But  Christ's  afSiotions  had  a  wider
meaning  than  simply  atonement.  He  was  perfected  in  experience  by  them,  so  as  to  h'>
sympathetic  in  a  degree  impossible  otherwise.  In  this  department  Paul  could  have
fellowship  with  Christ  in  his  sufferings  (Phil.  iii.  10).  Now,  the  Colossians  profited  by
Paul's  sufferings  for  them  at  Rome.  All  his  pain,  all  his  agouizings  for  them,  all  the
devotedness  of  spirit  he  had  manifested  for  them  during  many  years,  went  to  make  up
the  needful  basis  for  their  spiritual  progress.  If  he  had  nut  suliered  as  he  did,  he  could
not  have  composed  these  Epistles  of  the  captivity.  To  this  painful  ministry  all  earnest
souls  are  called.  It  is  part  of  our  heritage,  and  the  experiences  found  within  it  are
altogether  glorious. — R.  M.  E.

Vers.  1,  2. — Address  and  salutation.  It  is  common  to  compare  the  Epistle  to  the
Colossians  with  the  Ei>istle  to  the  Ephesians.  Written  about  the  same  time  (both
conveyed  by  Tychicuis),  there  are  many  coincidences  in  thought.  But  there  is  this
difference — that  the  thought  in  this  Epistle  does  not  centre  round  the  Church  of  Christ
(the  word  occurs  only  twice,  as  compared  with  nine  times  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Eph.  -
sians),  but  ruund  the  Person  of  Christ.  There  is  also  this  difference — that  this  Epistle
has  not  the  catholic  form  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  but  has  a  certain  controver-
sial form,  with  reference  to  the  peculiar  state  of  the  Colossian  Church.  In  order  to
understand  the  Colossian  heresy,  it  is  necessary  to  bear  in  miud  that  the  type  of  religion
to  which  the  Eastern  mind  was  inclined  was  mysticism.  One  feature  was  the  belief  in
a  good  and  a  bad  principle  (Isaiah  "efers  to  them  as  light  and  darkness),  the  latter
having  its  abode  in  matter.  Another  feature  is  the  postulation  of  emanations,  or
intermediate  agencies  between  heaven  and  earth.  This  mysticistn  seems  to  have  had
congenial  soil  in  Phrygia,  to  which  Colosste  belonged.  It  had  an  ascetic  side  (com-
munication with  matter  being  to  be  eschewed),  and,  readily  combining  with  Judaism,
it  formed  JEssinism.  In  the  Galatian  Churches  it  was  Judaism  that  was  sti'ugglin^
to  modify  Christianity.  In  the  Colossian  Church  it  was  rather  this  Essenism  that  was  the
modifying  element.  The  modification  of  Christianity  by  Eastern  philosophy  (its  finding
H  place  for  redemjition  and  the  Person  of  Christ)  was  afterward  known  as  Gnosticism.
L  Addbkss.    1.  The  writers.    "  Paul."    He  ia  the  principal  writer.    The  thought


46  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [ch.  1. 1— 29.

I  ■  — — IM.^-^— ».l      II  ■  ■  ...  I  I  I      —ll.l        I  — IIMII  »■■■  III  I  I     ■         11     ■  '  —

has  a  distinctively  Pauline  character.  We  cannot  mistake  its  coming  from  the  write?
of  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephtsians.  He  has  a  relation  to  two  personalities,  who  are  yet
one  (Jesus  being  the  Christ  of  God).  (1)  His  relation  to  Christ.  "  An  apostle  of
Christ  Jesus."  That  gave  him  unquestionable  authority  in  all  matters  which  he  dis-
cussed. He  gave  the  mind  of  Christ.  He  was  under  the  infallible  direction  of  the
Spirit.  And  his  statements  were  to  be  accepted  in  the  face  of  all  statements  to  the
contrary.  (2)  His  relation  to  Ood.  "  Through  the  will  of  God."  It  was  not  that  he
had  light  in  himself  more  than  any  ordinary  writer.  It  was  simply  that  God  graciously
willed  that  he  should  communicate  the  mind  of  Christ  to  them  and  to  others.  And
that  was  his  support  in  every  word  he  dictated.  "  And  Timothy."  He  is  subordiaated
to  Paul  in  the  writing  of  the  Epistle ;  and  his  personality  is,  after  a  few  introductory
verses,  lost  sight  of.  He  is  brought  into  relation,  not  directly  to  Christ  or  God,  but  to
the  brethren.  "  Our  brother."  A  member  of  the  Christian  brotheihood  Timothy  was.
And  that  really  contained  more  in  it  (title  to  everlasting  life)  than  "  apostle"  by  itself.
"Aposlle"  would  cease,  but  "brother"  would  remain.  Apostle  though  Paul  was,
in  a  brotherly  way  he  consulted  with  Timothy  regarding  the  Church  of  Colossss.  The
ground  of  his  consulting  with  him  would  naturally  be  his  acquaintance  with  that
Church.  That  active  brother,  it  may  be  presumed,  had  ministered  to  them  and  had
won  their  affection.  And  so  Paul  associates  him  with  himself  in  writing  to  Colossae,
that,  beyond  the  "  apostolic,"  there  might  be  the  "  personal,"  in  which  personal  Timothy
was  partly  his  representative.  He  might  expect  to  have  influence  with  Colossse,  when
there  was  both  apostolic  authority  and  personal  affection  combined.  2.  The  persons
addressed.  (1)  Generic  designation.  "  To  the  saints."  The  holy  people  had  formerly
been  those  connected  with  the  holy  land ;  hut  here  were  they,  many  of  them  Gentiles,
receiving  the  ancient  title  of  honour.  (2)  Specific  designation.  "  And  faithful  brethren
in  Christ."  The  corresponding  designation  in  Ephesians  is  "  And  the  faithful  in  Christ
Jesus."  The  apostle  goes  a  point  here  beyond  their  believing,  viz.  to  their  being,  in
virtue  of  their  believing,  a  brotherhood,  and  a  brotherhood  subsisting  in  (as  created  by)
Christ,  therefore  distinctively  the  Christian  brotherhood.  Locality.  "Which  are  at
Colossje."  This  town  was  situated  in  Phrygia,  in  the  interior  of  Asia  Minor.  There
were  three  towns  connected  with  the  valley  of  the  Lycus  (a  tributary  of  the  Mjeander).
Overhanging  the  valley  on  opposite  sides,  and  facing  each  other,  with  the  mountains
rising  behind  and  the  Lycus  flowing  between,  about  six  miles  apart,  were  Laodicea  and
Hierapolis,  the  two  towns  which  are  referred  to  at  the  close  of  this  Epistle.  Further  up
the  river,  and  intersected  by  it,  distant  about  twelve  miles  botli  from  Laodicea  and
Hierapolis,  was  the  third  town  of  Colossse.  With  a  certain  historical  character,  it  wai
the  least  important  place  to  which  any  Epistle  of  Paul's  was  sent.  The  attention  of
the  apostle  was  drawn  to  it  at  the  time  b}-  the  presence  at  Rome  of  two  Colossians —
Epaphras,  who  is  referred  to  in  the  seventh  and  eighth  verses,  and  Onesimus,  the
runaway  slave  about  whom  Paul  writes  in  his  Epistle  to  Philemon.

IL  The  salutation.  1.  The  two  words  of  salutation.  (1)  Qrace.  "  Grace  to  you."
This  is  the  universal  word  of  salutation  in  the  Epistles  which  bear  Paul's  name  (it  ia
wanting  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews).  It  points  to  this— that  we  must  not  look  to
our  friends  being  blessed  on  the  ground  of  their  deservings.  If  they  are  to  be  blessed,
as  we  would  wish  them,  then  there  must  be  the  outflowing  of  Divine  favour  toward
them.  (2)  Peace.  "  And  peace."  This  also  is  the  universal  word  in  salutation  with
Paul.  If  we  were  dealt  with  according  to  our  deservings,  there  would  be  constant
cause  for  dispeace.  But  being  dealt  with  according  to  infinite  grace  (upon  which  we
can  ever  fall  back  under  a  sense  of  our  ill  deservings),  there  should  then  be  a  calming
of  the  mind  and  an  ultimate  complete  deliverance  from  all  disturbing  influences.  2.
Source  to  which  we  look  in  salutation.  "  Prom  God  our  Father."  In  the  Revised  trans-
lation the  usual  addition  is  omitted,  "  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  It  does  not  enter
into  the  plan  of  the  apostle  to  connect  his  thought  with  the  Father  and  the  Spirit  in
this  Epistle,  as  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Bphesians  (they  are  named  twenty-four  times  in
Ephesians,  and  only  six  times  in  Colossians).  But  here  in  the  forefront  prominence  is
given  to  the  Father  (all  the  more  because  of  the  unusual  omivssion)  as  the  original
Source  whence  all  blessings  flow.  The  Divine  fatherhood  (not  apart  from  Christ)  is
the  natural  guarantee  for  provision  being  made  for  ourselves  and  for  our  friends,  for
individuals  and  for  Churches. — B.  F,


CH.I.1— 29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  47

Vers.  3 — 8. — Pauline  Sorites.  L  Thanks9Ivino,  This  forms  a  suitable  intr"duc-
tion  (ia  Ephesians  the  apostle  starts  with  a  sublime  but  less  personal  (inxologi).  1.
The  facts  of  thanksgiving.  There  may  be  said  to  be  two  fUcts,  but  the  other  ii
subordinated  to  this  (which  accordingly  is  assigned  the  fir.st  place),  "  We  jiive  thanlcs
to  God  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  In  this  exercise  Timothy  was  coniuined
with  Paul.  Being  a  thing  about  which  they  were  agreed,  they  could  thank  God,  not
only  separately,  but  unitedly.  This  is  a  holy  partnership  on  which  God  looks  duwu
with  special  pleasure.  Where  did  they  go  to  with  their  thanksgivings  ?  It  was  to  the  •
Fii'st  Source,  through  the  Second  Source.  Our  Lord  as  the  Saviour  anointed  (Jesus
Christ)  dispenses  blessings  ;  but  he  has  got  them  from  the  Father  ("  He  has  received
gifts  for  men  "),  and  therefore  we  trace  them  up,  in  others  as  well  as  in  ourselves,  through
Christ  to  his  Father,  "  Praying  always  for  you."  This  is  stated  to  show  the  abun-
dance of  his  opportunity  for  thanksgiving.  He  was  always  praying  for  the  Colosaian
Church  as  for  other  Churches.  This  was  one  form  which  his  care  for  all  the  Churches
(a  daily  care)  took.  And  .Timothy,  it  seems,  was  not  behindhand,  but  was  copying  the
comprehensiveness  of  his  instructor.  And  as,  in  their  like-mindedness,  they  had  daily
prayers  together,  when  they  came  to  thanksgiving  CoIosssb  was  never  forgotten.  2.
On,  what  their  thanksgiving  was  founded.  "  Having  heard,"  He  (Paul)  was  not
(never  had  been)  an  eye-witness  of  the  Church  at  Colossae,  but  his  ear  was  open  to  all
information  from  that  quarter,  by  Colosstan  visitors,  or  by  special  deputy  (from  him-
self), or  through  less  direct  channels.  Timothy  (with  his  many  movements  and,  W6
may  suppose,  missions  of  inquiry)  had  probably  been  at  Colossas,  but  his  knowledge,
too,  had  been  added  to  by  hearing.  And,  as  the  two  talked  over  matters,  they  found
subject  for  thanksgiving.  It  is  one  reason  for  our  extending;  our  knowledge  of  mis-
sionary operations  (not  confining  them  to  one  spoiety  or  field)  that,  by  doing  so,  wo
get  a  multiplicity  of  subjects  for  thanksgiving,  3.  For  what  specially  they  thanked  God.
(1)  Faith.  "Of  your  faith  in  Christ  Jesus."  It  was  faith  (subjectively)  that  made
them  a  Church.  When  Paul  and  Timothy  thanked  God  for  the  faith  of  the  Colossians,
they  had  in  view  the  activity  of  their  faith.  It  was  not  only  there  (that  is  supposed
in  their  being  addressed  as  "  faithful  brethren  "),  but  it  was  strongly  operating.  The
element  in  which  it  operated,  and  in  which  it  admitted  of  endless  expansion,  was  Christ
.Jesus  (a  saving  element  being  in  him  that  was  inexhaustiblo).  (2)  Love.  "And  of
the  love  which  ye  have  toward  all  the  saints."  Their  love  to  he  thus  signalized  must
have  been  more  than  ordinarily  active.  There  is  a  vague  kind  of  love  which  does  not
amount  to  much.  If  it  is  really  the  Christian  principle  of  love  (of  the  thirteenth
chapter  of  1  Corinthians)  and  if  it  is  sufficiently  active,  it  will  show  itself,  not  only  in
the  absence  of  jealousy,  but  in  the  presence  of  positive  interest.  These  Colossians  did
not  confine  their  affections  within  their  own  circle,  but  let  them  go  out  toward  all  the
saints.  They  acquainted  themselves  with  the  condition  of  otherOhurches,  and  in  many
ways  were  helpful  to  them.  Faith  and  love  are  here  referred  to  generally,  but  when
Paul  and  Timothy  gave  thanks,  they  would  be  able  to  fix  upon  this  and  upon  that  as
evidencing  the  reality  and  vitality  of  their  faith  and  love.

II,  The  love  (which  formed  matter  of  thanksqiving)  was  caused  by  hops.
"  Because  of  the  hope  which  is  laid  up  for  you  in  the  heavens,"  This  hope  had  a  cer-
tain objective  character.  It  was  something  outside  of  them  which  was  safely  laid  past
for  their  future  enjoyment.  At  the  same  time,  it  had  a  certain  subjective  character.
It  was  something  operating  within  their  own  breasts.  They  were  kind  to  the  saints  of
their  day  (without  exception).  Why  ?  Because  they  looked  beyond  the  present.  The
time  would  come  when  (removed  from  under  earthly  conditions)  they  would  meet  them
in  the  heavens.  They  might  get  no  reward  here  (their  catholicity  might  bring  them
persecution),  but  it  would  be  reward  enough  to  see  there  those  whom  they  had  done
ilieir  duty  by,  and  to  receive  from  Christ  words  of  approval.  It  was  because  of  this
liupe,  then  (so  surt-),  that  their  love  flourished.

III.  The  hope  was  communicated  in  the  gospel,  "Whereof  ye  heard  before  in
[he  word  of  the  truth  ot  the  gospel."  We  owe  it  to  God  that  he  has  given  us  "the
ruth  "  (and  the  gifis  of  God  are  without  repentance).     We  may  well  prize  this  gift  of

God  when  we  think  of  the  erroneous  ideas  which  men  (unaided  by  revelation)  have
entertained.  This  is  the  Promethean  fire,  not  stolen,  but,  in  infinite  love,  sent  down
from  heaven.    God  has  placed  us  under  additional  obligation  by  giving  us  the  truth  in


48  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.-        [oh.  1. 1—29,

the  form  of  "the  Word."  Considering  the  conditions  of  language  and  our  earthly
ni;oessities,  this  form  is  perfect.  "  I'he  Law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect."  It  is  an  abiciins;
form.  There  may  be  movements  of  thought  away  from  "the  Law  and  the  testimony,"
but  here  always  is  the  truth  in  the  form  in  which  God  wishes  us  to  have  it,  if  only  wa
can  bring  our  minds  up  to  it.  The  whole  Word  of  truth  is  precious ;  but  there  is  that
which  is  to  be  regarded  as  singularly  precious  (being  singled  out  here),  viz.  the  gospel,
or  the  good  message,  God's  special  message  (of  a  glad  nature),  to  sinners  in  need  of
salvation.  It  was  this  gospel  that  the  Colossians  at  a  former  period  had  heard.  By
this  the  harden  of  their  sin  had  been  removed,  and  the  hope  of  immortality  enkindled
within  them.

IV.   How  THE   GOSPEL    (THROUGH   WHICH   THE   HOPE   WAS   COMMONICATED)   WAB  PBE-

8ENTED.  1.  Thei-e  was  a  general  gospel  movement.  "Which  is  come  unto  you;  even
as  it  is  also  in  all  the  world  bearing  fruit  and  increasing."  The  parting  command  of
the  Master  was,  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  the  whole  creation
[every  creature]."  And  the  command  had  been  carried  out  (as  time  allowed)  in  its
wideness.  The  gospel-trumpet  had  been  heard,  not  merely  in  Palestine,  hut  had  sounded
out  to  all  lands.  And  everywhere  an  efficacy  had  attended  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.
False  foiins  of  religion  are  limited  by  certain  climatic  conditions,  by  certain  tempera-
ments. What  would  do  in  Phrygia  might  not  do  in  Bome.  But  the  gospel  (unmodi-
fied) had  been  proved  to  be  world-wide  in  its'  adaptation,  ailapted  for  Jew  and  Gentile,
for  Eastern  and  Western  alike.  As  the  apostle  represents  it  here,  in  all  the  world  the
gospel-tree  had  been  bearing  fruit  and  increasing.  In  a  healthy  fruit  tree  there  is  a
double  effort  going  on.  There  is  an  effort  after  fruit-producing,  which  is  crowned  when
in  autumn  there  are  seen  the  ripe  apples  or  rich  clusters  of  grapes.  But  at  the  same
time,  there  is  an  effort  after  the  producing  of  more  wood,  which  has  a  view  to  future
fiuifr-produoing.  And  so  with  regard  to  the  gospel  in  the  Church ;  if  it  is  vital,  then
there  will  be  produced  the  fruits  of  righteousness,  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit  (a  rich  cluster)
which  is  described  in  Galatians.  And  not  only  so,  but  there  will  at  the  same  time  be
produced  an  increased  sphere  of  fruit-producing.  And  the  two  processes  can  go  on
without  their  interfering  with  each  other.  The  gospel  in  the  Church  may  be  producing
its  rich  clusters,  and  at  the  same  time  enlarging  the  sphere  where  such  clusters  may
grow.  2.  The  movement  in  CoIosssb  partook  of  the  characteristics  of  the  general  move-
ment. "  As  it  doth  in  you  also."  The  gospel  was  as  a  tree  (on  a  small  scale)  in
Golosese.  And  there,  as  in  all  the  world,  it  was  bearing  fruit  and  increasing.  Three
fruits  have  already  been  mentioned,  these  the  three  Christian  graces — faith,  hope,  and
charity.  And  we  may  gather  from  the  second  word  that  the  numbers  of  Christian
converts  were  increasing  at  Colossse.  And  also  Christians  may  have  gone  forth  from
Colossas  to  spread  the  gospel  in  other  places.  3.  This  was  to  be  accounted  for  by  two
circumstances.  (1)  T%e  gospel  had  been  rightly  presented  to  them.  "  Since  the  day  ye
heard  and  knew  the  grace  of  God  in  truth."  The  movement  is  traced  back  to  its  very
commencement.  He  (the  writer,  Timothy  assenting)  calls  to  mind  the  very  day  when
the  gospel  was  first  preached  to  them.  It  was  a  reil-letter  day  in  the  history  of  Colossas
(though  viewed  differently  by  some  there),  more  famous  than  the  day  when  Xerxes
halted  there  on  his  march  against  Greece,  or  the  day  when  Cyrus  with  his  Greeks
passed  through  it  on  his  march  against  his  brother  at  Babylon.  It  was  really  Christ
entering  the  town,  to  take  possession  of  those  for  whom  he  had  died.  And  no  spurious
gospel  had  been  preached  to  tliem.  There  were  spurious  gospels,  which  consisted  in
cold  moralities  and  rigorous  prohibitions.  But  the  gospel  (the  true  gospel)  which  had
been  preached  to  them  was  the  grace  of  Ood.  It  told  of  salvation  wrought  out,  not  in
answer  to  man's  call,  but  to  satisfy  the  yearnings  of  Divine  love.  It  was  salvation
offered,  not  to  huiaan  merit,  but  freely,  on  the  ground  of  the  infinite  merits  of  the
Saviour.  And  this  gospel  (as  evidence  that  it  had  been  rightly  presented)  they  knew,
from  their  own  consciousness  of  salvation,  to  be  the  truth  of  God.  (2)  The  gospel  had
been  rightly  presented  to  them  by  Epaphras.  "  Even  as  ye  learned  of  Epaphras."  Eii
character  more  generally.  "  Our  beloved  fellow-servant."  He  was  a  servant  of  Christ
(ready  to  go  anywhere  at  the  Master's  bidding).  That  was  his  general  fitness  for  ser-
vice. That  was  what  Paul  and  Timothy  were  as  well  as  he.  For  he  is  called  their
"fellow-servant."  And  he  was  a  fellow-servant  whom  they  had  learned  to  regard  with
the  warmest  affection.    His  character  with  special  reference  to  the  Church  at  Colossie,


CH.  1.1— 29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   COLOSSIANS.  ■*»

"  Who  is  a  faithful  minister  of  Christ  on  our  behalf."  He  represented  Christ  in  niinis-
teiing  the  gospel  atColossae;  and  testimony  is  borne  to  his  having  faithfully  repre-
sented him.  Ha  had  not  shrunk  from  declaring  unto  them  the  whole  counsel  of  God.
He  had  preached  unto  them  grace  which,  while  free,  bore  good  fruit.  We  may,  there-
fore, regard  him  (and  not  Paul  directly)  as  the  founder  of  the  Cohssian  Church.  At
the  same  time,  he  represented  Paul  (and  his  coadjutors).  He  was  acting  on  their
behalf.  There  were  friendly  relations  between  Colossas  and  Ephesus.  In  connection
with  the  sojourn  of  the  apostle  for  three  j'ears  at  that  Asian  centre,  it  is  said  tliat  "  all
they  which  dwelt  in  Asia  heard  the  Word  of  the  Lord,  both  Jews  and  Greeks."  Among
those  who  had  occasion  to  visit  Ephesus  during  that  period,  and  were  led  to  hear  the
Word,  was  probably  Epaphras.  Converted  by  the  apostle,  we  can  understand  him
charged  by  him  to  preach  the  gospel  at  his  native  Colossee.  And  thus,  though  Paul
had  never  visited  Colossse,  yet  he  claimed  an  interest  in  the  Church  as  having  led  to
its  formation,  in  having  given  them  Epaphras.

V.  Epaphras  conveyed  to  Eome  the  tidings  of  theie  love  (fob  which  God  was
thanked).  "  Who  also  declared  unto  us  your  love  in  the  Spirit."  He  not  only  had
conveyed  the  gospel  from  them  to  the  Colossians,  but  had  also  conveyed  to  them  now
at  Rome  the  tidings  of  their  love.  It  was  the  love  for  which  God  was  thanked,  and  it
is  here  characterized  as  "in  the  Spirit"  (one  of  the  two  references  to  the  Spirit  in  an
Epistle  which  is  largely  taken  up  with  the  Person  of  Christ).  It  was  a  love  within
that  sphere  in  which  the  Spirit  works  (and  wide  as  it),  and  sustained  by  the  Spirit.
Epaphras  had  acted  a  kindly  part  toward  them.  In  giving  an  account  of  matters
relating  to  the  Colossian  Church,  he  had  not  concealed  wliat  was  to  their  credit.  The
whole  of  the  allusion  to  Epaphras  (so  honourable  to  him)  was  fitted  and  intended  to
establish  his  influence  at  Colossa,  which  may  have  been  shaken  by  false  teachers.
1'his  paragraph,  so  remarkable,  bears  a  resemblance  in  form  to  the  Sorites  in  logic.  It
is  a  series  of  propositions,  in  which  the  predicate  of  one  becomes  the  subject  of  the
next,  and  in  which  in  the  last  there  is  a  reference  hack  to  the  first.  The  propositions
are  these :  1.  We  thank  God  especially  for  your  love.  2.  Your  love,  for  which  we
thank  God,  was  caused  by  hope.  3.  The  hope,  which  caused  your  love,  was  commuci-
cated  in  the  gospel.  4.  The  gospel,  which  communicated  the  hope,  was  rightly  presented
by  Epaphras.  5.  Epaphras,  who  rightly  presented  the  gospel,  gave  us  tidings  of  your
love  (for  which  we  thank  God).  These  propositions  (if  with  some  loss  of  clearness,
yet  with  gain  of  force)  are  (with  considerable  detail)  all  compacted  by  the  apostle  into
one  unbroken  paragraph. — B.  P.

Vers.  9 — 23. — Prayer  leading  up  to  the  Person  of  Christ.  I.  Making  request.  1.
Impulse  under  which  request  was  made  for  the  Colossians.  "  For  this  cause  we  also,  since
the  day  we  heard  it,  do  not  cease  to  pray  and  make  request  for  you."  It  was  formerly
praying  and  giving  thanks ;  it  is  now  praying  and  making  request.  (1)  It  was  an  impulse
with  a  sufficient  cause,  viz.  the  same  which  led  to  the  thanksgiving.  It  was  an  impulse,
not  founded  on  fiction,  but  on  matter  of  fact,  on  well-accredited  testimony.  Information
received  regarding  the  faith  and  love  of  the  Colossians  had  led  to  praying  and  thanking
God  on  their  behalf.  This  information  also  (such  is  the  force  of  "  also,"  it  is  wrong  to
connect  it  with  "  we  ")  led  to  praying  and  making  request  on  their  behalf.  (2)  /*  was  a
united  imjmlse.  Wo ;  i.e.  Paul  and  Timothy.  So  that  here  it  is  literally  the  carrying
out  of  the  Lord's  words,  "  If  two  of  you  shall  agree  on  earth,  as  touching  anything
that  they  shall  ask,  it  shall  be  done  for  them  of  my  Father  which  is  in  heaven."  (8)  It
was  a  well-sustuined  impulse.  It  did  not  spend  itself  in  a  day  (as  is  sometimes  the
case) ;  but,  commencing  with  the  day  when  the  first  hearing  had  taken  place,  it  had
continued  without  interruption  and  was  still  operative.  How  much,  then,  did  all  this
represent  of  availing  prayer,  of  influence  going  forth  on  behalf  of  the  Colossian
Church!  Blessed  is  the  Church  that  has  two  such  men  from  day  to  day  mingling
their  prayers  together  in  its  interest.  2.  For  what  request  was  made.  (1)  For  know-
ledge. There  is  the  same  notable  petition  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  and  in  the
Epistle  to  the  Philippians.  'J'here  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  apostle  was  the  friend  of
enlightenment.  If  ignorance  is  the  mother  of  superstition,  then  knowledge  is  the
mother  of  true  religion,  (a)  It  is  a  request  for  progressive  knowledge.  "  That  ye  may
be  filled  with  the  knowledge."  We  s^re  4ot  bofn  with  our  wiftds  full  of  knowledge,
COfcOBSfANP,  S  I


50  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa  [oh.  1. 1—29.

Bather  are  our  minds  like  empty  vessels  that  need  to  be  filled.  There  5s  our  capacity
of  knowing,  over  against  the  vastness  of  the  knowable.  This  filling  process  begios
soon,  and  the  prayer  is  that  it  may  go  on  toward  fulness.  (6)  It  is  a  request  for  the
progressive  knowledge  of  God's  will.  "  Of  his  will."  This  is  very  wide  as  it  stands.
It  is  by  his  will  that  things  have  been  made  as  they  are  made.  And,, therefore,  this
may  be  taken  as  a  prayer  for  the  advance  of  science.  It  is  not  by  his  will  that  he
is,  or  that  he  is  love,  or  that  there  is  a  distinction  between  right  and  wrong.  But
it  is  his  will  that  we  should  justly  conceive  of  him,  and  that  we  should  act  in  a  manner
consistent  with  his  holy  character.  It  is  by  his  will  that  Christ  became  our  Substitute
and  died  for  our  salvation.  And  it  is  his  will  that  we  should  believe  on  Christ,  and,  as
we  shall  presently  see,  take  «fter  him  in  our  characters,  (c)  It  is  a  request  for  the
progressive  knowledge  of  God's  will  within  the  spiritual  sphere.  "In  all  spiritual
wisdom  and  understanding."  In  Ephesians  "  wisdom  "  is  conjoined  with  "  prudence ; "
here  it  is  conjoined  with  "  understanding."  We  are  happily  in  the  position  of  having
exact  definitions  of  these  three  words.  Aristotle,  in  hie  '  Nioomachean  Ethics,'  treats  of
them  at  length.  All  are  characterized  as  intellectual  virtues.  "  Wisdom  "  is  conversant
with  universals,  or  things  eternal  and  immutable.  "  Prudence  "  and  "  understanding  "  are
conversant  with  particulars,  or  details,  or  applications  of  principles  or  things  about  which
deliberation  is  needed.  Prudence  is  practical  (has  to  do  with  lines  of  action,  what
is  to  be  done  or  not  to  be  done).  Understanding  is  critical  (has  to  do  with  processes  of
thought,  how  things  are  to  be  viewed  or  not  to  be  viewed).  This  account  of  the  three
wor(£  is  quite  in  accordance  with  Pauline  usage.  "  Wisdom  "  has  evidently  with  Paul
to  do  with  the  everlasting  verities — the  character  of  God,  the  principles  of  his  govern-
ment, the  mystery  of  redemption.  And  "understanding"  has  to  do  with  subjects  of
thought  which  admit  of  doubt  and  which  have  to  be  presented  in  their  relations  to
the  great  entities.  And  his  wisdom  and  understanding  are  of  the  spiritual  kind,  such
as  unspiritual  men  are  strangers  to.  There  must  be  a  penetrating  with  the  Spirit  if  we
would  rightly  apprehend  eternal  principles  and  understand  their  application  to  subjects
that  come  up  for  consideration.  And  it  is  this  that  is  asked  for  the  Colossians  as
necessary  for  the  filling  with  the  knowledge  (the  clear,  certain,  experimental  know-
ledge) of  God's  will.  (2)  For  the  Christian  form  of  character.  This  is  emphatically
here  the  will  of  God,  the  knowledge  of  which  is  asked,  (a)  Generally.  It  is  a  request
for  a  worthy  Ohristicm  walk.  " To  walk  worthily  of  the  Lord."  Chiist  is  Lord ;  we
are  his  servants.  And  we  are  like  those  servants  whose  ears  were  bored,  as  bound  to
serve  this  Master  for  ever.  He  is  no  common  Master ;  for  (in  connection  with  his
doing  of  God's  will)  it  is  said  that  his  ears  were  bored.  Conduct  worthy  of  him,  then,
how  shall  we  get  the  conception  of  it,  and,  when  we  have  got  the  conception,  put  it
into  execution  ?  "  Unto  all  pleasing."  It  is  implied  in  this  language  that  he  is  unin-
terruptedly observant  of  our  conduct,  and  that  he  forms  an  estimate  of  it  as  we
proceed — an  estimate  which  must  be  according  to  truth.  It  is  implied  also  that,  if
we  would  bring  our  conduct  up  to  what  is  worthy  of  Christ,  we  must  seek  his  universal
approval,  we  must  seek  to  please  him  in  every  moment  that  we  live,  in  every  step
that  we  take,  (ft)  Under  a  special  aspect,  (a)  It  is  a  request  for  progressive  fruitful-
ness  following  upon  progressive  knowledge.  "  Bearing  fruit  in  every  good  work,  and
increasing  in  the  knowledge  of  God."  It  it  better  to  read,  "  by  the  knowledge  of  God."
The  advantage  of  this  translation  (which  is  grammatically  correct)  is  that  "knowledge"
is  used  as  before,  viz.  as  that  which  leads  to  good  conduct  as  its  fruit.  There  is  a
taking  up  here  of  language  which  has  already  been  employed.  It  was  said  that  the
gospel-tree  was  bearing  fruit  and  increasing  in  Colossaj  as  in  all  the  world.  Now,
Christians  are  trees,  whose  fruit  is  every  good  work.  A  work  is  good  which  has  Chris-
tian principle  in  it.  If  for  the  sake  of  Christ  we  are  industrious,  eager  to  learn,  con-
tented, slow  to  anger,  humble,  ready  to  give  up  what  is  hurtful, — then  we  are  fruitful
in  good  works.  Especially  are  we  fruitful  in  good  works  if,  after  the  example  and  for
the  sake  of  Christ,  we  live  for  the  good  of  others,  try  to  make  all  around  us  happy,  are
kind  to  the  poor,  pity  the  sinful.  If  a  tree  is  in  a  healthy  state,  it  not  only  bears
fruit,  but  increases  (in  wood)  so  that  it  bears  more  fruit  another  year.  So,  if  we  are  in
a  healthy  spiritual  state,  we  shall  not  only  bear  fruit,  but  as  we  go  on  in  life  we  shall
increase  (in  quality  of  being,  in  aptitude)  so  that  we  ever  bring  forth  more  fruit.  Tliis
progressive  IruitlulneM  i»  brought  about  by  the  IfnowUd^e  o/  Qo<i,  whipb  bt^a  already


CH.1. 1— 29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN3.  81

been  characterized  as  progressive.  The  more  we  get  into  our  minds  of  Divine  truth,
the  fuller  our  knowledge  of  God,  the  richer  will  be  the  fruit  which  we  produce.  (/3)  It
is  a  request  for  increased  strength.  "  Strengthened  with  all  power,  according  to  the
might  jf  his  glory,  unto  all  patience  and  long-suffering  with  joy."  If  a  tree  is  to  bear
fruit,  it  must  be  supplied  with  nourishment.  So,  if  we  are  to  produce  every  good  work,
we  must  be  strengthened  by  God.  The  measure  according  to  which  strength  can  be  sup-
plied is  infinite.  It  is  "  according  to  the  might  of  his  glory."  "  Might "  is  an  attribute
of  the  glorious  majesty  of  God.  "  God  hath  spoken  once ;  twice  have  I  heard  this,  that
power  belongeth  unto  God."  Power  can  be  communicated  from  this  source  to  us.  We
have  already  been  strengthened  with  some  power,  but  we  need  to  ask  for  ourselves,
and  others  need  to  ask  for  us,  that  we  may  be  strengthened  with  more  power.  We
need  to  be  strengthened  in  prosperity  to  make  a  right  use  of  our  powers ;  but  especially
do  we  need  to  be  strengthened  in  times  of  trial  unto  all  patience  and  long-suffering.
"  Patience,"  in  so  far  aa  it  is  to  be  distinguished  from  "  long-suffering,"  has  reference  to
trials  as  laid  upon  us  by  God.  "  Long-suffering,"  in  so  far  as  it  is  to  be  distinguished
from  "  patience,"  has  reference  to  trials  caused,  and  as  caused  by  others.  We  never  need
to  bear  with  God,  we  have  to  bear  up  under  what  he  (directly  or  indirectly)  lays  upon
us ;  but  we  have  to  bear  with  others  who  are  unreasonable  or  do  us  injury.  And  the
power  communicated  from  the  Divine  glory  is  efficient  to  make  us  endure  with  joy.
This  is  the  Christian,  as  distinguished  from  the  mere  Stocial,  relation  to  sufferings.  We
can  rise  in  triumph  over  our  sufferings.  "  Let  us  also,"  says  the  apostle,  "  rejoice  in
our  tribulations."  "  In  the  world  ye  have  tribulation ;  but  be  of  good  cheer,  I  have
overcome  the  world."  (y)  It  is  a  request  for  thmkfidness.  Alike  in  prosperity  and  In
adversity,  we  have  three  causes  for  joy,  for  which  we  pour  out  our  souls  in  gratitude,
(i.)  Thankfulness  for  the  loving  purpose  of  Ood.  "  Giving  thanEs  unto  the  Father,
who  made  us  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light."  This  is
not  a  meetening  for  heaven  in  the  way  of  holy  habits.  The  words  cannot  bear  that
interpretation  which  is  commonly  put  upon  them.  The  historical  parallel  is  to  be  kept
in  view.  The  Jews  had  their  allotment  (it  is  literally  here  "  the  portion  of  the  lot,"  i.e.
the  portion  which  fell  to  them  by  lot)  in  the  land  of  Canaan.  God  counted  it  a  meet
thing  (so  we  would  translate)  that  they  should  have  this  allotment.  This  was,  in
point  of  time,  antecedent  to  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  which  is  referred  to  in  the
next  verse.  It  was  true  that  in  Abraham  God  counted  it  a  meet  thing  that  they,  his
descendants,  should  possess  the  land  of  Canaan.  So  for  us  saints,  i.e.  the  successors  of
the  holy  people  (not  merely  Jewish  Christians,  but  Gentile  Christians,  who  are  referred
to  at  the  close  of  this  paragraph),  there  is  in  store  an  allotted  inheritance.  This  is  to
be  in  the  world  of  light  (when  the  shadows  have  fled  away,  when  the  light  of  God
is  all-penetrative),  and  with  this  in  prospect  there  would  need  to  be  a  meetening,  in
the  expelling  of  all  impurity,  of  all  darkness,  from  our  natures.  But  still  it  is  true
that  this  was  the  loving  purpose  of  God  from  all  eternity.  The  Father  (it  was  his
love  that  was  at  the  root  of  it)  counted  it  a  meet  thing  in  Christ  that  we  should  be
partakers  of  the  inheritance  in  light.  And  thus  what  is  expanded  and  made  promi-
n  ent  in  Ephesians  regarding  the  purpose  of  God,  we  have  here  in  brief  and  incidentally.
(ii.)  Thankfulness  for  the  delivertmce  effected  in  Christ.  "  Who  delivered  us  out  of
the  power  of  darkness,  and  translated  us  into  the  kingdom  of  the  Son  of  his  love."
The  historical  parallel  is  still  kept  up.  Egypt  was,  to  the  Israelites,  a  house  of  bondage.
They  were  under  power,  not  power  in  its  purity,  power  in  the  service  of  light,  but
power  in  the  service  of  darkness — ^harsh,  oppressive  power.  But  out  of  that  they  were
brought  with  a  strong  arm,  and  were  translated  into  a  new  orderly  state  of  things,
which  is  expressed  by  the  word  "kingdom"  (the  theocracy).  So  there  is  an  Egypt  behind
us  all.  Sin  was  the  tyranny  of  darkness.  But  the  Father  effected  for  us  a  deliverance.
How  it  was  effected  is  not  stated  here.  But,  to  carry  out  the  historical  parallel,  it  was
by  the  sacrifice  of  the  Son  of  his  love.  The  power  of  darkness  came  upon  him  in  all
its  horrors.  He  was  the  Firstborn,  slain  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  that  Israel  might
escape.  And  this  deliverance  involved  a  complete  changing  of  our  state.  It  was  a
bringing  us  in  Christ  into  a  true  kingdom,  a  kingdom  presided  over  by  Christ,  a  king-
dom whose  law  is  love,  (iii.)  Thankfulness  for  the  enjoyment  <f  redemption.  "In
whom  we  have  our  redemption,  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins,"  We  are  yet  in  oui
wilderaegs  state;  we  have  not  corns  to  our  full  redemption,  to  our  possessioa  of  t]i«


52  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [ch.  1. 1— 29.

lot.  But  we  have  the  feeling  of  emancipation.  We  have  the  first  and  characteristia
blessing  of  redemption,  viz.  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins.  We  feel  happy  in  the  enjoy-
ment of  the  Divine  favour.  And  that  is  only  part  of  the  redemption  we  have  here.
For,  as  is  brought  out  in  Ephesians,  we  have  the  Spirit  as  the  Earnest  of  the  inheritance.
We  have  thus,  under  all  circumstances,  causes  for  thankfulness  to  God ;  and  therefore
prayer  may  always  go  up  for  this.

II.  The  Person  of  Christ.  1.  In  relation  to  the  wniverse.  His  having  the  pre-
eminence. (1)  At  arising  out  of  his  relation  to  the  Father.  "  Who  [i.e.  the  Son  of
his  love]  is  the  Image  of  the  invisible  God,  the  Firstborn  of  all  creation."  First  part
of  the  designation.  Image  is  to  be  distinguished  from  mere  liiieness.  There  is  a  lil<e-
ness  between  members  of  the  same  family,  but  the  parental  features  are  imaged  in  the
child.  In  "  image  "  there  is  the  idea  of  derivation  from  an  original.  So  it  is  not  mere
likeness  that  is  predicated  of  the  First  and  Second  Persons  of  the  Godhead ;  but  God
is  represented  (imperfectly,  we  may  believe)  as  the  original,  and  Clirist  as  the  copy.
In  1  Cor.  xi.  7  man  is  said  to  be  the  image  of  God,  so  that  this  way  of  designating  the
Second  Person  does  not  necessarily  imply  his  divinity.  At  the  same  time,  it  may  be
employed  in  consistency  with  his  divinity,  if  (admitting  the  mystery  of  the  relation-
ship, viz.  that  one  should  be  original  or  prototype,  and  another  copy  or  impress)  we
think  of  him  as  the  perfect  Image  of  God.  The  designation  "  invisible  "  is  here  applied
to  God,  and  when  Christ  is  said  to  be  the  Image  of  the  invisible  God,  the  apparent
meaning  is  that  the  essential  idea  of  his  existence  is  that  he  is  Ood  manifest,  and
that  antecedent  to  his  being  Ood  manifest  in  the  flesh.  From  aU  eternity  he  manifests,
is  in  visible  form,  that  God  whom  no  man  hath  seen  nor  can  see.  And  this,  as  we  shall
presently  see,  accounts  for  his  connection  with  the  work  of  creation.  Second  part  oj
the  designation.  He  is  "the  Firstborn  of  all  creation."  As  we  must  first  think  of
original  and  then  of  copy,  so  we  must  first  think  of  Father  and  then  of  Son.  The
Father  is  imaged  in  the  Son.  In  relation  to  the  Father,  the  Second  Person  is  strictly
the  Only-begotten.  The  firstborn  has  always  reference  to  some  coming  after.  Christ
is  the  "  Firstborn  "  among  many  brethren,  i.e.  Brother  leading  others  after  him.  He  is
styled  in  this  passage  "  the  Firstborn  from  the  dead,"  i.e.  the  first  to  rise  from  the  dead
himself,  and  bringing  others  after  him.  If  the  expression  had  been  "  the  first-created  of
creation,"  the  Arian  interpretation  (Christ's  creatureliness)  might  have  been  pressed.
But  there  is  an  expression  used  which  seems  to  make  Christ  stand  out  from  all  creation,
as  not  created  himself,  but  born.  If  it  had  been  Christ's  relation  to  the  Father  that
had  been  solely  in  question,  the  expression  would  probably  have  been  not  "  bom,"  but
"  begotten "  (only  begotten).  But  it  is  rather  Christ's  relation  to  all  tliat  might  be
thought  of  as  in  the  family.  And  therefore  the  ordinary  woid  in  such  a  relation  is
used,  "firstborn"  (as  distinguished  from  after-born  by  same  mother).  And  it  is  intended
to  bring  out  emphatically  the  thought  that  he  has  the  rights  of  the  firstborn.  Philo
had  applied  the  name  "First-begotten"  (relative  to  Father)  to  the  Logos.  But  the
Messianic  name  was  "  Firstborn  "  (relative  to  other  members  of  a  family).  "  I  wUl  make
him  my  Firstborn,  higher  than  the  kings  of  the  earth  "  (Ps.  Ixxxix.  27).  Kings  of  the
earth,  by  virtue  of  primogeniture,  are  placed  over  their  portions  of  the  earth.  As  God's
Firstborn,  Christ  is  higher,  as  absolutely  placed  over  all  creation.  (2)  As  arising  out
of  his  causal  relation  to  the  universe,  (a)  Conditional  cause.  "  For  in  him  w  ere  all
things  created,  in  the  heavens  and  upon  the  eanh,  things  visible  and  things  invisible,
whether  thrones,  or  dominions,  or  principalities,  or  powers."  We  are  taught  here,  in
opposition  to  the  Arian  idea,  that  Christ  stood  out  from  all  things  created  as  their
Cause.  He  is  thus  placed  in  a  different  category  from  creation.  As  Cause,  he  was  very
closely  connected  with  creation.  There  seems  to  be  a  catching  up  of  the  thought  that
he  is  essentially  the  Manifester  of  God.  In  him,  as  such,  creation  had  its  origin.  God
is  manifested  (conies  out  of  invisibility)  in  creation.  "  For  the  invisible  things  of  him
since  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly  seen,  being  perceived  through  the  things
that  are  made,  even  his  everlasting  power  and  divinity."  If,  then,  it  was  to  be  made
to  appear  (outside  of  Godhead)  what  God  was  in  his  wisdom,  power,  goodness,  to  whom
did  this  belong  but  to  the  Second  Person?  It  was  in  him  as  Manifester  that  it
necessarily  inhered.  There  was  an  emphatic  universality  connected  with  his  work  of
creating.  In  him  were  all  things  (equivaknt  to  the  universe)  created.  But,  as  if  that
^ere  iiot  enough,  a  pomprehensive  division  is  added ;  "  in  the  heavens  and  upon  tit*


CH.i.  1— 29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSlANS.  58

earth."  As  if  this,  again,  were  not  enough,  a  different  division  (for  stars  are  in  the
heavens  and  visible,  the  human  spirit  is  upon  the  earth  and  invi^ible),  but  an  equally-
comprehensive  division,  is  added :  "  things  visible  and  things  iuvisible."  As  if  these  two
divisions  in  locality  were  not  enough,  essences  are  next  brought  in,  but  not  all  essences,
only  the  highest — angelic  beings,  that  might  be  thought  of  as  in  rivalry  with  the  Son  :
"  whether  thrones, or  dominions,  or  principalities,  or  powers."  Great  prominence  was  given
in  Jewish  speculations  to  the  not  very  profitable  subject  of  the  grades  of  the  celestial
hierarchy.  These  speculations  were  mixed  up  with  the  non-soriptural  doctrine  of  seven
heavens.  And  Judaizing  Christians  speculated  in  the  same  line.  These  angels  became
the  intermediate  beings  of  Eastern  theosophy.  The  idea  was  that,  matter  being  the
evil  principle,  God  could  not  create  it  immediately.  But  there  was  a  descending  scale
from  God  to  matter.  God  created  a  being  at  a  certain  renaove  from  himself.  This
first-created  being  created  another,  still  further  removed ;  and  so  it  went  on,  till  one
was  created  far  enough  down  to  create  matter.  It  is  quite  likely,  from  the  reference
afterward  to  the  worshipping  of  angels,  that  in  Colossse  there  was  danger  of  the  idea
gaining  ground  that  the  angels  in  their  several  grades  were  to  be  regarded,  in  the  light
of  Eastern  theosophy,  as  beings  having  to  do  with  creation,  and  on  that  ground  to  be
worshipped.  The  apostle  certainly  clears  the  whole  ground  here  for  the  Colossians.
He  does  not  profess  to  know  what  the  several  grades  are.  He  gives  the  common  (not
the  inspired)  names  with  a  certain  impatience  (as  associated  with  much  that  was  rask).
But  this  he  asserts  that,  whatever  they  are,  they  have  nothing  to  do  with  creating.
In  him  all  of  them,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  were  created.  No  part  of  creation
was  the  work  of  an  inferior  angel,  but  every  part  of  it  was  immediately  in  him.  (J))
Instrumental  cause.  "  All  things  have  been  created  through  liim."  Creation  can  be
ascribed  to  God,  as  it  is  in  Rom.  xi.  36.  But  it  is  true  that  God  never  acts
im  mediately ;  he  always  acts  through  the  agency  of  the  Son.  New  Testament  language
is  very  explicit  on  this  subject.  "All  things  were  made  by  him  [the  Word],  and
without  him  was  not  anything  made  that  was  made."  "  Through  whom  [his  Son]  also
he  made  the  worlds."  So  here  the  present  (no  longer  the  past)  fact  of  creation  is
attributed  to  the  instrumentality  of  the  Son.  And  this  is  not  the  passive  instrumen-
tality the  Alexandrian  Jew  thought  of  in  attributing  creation  to  the  Logos.  Neither
is  the  agent  in  creation  the  dark,  hard,  limited  demiurge  of  the  Gnostics ;  but  he  is
distinctly  a  Divine  Person,  One  who  with  an  intelligence,  with  an  interest,  with  »
plastic  power,  that  are  all  infinite,  has  done  his  work,  (c)  Final  cause.  "  And  unto
him."  One  Agent  and  one  End;  so  the  Christian  doctrine  of  creation  proceeds.  And
how  grandly  does  it  rise  above  all  mere  human  speculations  about  creation  1  Why  has
this  totality  been  brought  into  existence?  There  are  suburdinate  ends  which  are
served  by  the  various  parts.  A  plant  has  an  end  in  its  own  development  and  fruit-
bearing.  It  has  an  end  beyond  that,  in  its  service  to  man  and  t6  beast.  Man — the
microcosm,  as  he  has  been  called — has  an  end  in  his  own  development.  He  has  an  end
beyond  himself,  in  the  mastering  of  the  world.  And  each  member  of  the  race  has  an
end  in  helping  the  development  of  his  neighbour.  But  when  we  think  of  the  presence
of  so  much  evil,  we  still  ask — Why  have  we  and  all  things  been  made?  It  is  a
satisfaction  to  have,  as  the  answer,  that  the  one  reason  which  determined  the  existence
of  the  whole,  as  the  one  Bringer  into  existence,  is  Christ  as  the  Manifestation  of  God.
It  was  no  cold  necessity,  it  was  the  Son,  who  is  here  the  subject,  freely,  filially,  and  in
view  of  all  that  now  exists  to  mar  creation,  bringing  out  what  was  in  the  heart  of  the
Divine  Father.  And  in  that  answer,  here  given,  faith  can  rest,  (d)  Pre-existent  cause.
"  And  he  is  before  all  things."  It  was  very  necessary  clearly  to  think  of  Christ  as  pre-
existent  to  his  incarnation.  Christ  himself  said  in  memorable  words, "  Before  Abraham
was,  I  am."  His  pre-existence  is  here  carried  forward  to  a  much  earlier  point.  There
is  that  totality  now  which  is  called  the  universe.  The  time  was  when  there  was  nothing
outside  of  God.  There  were  no  materials  lying  from  all  eternity  (as  some  have  vainly
imagined)  out  of  which  a  universe  could  be  constructed.  There  were  no  germs  out  of
which  a  universe  could  be  developed.  There  was  simply  the  creative  energy  of  the
Word,  who  had  himself  to  create  all  the  materials  and  germs  of  things.  We  have,  then,
to  go  back  to  him  as  the  pre-existent  Creator.  And  not  only  was  he  before  all  things ;
but,  as  it  is  here  put,  he  is  (absolutely  exists)  before  all  things.  For  time  itself  is  his
creation ;  and  before  it,  and  outside  of  it,  he  iu  himself  exists.    («)  FermwMwt  mum.


84  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.         [cat  1—29.

"  And  in  him  all  things  consist."  But  for  him,  all  things  would  fall  asunder  and  go
back  into  nothingness.  There  are  laws,  indeed,  which  regulate  and  give  stability  to
things;  but  these  laws  subsist  in  Christ,  are  non-existent  out  of  him.  His  continued
existence  is  really  the  guarantee  for  the  sun  rising  every  morning.  It  will  rise  so  long
as  he,  who  made  it,  has  an  end  in  its  rising.  And  all  things  have  consi.stence  and  (er-
sistence  only  in  his  existence  and  in  his  ends.  There  is  no  other  basis  on  which
things  can  proceed  toward  the  consummation.  2.  In  relation  to  the  Ghurch.  (1)  Eis
headship  over  the  Church.  "  And  he  [who  has  the  pre-eminence  in  the  universe]  is  the
Head  of  the  body,  the  Church."  As  Christ,  as  God's  Firstborn,  has  rights  over  all
creation,  so  has  he  the  headship  over  the  Church.  In  Eph.  i.  22,  23  the  thought  turns
more  on  the  Church  as  the  body  of  Christ;  here  it  turns  more  on  Christ  as  the  Head.
Through  the  brain,  in  its  connection  with  the  nerves,  the  mind  can  be  present  in  all
the  body;  so  Christ  is  present  in  all  the  members  of  the  Church.  From  the  brain  as  a
centre  the  movements  of  the  body  can  be  originated,  guided,  combined,  controlled ;  so
fiom  Christ  as  a  Centre  the  movements  of  the  Church  are  originated,  guided,  combined,
controlled.  This  domination  of  the  brain,  being  so  complete,  is  well  fitted  to  set  forth
the  supremacy  of  Christ  over  the  Church.  (2)  A$  arising  out  of  his  relation  to  the
Churdi.  (a)  Originating  cause.  "Who  is  [seeing  he  is]  the  Beginning."  He  gives
origin  to  the  Church.  It  belonged  to  Christ,  as  the  Manifester  of  God,  to  bring  the
universe  into  existence ;  so  it  belongs  to  Christ,  as  the  Manifester  of  God,  to  bring  the
Church  into  existence.  The  connection  is  very  close.  It  is  as  though  we  created  and
then  guided  and  controJled  the  movements  of  our  body.  A  king  rules  over  those  with
whose  existence  he  has  had  very  little  connection.  Christ  in  the  Church  rules  and  by
strongest  fight  over  those  whom  he  has  created  and  again  created.  (5)  Inaugurating
cause.  "  The  Firstborn  from  the  dead."  It  is  difficult  to  get  a  word  to  express  the
whole  meaning.  There  is  this  idea — that  he  exists  in  that  in  which  he  operates.  He
is  the  great  Energizer  incarnate.  And  as  incarnate  (in  the  carrying  out  of  his  work)
he  was  numbered  among  the  dead.  But  he  rose  from  the  dead,  the  possessor  of  a  new
life.  He  is  not  only  the  possessor  of  a  new  life  himself,  but  he  is  regenerative  cause
to  those  that  come  after  him.  As  regenerative  cause  to  those  that  come  after,  he  has
the  right  of  the  Firstborn  over  them.  Thus  is  his  authority  established  in  the  Church
as  in  the  universe.  3.  Combination.  (1)  His  heing  Mediator  in  both  spheres,  "  That
in  all  things  he  might  have  the  pre-eminence."  There  was  dualism  (a  good  and  a  bad
principle)  at  the  root  of  the  doctrine  of  intermediate  beings  or  angelic  mediators.  The
apostle  teaches  the  existence  of  one  Mediator  presiding  over  the  two  spheres — the
universe  and  the  Church.  This  is  a  cardinal  point  in  the  Christology  of  the  New
Testament.  There  are  some  who  have  mistakenly  or  confusedly  the  idea  that  it  is
God  in  nature  and  Christ  in  the  Church.  It  is  really  Christ  in  both,  as  the  Mediator
of  God.  He  mediated  in  creation  before  he  mediated  in  redemption.  It  belongs  to
the  very  idea  of  liis  being  to  be  Mediator.  This  absolute  pre-eminence  of  Christ
implies  a  unity  of  meaning,  a  harmony  of  working,  between  the  two  spheres.  It  is
comforting  so  far  as  the  universe  is  concerned.  For  it  implies  that  we  are  as  in
a  Christian  temple.  It  is  our  Saviour  who  is  working  around  us.  We  can  feel  ttiat
there  is  behind  all  works  of  creation,  not  iron  law,  but  infinite  love— the  love  that  bkd
on  Calvary.  It  is  comforting  so  far  as  the  Church  is  concerned.  For  it  implies,  as  is
taught  in  Ephesians,  that  all  things  can  be  placed  at  the  service  of  the  Church.  All
the  forms  of  things  (even  the  evil  forms)  are  for  the  education  of  the  Church.  All  the
products  of  the  earih  are  for  the  support  of  the  Church.  The  worldly  powers  are  con-
trolled for  the  Church.  The  very  stars  in  their  courses  fight  for  the  Church.  (2)  Bis
qualifications  as  Mediator.  "  For  it  was  the  good  pleasure  of  the  Father  that  in  him
should  all  the  fulness  dwell."  In  the  fact  of  Christ  being  Mediator  there  is  implied  a
certain  subordination,  his  being  Second^  in  relation  to  the  First.  There  is  the  same
subordination  implied  in  his  being  represented  as  the  copy  of  the  great  Original,
and  also  in  his  being  represented  as  Son  which  cannot  be  thought  without  first
thinking  "  Father."  With  the  First,  here  as  elsewhere,  there  is  associated  the  idea  of
good  pleasure.  It  is  as  fitting  for  the  Father  to  have  his  good  pleasure  as  for  Christ
to  carry  it  oat.  The  remarkable  thing  here  is  that  this  good  pleasure  is  represented
as  extending  to  the  qualifications  which  Christ  possessed  as  Mediator.  "  It  was  the
good  pleasure  of  the  Father  that  in  Um  should  all  the  fuluesg  dwell,"    To  the  word


OH.  1. 1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  55

pleroma,  translated  "  the  fulness,"  may  be  attached  the  idea  of  "  filled-up  receptacle."
The  word  "  plenitude"  seems  nearer  the  meaning.  It  is  applied  to  the  full  complement
for  manning  a  ship.  As  applied  to  Christ,  it  meaos  the  totality  of  the  Divine  perfections.
There  were  gome  who  had  the  idea  that  the  agent  employed  in  creating  had  only  a
portion  of  the  pleroma,  as  much  as  was  needed  for  his  work.  It  is  asserted  of  Christ
as  Mediator  that  he  exhausted  in  himself  the  Divine  perfections.  There  were  some
who  had  the  idea  that  there  was  a  separation  from  (in  human  semblance),  and  after-
ward a  return  to,  the  pleroma.  It  is  asserted  of  Christ  that  the  Divine  plenitude  did
not  sojourn,  but  necessarily  dwelt,  in  him.  Thus  were  the  Golossian  believers  guarded
against  all  actual  or  possible  philosophizings  that  would  have  dimmed  the  glory  of  the
great  Mediator,  (3)  The  issue  of  his  work  as  Mediator.  "  And  through  him  to  recon-
cile all  things  unto  himself,  having  made  peace  through  the  blood  of  his  cross ;  through
him,  I  say,  whether  things  upon  the  earth,  or  things  in  the  heavens."  This  relates  to  the
doctrine  of  the  last  things.  The  word  "  reconcile  "  is  stronger  than  "  adjust,"  or  "  rectify."
It  is  applied  to  the  reconciliation  of  enemies.  It  is  applied  to  our  reconciliation,  as
sinners,  to  God.  It  is  not  so  strong  as  the  expression, "  summing  up  in  Christ,"  which
is  used  in  Ephesians.  But  it  is  stronger  than  the  word  translated  "  reconcile  "  in  the
fifth  chapter  of  2  Corinthians.  It  is  intensive  here,  and  means  reconciliation  (after  a
breaking  of  the  harmony)  back  to  the  pristine  or  intended  condition  of  things.  This
reconciliation  is  to  extend  to  all  things,  viz.  all  things  to  which  the  Mediator  gave
being.  This  universal  reconciliation  is  to  be  not  merely  between  the  different  parts,
but  unto  the  Father.  It  is  to  be  effected  through  the  Son.  More  specifically  it  is
stated  that  it  is  to  be  on  the  ground  of  God  having  made  peace  through  the  blood  of
Christ's  cross.  The  blood  shed  on  the  cross,  the  blood  of  atonement  for  sin,  was  the
procuring  cause  of  reconciliation.  There  the  reconciling  efficacy  all  centred.  And  it  is
to  go  out  to  the  widest  circumference,  for  it  is  added,  "  Through  him,  I  say,  whether
things  upon  the  earth,  or  things  in  the  heavens."  What  are  the  contents  of  the
universal  reconciliation  which  is  here  taught?  We  must  guard,  on  the  one  hand,
against  a  dilution  of  the  language  of  Scripture.  We  must  guard,  on  the  other  hand,
against  a  dogmatic  fixing  of  the  form  which  this  universal  reconciliation  is  to  take.
"  The  secret  things  belong  unto  the  Lord  our  God ;  but  those  things  which  are  revealed
belong  unto  us  and  to  our  children."  It  belongs  to  us  to  take  advantage  of  the
revealed  way  of  reconciliation,  viz.  faith  in  Christ.

III.  Application  to  the  Colossianb.  1.  Qentilism.  "And  you,  being  in  time
past."  The  Colossians  are  reminded  of  what  they  were  in  time  past,  to  emphasize
tlieir  present  participation  In  reconciliation.  (1)  Gentile  in  position.  "Alienated."
In  their  heathen  state  they  were  among  the  "  things  "  needing  to  be  reconciled  to  God.
They  were  away  from  him,  as  the  Greek  word  indicates.  They  were  in  the  position  of
aliens.  They  were  without  external  privileges  such  as  the  covenant  people  had.  And
they  were  without  the  inward  helps  that  were  necessary  for  their  living  the  life  of  God.
(2)  Oentile  in  their  thoughts.  "  And  enemies  in  your  mind."  The  mind  is  the  seat
of  the  thoughts.  It  is  where  we  reflect,  come  to  our  conclusions,  form  our  resolutions.
It  was  in  this  sphere  that  the  Colossians  manifested  hostility  to  Ood.  If  a  right  con-
ception of  God  had  been  presented  to  them,  it  would  not  only  have  been  uncongenial
to  them,  but  it  would  have  called  forth  active,  virulent  hostility.  As  it  was  (with  God
very  much  as  a  lost  thought),  their  hostility  showed  itself  rather  in  their  pleasing
themselves  in  their  thoughts,  in  their  forsaking  the  rays  of  light  that  still  lingered  in
their  reason  and  conscience.  (3)  Gentile  in  their  works.  "  In  your  evil  works."  This
was  the  outcome  of  their  God-hating  thoughts.  Hating  good  (if  not  so  directly  God)
in  their  mind,  they  did  not,  and  indeed  could  not,  keep  their  hatred  there.  Their
actions  took  a  complexion  from  their  thoughts.  Those  who  love  God  have  more  or
less  of  the  Divine  form  in  their  actions.  But  the  actions  of  these  Colossians  in
heathenism  were  evil.  They  were  not  done  out  o£  love  to  God,  That  alone  was  suffi-
cient to  give  them  a  character  of  evil.  Of  positive  forms  of  evil,  from  what  is  warned
against  in  this  Epistle,  we  may  particularize  sensuality,  covetousness,  deceitfulness,
revengefulness.  2.  The  historical  element  in  reconciliation.  "  Yet  now  hath  he  [God]
reconciled  in  the  body  of  his  [Christ's]  flesh  through  death."  (1)  Ood  in  bodily  form.
It  is  true  that  we  must  separate  from  God  his  havmg  a  body.  He  is  a  Spirit ;  "  he  con-
siBts  not  of  various  parts  extended  one  without  and  beyond  another,"    Ttie  ground  oa


68  THE  EPlS'TLfi  to  TflE  COLOSSlAlfS.         [c".  1. 1—29

which  the  Jews  were  forhidden  to  represent  God  under  any  bodily  form  was  that  he
had  no  bodily  form.  He  was  in  the  fifteenth  verse  declared  to  be  the  invisible  God.
"Now,  if  he  had  a  body  and  hid  it  from  our  eyes,  he  might  be  said  not  to  be  seen,  bul
could  not  be  said  to  be  invisible  "  (Charnook).  And  yet  he  whose  divinity  (from  lan-
guage in  preceding  verses)  is  indubitable  has  here  ascribed  to  him  a  body.  He  appeared
in  Old  Testament  times  in  what  was  the  semblance  of  a  body ;  but  it  is  a  real  body
that  is  here  ascribed  to  him.  That  is  to  say,  we  have  what  we  cannot  understand — the
Divine  spirituality,  and  yet  a  body.  (2)  Ood  in  the  form  of  flesh.  The  Second  Person
did  not  receive  a  body  unique  in  kind.  He  did  not  receive  our  body  in  its  paradisical
or  ideal  state ;  but  as  it  was  actually,  inheriting  the  effects  of  the  Fall.  He  received  it
from  Mary.  If  there  was  a  purilying  (from  the  Holy  Ghost),  what  he  received  was
none  the  less  flesh.  He  appeared  in  flesh  in  the  midst  of  human  history.  That  is  to
say,  he  whose  existence  formed  the  ground  upon  which  history  went  forward,  became
himself  part  of  history,  became  himself  an  historical  Personage.  (3)  Ood  in  the  experi-
ence of  death.  Flesh  is  a  weak  thing.  It  cannot  well  stand  the  shocks  of  time.  Its
ti  ansitoriness  is  being  ever  evidenced.  "  All  flesh  is  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof
is  as  the  flower  of  the  field."  "  And  the  Word  became  flesh,"  it  is  said,  and  that
carried  with  it  a  weak,  transitory  existence.  In  flesh  he  had  to  pass  through  the
experience  of  death.  That  is  to  say,  we  have  this  as  the  climax  of  the  mystery — that
he,  who  is  the  absolutely  Living  One,  in  experience  went  round  to  the  opposite  pole  of
death.  In  accordance  with  this,  we  can  pray  in  such  words  as  these :  "  Good  Lord,
deliver  us :  by  the  mystery  of  thy  holy  incarnation  ;  by  thy  holy  nativity  and  circum-
cision; by  thy  baptism,  fasting,  and  temptation;  by  thine  agony  and  bloody  sweat;  by
thy  cross  and  passion.  Good  Lord,  deliver  us."  This  is  said  by  unitarians  to  be  a
materializing  of  God.  Ood  came  into  time,  assumed  humanity  nineteen  hundred  years
ago.  That  is  what  Christianity  says,  what  stamps  it  as  an  historical  religion.  It  is  only
to  he  scouted  as  a  lowering  of  God  on  the  supposition  that  it  is  impossible  for  God  to
descend.  But  if  it  is  possible  for  God,  impelled  by  love,  to  descend  (and  the  possibili-
ties of  love  are  matter  of  revelation),  then  we  have  a  grand  historical  commencement
in  God  descending  through  the  infinite  interval  into  time  and  into  humanity.  He
descended,  according  to  the  teaching  here,  in  the  Father's  Name  to  make  reconciliation.
The  foundation  of  this  reconciliation  was  laid  principally  in  the  great  historical  fact  of
his  death.  It  was  death  in  perfect  submission  to  the  will  of  God.  It  was  death  as  the
desert  of  sin.  It  was  death  deriving  infinite  value  from  the  fact  that  the  Person  dying
was  the  Son  of  God.  To  this  Eeconoiler  in  humanity  all  can  cling.  His  reconciliation
"would  seem  to  have  a  universality  extendins  beyond  humanity.  Within  humanity
Gentiles  as  well  as  Jews  were  included.  "  I  am  a  man,  and  there  is  nothing  human
foreign  to  me."  All  alike  can  cling  to  God  appearing  in  humanity  and  can  participate
in  the  benefits  of  his  work  performed  in  humanity.  3.  Tlie  ultimate  of  reconciliation.
"  To  present  you  holy  and  without  blemish  and  unreprovable  before  him."  "  Before
him"  is  to  be  understood  as  before  God,  and  points  to  a  time  when  we  shall  be  in  the
];)re8ence  of  God  in  a  sense  in  which  we  are  not  now  in  the  presence  of  God.  It  is  God
also  who  presents  here;  but,  as  God  reconciles  through  Christ,  so  also  he  presents
through  Christ  (in  accordance  with  Eph.  v.  27).  (1)  I'ositively.  Holy.  This  is  to  be
taken  in  its  full  contents.  We  are  now  consecrated  to  God  (as  ancient  Israel).  At  our
presentation  we  shall  have  all  the  inward  dispositioiis  that  corresi  ond  to  our  outward
consecration.  Our  spiritual  susceptibilities,  affinities,  aspirations,  will  correspnnd  to  the
presence  of  God  into  which  we  come.  (2)  Negatively.  Without  blemish.  This  is  the
constant  sacrificial  expression.  Whatever  was  ofleied  to  God  was  to  be  without
blemish.  It  would  belong  to  the  officiating  priest  to  pronounce  upon  the  fitness  of  an
animal  for  sacrifice.  There  is  a  Greek  word  which  means  "  blemish-examiner."  Such
Christ  Is  to  those  who  are  to  be  presented  to  God.  In  his  inspection  of  the  seven
Churches  he  discovered  blemishes  in  them.  We  shall  not  be  in  a  fit  state  for  presenta-
tion to  God  until  all  blemishes  have  been  removed  i'rom  us.  Unreprovable.  This  is
a  following  up  of  the  previous  expression.  Pronounced  upon  by  Christ,  our  position
before  God  is  for  ever  secured,  our  character  is  unim|jeachable.  No  one  can  come  in
after  him  to  reverse  his  decision.  There  cannot  be  ground  for  any  subsequent  charjio
being  brought  against  us.  4.  Oentle  exhortation  to  steadfastness.  (1)  In  faith.  "If
10  be  that  ye  continue  in  the  faith."    To  have  so  much  done  for  us  as  is  implied  in  oui


ca.tl— 29.]         tflls  EPISTLS  TO  Tflfi  COLOSSlAlJS.  8t

fitness  for  presentation  to  God,  we  must  persevere,  and  persevere  In  the  right  way.
Our  position  is  to  be  faith  toward  Christ.  Within  ourselves  we  have  not  the  elements
of  strength.  Wo  are  powerless  to  torm  character.  We  are  not  only  to  come  into  the
position  of  faith,  but  we  are  to  rest  in  it.  However  our  outward  position  may  be
altered,  our  inward  position  is  to  remain  unaltered.  Result.  "  Grounded."  "  My  soul
hath  found  the  steadfast  ground."  We  try  other  foundations,  only  to  find  them  insuffi-
cient. When  we  have  got  past  our  own  doings  and  the  services  of  the  Church  down
to  Christ,  then  we  feel  that  we  have  found  the  immuvahle  Poundntion,  the  steadfast
ground  for  our  being.  "  And  steadfast."  A  building  even  by  its  own  weight  gets '
steadied  when  it  is  upon  a  secure  foundation.  So  by  faith  are  we  to  get  steadied  upon
the  Foundation.  We  are  to  become  like  the  Poundatidn.  The  imiuovahleness  that  is
in  Christ  is  to  come  up  into  us.  (2)  In  hope.  "  And  not  moved  away  from  the  hope
of  the  gospel."  Believing  in  Christ  we  have  hope  toward  God — we  have  hope  in  view
of  the  future.  We  have  hope  of  being  presented  holy  and  without  blemish  and  unre-
provable  before  God.  This  is  the  hope  communicated  in,  evoked  by,  the  gospel.
Prom  this  hope  we  are  not  to  be  moved  away  (which  is  the  negative  corresponding  to
the  positive  connected  with  faith).  We  are  not  to  be  of  two  moods,  hoping  and
desponding,  but  we  are  to  keep  to  the  one  mood,  hoping.  Circumstances  may  arise
in  which  we  are  tempted  to  despond  or  despair ;  but  our  hope  is  to  partake  of  the
immovableness  of  its  object.  The  inexcusahleness  of  being  moved  away  from  the  hope
of  the  gospel,  (a)  From  their  having  heard  the  gospel.  "  Which  ye  heard."  Left  to
themselves,  they  would  have  been  in  heathenism  and  its  hopelessness :  "  Having  no  hope,
and  without  God  in  the  world,"  as  is  said  in  Bphesians.  Such  had  been  their  melan-
choly state,  but  by  the  grace  of  God  the  gospel  had  been  preached  to  them  in  Oolos.s».
It  heoame  them,  then,  to  present  a  contrast  to  the  hopelessness  of  heathenism,  to  be
inspired  with  the  hope  of  future  presentation  and  everlasting  continuance  before  God.

(b)  From  the  universality  which  characterized  the  gospi-l.  "  Which  was  preached  in
all  creation  under  heaven."  The  form  of  the  command  was :  "  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,
and  preach  the  gospel  to  the  whole  creation."  The  apostle,  writing  not  many  years
after  the  giving  forth  of  the  command,  regards  its  universal  character  as  already  estab-
lished. It  had  already  obtained  this  seal  of  its  Divine  authorship.  It  was  not  a
partial  provincial  thing,  but,  preached  in  all  creation  under  heaven,  it  had  been  proved
to  be  adapted  to  the  wants  of  men.    They  were  not,  then,  to  abandon  its  peculiar  hope.

[c)  From  Paul's  personal  relation  to  the  gospel.  "  Whereof  I  Paul  was  made  a
uiiuister."  Of  this  gospel,  the  universal  hope-bringer,  he  had  the  high  privilege  of
being  a  minister.  He  had  no  claim  to  the  position.  He  was  only  Paul,  one  who  had
been  a  persecutor  and  had  obtained  mercy.  But  the  gospel  was  dear  to  him,  and,  in
writing  to  them  and  in  introducing  his  personal  relation  to  them,  he  puts  that  forward
as  a  reason  for  their  not  being  moved  away  from  their  hope. — II.  P.

Vers.  24 — 29. — Paul's  sufferings.  "Now."  This  is  the  connecting  word,  and  serves  to
bring  down  the  time  from  the  past  (when  he  was  made  a  minister)  to  the  present  when
he  contemplates  his  sufferings.

I.  He  bejoices  in  his  sufferings,  beoadsb  they  webb  fob  the  bknefit  of  the
CoLossiANS.  "I  rejoice  in  my  sufferings  for  your  sake."  He  adopts  a  triumphant  key
with  regard  to  his  sufferings.  He  is  not  merely  reconciled  to  them,  but  he  finds  them
a  sphere  in  which  he  has  occasion  for  rejoicing.  He  does  not  rejoice  in  them  as  suffer-
ings, for  they  were  no  more  pleasant  to  him  than  to  others.  Nor  does  he  rejoice  in
them  here  because  they  were  helpful  to  self-discipline.  But  he  rejoices  in  them
because  they  were  beneficial  to  the  Colossians.  He  was  suffering  as  a  witness  to  the
gospel.  1.  Jiis  sufferings  may  have  been  as  prayers.  The  Lord  looking  down  on  them,
in  response  to  them,  may  have  showered  blessings  on  the  Colossians.  2.  His  sufferings
may  have  been  as  the  sending  of  the  gospel  to  them.  Because  he  stood  in  the  breach,
others  may  have  been  left  free  to  give  them  the  gospel.  3.  His  sufferings  may  have
been  as  a  stimulus  to  them.  Because  he  was  courageous  in  enduring  sufl'erings,  their
courage  may  have  been  strengthened.

II.  He  bejoices  in  his  sufferings  because  thet  webe  connected  with  thk
AFFLICTIONS  OF  Chbist.  "  And  fill  up  on  my  part  that  which  is  lacking  of  the  afflic-
tions of  Christ  in  my  flesh  for  his  body's  sake.*"    The  language  employed  is  very  remark-


68  THE  EPISTLB  tO  THE  COLOSSIANS.         [ofctl— 29.

able.  "That  which  is  lacking  "is  properly  "deficiencies."  The  word  is  distributive
— one  deficiency  after  another.  The  verb  which  governs  "deficiencies"  is  a  double
compound.  The  simple  verb  would  give  this  meaning,  "  I  fill  the  deficiencies  of
the  afflictions  of  Christ."  The  single  compound  would  give  this  meaning,  "  I  fill  up
the  deficiencies  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ"  (stress  being  laid  on  the  fact  that  what  the
apostle  supplied  in  suffering  after  suffering  met  deficiency  after  deficiency  in  the  afflic-
tions of  Christ).  The  double  compound  gives  this  meaning,  "I  on  my  part  with
Buffering  after  suffering  meet  deficiency  after  deficiency  on  the  part  of  Christ  in  his
afflictions  "  (stress  being  laid  on  the  opposition  of  persons).  Protestant  commentators
(with  the  exception  of  Dr.  Lightfoot)  seem  to  have  settled  down  into  regarding  the
afflictions  of  Christ  as  those  endured  by  Christ  in  the  sufferings  of  his  people.  It  is
quite  scriptural  to  identify  Christ  with  the  sufferino;s  of  his  people  (Matt.  xxv.  31 — 46) ;
but  the  bringing  in  of  this  identification  (with  nothing  in  the  language  to  point  to  it)
has  the  effect  of  obscuring  the  antithesis  between  the  two  persons  to  which  the  language
gives  prominence.  It  is  more  natural,  then,  with  Dr.  Lightfoot,  to  adopt  the  Roman
Catholic  exegesis,  and  to  regard  the  afflictions  of  Christ,  not  as  those  which  he  endures
mystically  in  the  Church,  but  as  those  which  he  endured  personally  in  his  day.  He
did  not  complete  these  so  as  to  preclude  his  people  suffering  after  him ;  but  Paul  and
others,  with  suffering  after  suffering,  were  meeting  deficiency  after  deficiency  in  them.
The  Boman  Catholic  conclusion  from  this  is  that  saints,  by  the  merits  of  their  sufferings,
supplement  the  merits  of  the  Saviour.  But  that  is  an  utterly  un-Paulioe  idea  (coming
in  after  Christ  and  making  up  the  deficiencies  of  his  merits),  and  certainly  it  is  not
borne  out  by  the  language  which  is  employed  here.  1.  The  sufferings  of  the  apostle
can  be  classed  with  the  sufferings  of  Christ  as  afflictive  (not  meritorious).  In  2  Oor.  i.
5  it  is  said  that  the  sufferings  of  Christ  abounded  to  the  Corinthians  (or  overflowed  on
them).  If  our  sufferings  are  the  overflowings  (or  surplus)  of  the  Master's  sufferings,
then  they  are  in  the  same  class,  only,  however,  under  the  aspect  in  which  they  are  pre-
sented in  that  passage  as  sufferings  for  which  consolation  is  provided.  The  exclusion
of  meritoriousness  is  secured  here  by  the  use  of  the  word  "afflictions"  (not  "cross,"  or
"death,"  or  "suffering  of  death  ").  It  is  true  that  in  all  his  afflictions  (and  not  merely  in  his
death)  he  was  accumulating  merits  for  his  people.  But  it  is  quite  consistent  with  that
to  regard  them  separately  (compared  with  ours)  as  providentially  appointed.  2.  The
sufferings  of  the  apostle  can  be  classed  with  the  sufferings  of  Christ  as  edifying
(not  meritorious).  There  is  a  generalization  of  the  previous  thought.  The  suffer-
ings of  the  apostle  were  edifying,  not  merely  to  the  Colossians,  but  to  the  body  of
Christ,  which  is  the  Church.  They  were  as  prayers,  as  the  sending  of  the  gospel,  as
stimulus  for  the  whole  body  of  the  faithful.  Even  we  at  this  day  are  sharing  in  the
benefit.  And,  though  Christ  by  the  meritoriousness  of  his  sufferings  actually  gave  rise
to  the  Church,  yet  we  can  separate  (for  the  sake  of  comparison)  the  edifying  aspects  of
them.

III.  He  bejoices  in  his  bufferings  because  they  were  connected  with  his
OFFICE.  1.  He  was  a  minister  of  the  Church.  "  Whereof  I  was  made  a  minister."  It
is  consonant  to  a  Christian  to  suffer  loss  that  others  may  be  advantaged.  It  is  cer-
tainly consonant  to  a  minister  of  the  Church  to  be  afflicted  (in  soul  and  in  body)  that
others  may  rejoice.  He  is  not  so  much  the  holder  of  a  benefice  as  one  who  wears
^imself  out  for  souls.  It  is  said  of  the  greatest  Minister  of  the  Church  that  he  came
not  to  be  ministered  unto  but  to  minister,  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom  for  many.
And  Paul,  in  the  spirit  of  service,  was  closely  assimilated  to  Christ.  He  was  sowing
that  others  might  reap,  labouring  that  others  might  enter  on  his  labours.  2.  He  was
charged  with  the  mystery  relating  to  the  Oentiles.  "  Accoiding  to  the  dispensation  of
God  which  was  given  me  to  you-ward,  to  fulfil  the  Word  of  God,  even  the  mystery
which  hath  been  hid  from  all  ages  and  generations :  but  now  hath  it  been  manifested  to
his  saints."  As  a  minister  of  the  Church,  he  held  an  office  of  trust.  He  was  a  steward
in  the  house  of  God.  His  office  was  of  Divine  appointment.  It  had  reference  to  the
Colossians,  but  not  to  them  exclusively,  only  to  them  as  representatives  of  the  Gentile
world.  In  this  office  he  was  charged  to  fulfil  (to  complete  the  round  of)  a  Divine
declaration.  This  was  the  mystery  hid  from  the  ages  and  from  the  generations  (making
up  the  ages),  but  manifested  (brought  into  the  clear  light)  to  the  saintii  of  that  day.
8.  This  mysterp  was  a  yloriout  mOinifestuition,    "To  whom  Gcxl  was  pleased  to  mak«


OH.  1. 1—29.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa  69

known  what  is  the  riches  of  the  glory  of  this  mystery  among  the  Gentiles,  which  i«
Christ  in  you,  the  Hope  of  glory."  There  is  glory  in  nature;  the  sun  is  a  glorious
object.  There  was  glory  in  the  Mosaic  economy  (with  all  its  limitations).  But  in  this
mystery  God  was  pleased,  and  had  it  in  view,  to  make  known  the  riches  (the  highest
form,  the  greatest  affluence)  of  glory.  This  was  a  display  such  as  was  not  given  else-
where. The  sphere  of  this  display  was  among  the  Gentiles.  The  darkness  of  the
background,  therefore,  added  to  the  glory ;  but  it  was  a  glorious  thing  in  itself.  It  is
here  described  as  "  Christ  in  you,  the  Hope  of  glory."  Stress  is  not  to  be  laid  on  "  in
you."  The  first  meaning  is  "  among  you,"  and  "  in  you  "  only  comes  in  under  that.
The  stress  of  the  thought  is  to  be  laid  on  this — that  to  them,  in  the  hopelessness  of
heathenism,  Christ  came  as  the  great  Hope-bringer.  In  Christ  (not  in  his  doctrine  here,
hut  in  his  Person)  they  had  the  forgiveness  of  sins,  they  had  the  beginning  of  redemp-
tion. But  what  they  had  of  Christ  was  only  the  earnest  of  what  they  would  yet  ha/e.
What  they  looked  forward  to  in  the  future  with  hope  was  glory  (differing  from  the
glory  previously  mentioned  only  in  that  it  respects  persons  and  not  things).  This
glory  is  to  be  thought  of  as  the  highest  efflorescence  of  our  being,  from  the  Christ  within,
which  is  synonymous  with  full  redemption.  4.  The  breadth  of  his  duties  as  charged
with  the  mystery.  "  Whom  we  proclaim,  admonishing  every  man  and  teaching  every
man  in  all  wisdom,  that  we  may  present  every  man  perfect  in  Christ."  There  was  the
broadest  of  all  subjects,  viz.  Christ,  who  has  already  been  presented  as  the  First,  the
Midst,  the  Last,  in  the  universe  and  in  the  Church.  This  Christ  they  spoke  of,  not  in  a
whisper  (or  only  to  the  initiated),  but  proclaimed  that  men  widely  might  hear.  This
bold  presentation  of  Christ  was  not  one-sided.  There  was  the  preparing  the  way  for
Christ  in  admonishing  (showing  the  need  for  repentance  and  urging  to  repentance),  and
then,  as  complementary  to  that,  there  was  the  building  up  in  Christ  in  teaching  (pre-
senting Christ  for  faith  in  bis  qualifications  and  in  his  work).  And  in  this  they
observed  a  universality;  for  it  is  said,  with  the  emphasis  of  repetition,  "admonishing
every  man  and  teaching  every  man."  And  having  emphasized  "  every  man,"  it  is  added
(still  having  respect  to  universality), "  vnth  all  wisdom"  It  was  a  point  with  the  Gnostics
that  wisdom  was  to  be  kept  back  from  the  many.  According  to  the  apostle's  teaching,
there  was  no  oligarchy  of  intellect  (the  few  who  had  perception).  There  were  no  exclu-
sive possessors  of  the  Divine  wisdom.  There  was  universality  in  the  Divine  offer  and
intention.  Another  point  with  the  Gnostics  (as  with  others)  was  that  only  the  few,
the  select  spirits,  could  come  to  perfection ;  the  many  must  be  content  with  a  lower
attainment,  a  lower  heaven.  But  the  apostle  did  not  go  upon  such  principles.  He  saw
perfection  (the  highest  form  of  human  existence)  opened  up  for  every  man  in  Christ
(the  ideal  Man),  and  therefore  he  sought  to  present  (under  God,  to  whom  pre-eminently
it  belongs  to  present)  every  man  perfect  in  Christ.  5.  The  spirit  in  which  he  dis-
charged his  duties.  "  Whereimto  I  labour  also,  striving  according  to  his  working,  which
worketh  in  me  mightily."  There  is  a  recurrence  from  "  we  "  to  "  I "  (with  individualiz-
ing effect).  The  apostle  introduces  a  favourite  metaphor  of  his.  He  painfully  exercised
himself  in  training  for  the  conflict,  and  then  he  went  down  to  the  arena  and  engaged  in
the  conflict.  Thus  he  comes  back  to  the  sufferings  with  which  he  started.  The  pro-
clamation of  the  gospel  (so  broad)  was  a  proceeding  with  painful  accompaniments.  But,
in  the  midst  of  all,  he  rejoiced  because  he  was  not  left  to  his  own  strength,  but  was
supematurally  supported.  There  was  an  unseen  Master  beside  him,  nerving  him  as
he  laboured  (in  training)  and  strove  (in  the  lists) ;  and  so  he  laboured  and  strove,  not
according  to  his  own  poor  working,  but  acoerding  to  his  (Christ's)  working  that  worked
in  him  mightily. — B.  F.

*■-
Introduction.  Throughout  this  Epistle  St.  Paul  is  dealing  with  the  twefold  evil
that  had  arisen  in  the  Colossian  Church — an  error  half  Judaic,  half  Gnostic ;  an  erroi
that  was  theological  and  practical.  It  arose  from  the  wrong  conception  of  matter  as
inherently  evil,  and  as  consequently  demanding  intervening  mediators  between  the
material  system  of  things  and  God,  and  as  making  abstinence  from  contact  with  material
things,  as  far  as  might  be  possible,  very  incumbent  on  the  godly.  This  error  has  its
modCTB  analogies  in  sacerdotalism  and  in  pietism.  To  combat  the  error  then  and
now  the  plenitude  of  Christ  must  be  preached — Christ  the  Fulness ;  therefore  the  all-
sufBcient  Mediator  j  therefore,  too,  the  all-sufficient  Consecrator  of  the  material  system,


ed  TfiB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oh.  1.1—29

The  errors  of  the  ritualist  and  of  the  recluse  are  both  met  by  this  great  fact  of  tbti
plenitude  of  Christ. — U.  R.  T.

Vlers.  1,  2. — The  apostolic  salutation.  Pondering  this  salutation,  we  ask  about  it
three  questions.

J.  What  it  reveals  abotjt  the  apostle.  It  indicates:  1.  His  dignity  "An
apostle  .  .  .  by  the  will  of  God."  This  was  a  title  (1)  divinely  dorive:!  ;  (2)  directly
derived  from  Q-od;  (3)  &\)m-\(\.a.n\\y  justified,  (a)  by  supernatural  visions  and  experiences,
(6)  by  seals  of  success.  This  title  was  used  here,  though  not  in  his  salutation  to  all
the  Churches,  because  here  (1)  lie  was  dealing  with  error  and  erroneous  teachers,  and
so  needed  a  claim  of  authority ;  (2)  he  was  personally  an  entire  stranger  to  the
Colossians;  (3)  he  writes  from  piisnn,  and  it  was  well  he  should  remind  himself  and
them  of  his  true  dii^nity.  He  was  a  prisoner,  yet  none  the  less  an  apostle.  2.  His
condescension.  "  Timotheus  our  brother."  He  was  no  fellow-apostle,  yet  his  brother  ;
he  was  his  boyish,  not  to  say  childish,  convert,  yet  his  brother.  Great  souls  never
patronize  ;  they  elevate  true  men,  of  whatever  station  or  age,  into  brotherhood  with
them.  The  Greatest  said,  "  I  have  called  you  not  servants,  but  fiiends."  "He  is  not
ashamed  to  call  them  brethren."

II.  What  it  implies  about  the  Church.  It  recalls  to  us:  1.  Its  locality  and  its
associations.  One  of  the  historic  Churches  in  the  valley  of  the  Lycus  ;  the  town,  too,
had  been  famous,  though  its  slory  was  waning.  Xerxes  and  Cyrus  had  made  it  famous,
but  Paul's  letter  has  made  its  name  known  where  Xerxes  and  Cyrus  have  never  been
heard  of.  2.  Its  character.  This  indeed  ought  to  he  the  character  of  every  Church.
For  its  members  were :  (1)  "Saints."  The  Old  Testament  description  of  Israel  thus
applied  to  Chiistians  to  indicate  their  union  with  God.  (2)  "Faithful  brethren."
Indicating  their  union  with  each  other.  All  fiee-masonries,  guilds,  etc.,  are  but  hints
of  what  the  Church  is  meant  to  be  in  this  aspect  of  it.

III.  What  it  suggests  about  true  blessedness.  "  Grace  and  peace "  is  Paul's
customnry  greeting  ;  it  is  a  blended  Greek  and  Hebrew  salutation.  It  expresses  the
Apostle's  hest  wish  for  a  Cl)urch.  What  is  it  ?  1.  "  Grace."  It  is  a  Greek  thought
Christianized.  It  takes  the  conception  of  i;race  of  form,  of  gesturfi,  of  tone,  into  the
spiritual  realm.  It  has  on  Paul's  pen  and  lips  two  meanings.  (1)  It  is  to  be  enjoyed
as  the  attitude  of  God  in  Christ  towards  men.  It  is  thus  the  Divine  pity,  gentleness,
favour,  the  tiearing  of  a  forgiving,  condescending,  loving  God.  That  is  infinite  grace.
(2)  It  is  to  be  possessed  as  the  spirit  of  a  Christian.  It  is  thus  "  the  grace  of  life  " —
moral  beauty,  spiritual  loveliness.  It  is  the  indwelling  in  human  character  of  more
than  all  that  the  Greeks  conceived  in  their  "  three  Graces."  2.  "  Peace."  It  may
include:  (1)  Freedom  from  persecution,  then  a  great  de.sideratum.  (2)  Absence  of
interrial  dissension.  This  was  the  one  main  purpose  of  his  letter.  (3)  Inward  calm
of  heart  and  quiet  confidence  in  Ood.  This  is  ideal  peace.  Christ's  peace  and  the  wish
of  Paul  is  the  gift  of  Jesus ;  for  he  said,  "  My  peace  give  I  unto  you." — U.  R.  T.

Vers.  3 — 8. —  The  apostolic  thanksgiving.    We  notice  here —

I.  The  spirit  of  this  thanksgiving.  Whatever  is  in  it  is  so  beautiful  that  we
may  well  imitate  it.  Observe :  1.  It  is  unselfish.  We  hear  the  prisoner  praise,  the
chained  captive  exult,  for  the  joys  of  others.  Arthur  Helps  says,  "  That  man  is  very
strong  and  powerful,  who  has  no  more  hopes  for  himself,  who  looks  not  to  be  loved  any
more,  to  be  admired  any  more,  to  have  any  more  honour  and  dignity,  but  whose  sole
thought  is  for  others,  and  who  only  lives  for  them."  That  is  what  you  have  before  you
here.  2.  It  is  ungrudging.'  Paul  is  about  to  deal  with  their  errors,  but  nevertheless
how  willing  and,  indeed,  eager  he  is  first  to  recognize  what  is  good  and  laudaWe  in  this
Colossiah  Church  !  There  are  two  sets  of  men  with  regard  to  art,  scenery,  and  society  :
those  who  first  see  the  blemish,  then  the  beauty;  and  those  who  first  of  all  rejoice
in  the  admirable,  if  afterwards  they  have  to  criticise  any  drawback.  To  the  second
of  these  Paul  belonged.  3.  It  is  constant.  Like  a  perennial  fountain,  his  praise  and
prayer  for  them  shall  be  poured  forth.

II.  The  suhjbot  of  this  thanksgiving.  He  thanks  God :  1.  For  the  spiritual
possessions  of  the  Ohvrch.  Here  is  the  familiar  triad  of  his  thought  and  description — ■
feith,  love,  hope.    Sometimes  he  views  faith  and  love  as  leading  up  to  hope  j  here  ha


OH.  1. 1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   COLOSSIANS.  61

depicts  hope  as  l<in(1l!nor  faith  and  Inve.  (1)  The  faith  is  Christ-centred.  "In  Clirist
Jesus."  (2)  The  love  is  practical.  It  distributes  "  to  the  necessities  of  saints."
(3)  The  hnpe  is  secure.  It  is  stored  up — "laid  up  in  heaven."  So  it  is  aliove  fire  and
flood  and  all  de.structive  forces.  2.  For  the  means  by  which  these  possessions  had  been
obtained.  For :  (1)  Thegospel ;"  Word  of  truth,"  etc.  He  rejoices  in  its  reality — "  Word
of  truth;  '  universality — "whole  world;"  and  in  its  fertility.  He  shows  not  only  its
vitality,  but  its  inherent  reproductiveness.  It  "multiplies  itself  again."  (i?)  The
preacher.  He  thanks  God,  not  only  for  their  possessions,  and  the  means  by  which  they
had  been  acquired  ;  but:3.  For  the  source  and  sphere  of  their  posseksion.  "Lore  is  its
spirit."    Love  is  the  life  of  the  saints. — U.  K.  T.

Vers.  9 — 14. — The  apostolic  prayer.  The  maxims  of  the  Church  as  well  as  those
of  the  world  often  throw  a  glamour  round  much  that  is  worthless — a  glamour  that  stirs
our  desire  of  possession.  But  neither  the  world  nor  a  worldly  Church  can  teach  us
what  is  really  worth  aiming  at,  struggling  after,  praying  for.  A  man  like  Paul  can.
What  he  asks  for  it  must  be  good  to  have.  His  prayer  yxi^y  well  guide  us.  We  ought
to  wish  for  what  he  sought  for  Christians ;  and,  more  than  that,  we  are  ejicouraged
to  hope  for  it.     He  prays—

I.  That  their  knowledge  mat  incbeask.  Partly  because  of  the  error  by  which
many  of  the  Colossian  Church  were  being  misled,  but  also  because  increase  of  knowledge
is  good  for  any  Church,  Paul  here  says  he  prays  for  it,  and  even  at  times  afterwards
urges  it  on  them.  No  Grtek  had  more  veneration  for  the  blue-eyed  Athena,  no  Roman
for  wondrously  equipped  Minerva,  than  Paul  had  for  knowledge.  There  are  three
expressions  here  to  describe  this  knowledge,  expressions  that  are  very  often  used  in
combination  both  in  the  Old  and  New  Testameuts.  They  describe,  generally,  the
science,  the  philosophy,  and  the  art  of  religion.  1.  Knowledge,  which  in  the  Greek
is  not  the  simple  word  for  knowledge,  but  intensified,  large,  and  thorough  knowledge.
In  this  case  full  acquaintance  with  the  Law  of  God,  the  jirecepts  of  Christ,  the  docti'ine
of  the  apostles,  which  is  essential  as  a  beginning,  a  basis  of  Christian  culture,  but
is  only  a  beginning  and  a  biisis.  2.  Wisdom,,  which  is  higher  than  knowledge  and
includes  both  knowledge  and  understanding.  It  is  not  mere  additional  information,
the  acquaintance  with  more  facts,  or  even  more  laws,  or  even  more  principles.  Wisdom
is  digested  knowledge,  knowledge  wrought  into  a  system;  or,  as  Cardinal  Newman  well
puts  it,  "  reason  exercised  upon  knowledge."  In  this  case  it  is  the  c  dm  comprehensive
view  of  the  information  attained — information  about  God's  Law,  Christ's  precepts,
the  apostle's  doctrine.  3.  Spiritual  understanding,  using  a  word  that  denotes  the
application  of  knowledge  to  detail,  following  its  processes  as  appUed  to  daily  life  and
separate  actions.  It  means  a  keen,  quick  understanding  of  the  bearing  of  God's  will  on
all  their  conduct,  aill  their  conversation,  all  their  life.  Such  a  knowled;^e,  with  wisdom
and  understanding,  would  not  only  save  the  Colossians,  but  save  us.  It  is,  thank  God,
a  wisdom  recorded  for  us  in  Scripture,  incarnate  in  Jesus,  interpreted  by  the  Holy
Spirit.  But  we  must  acquire  it.  Is  half  an  hour  a  day  too  much  to  give?  Is  earnest
study  too  much?-  Is  persistent  prayer  too  much?  "  Wisdom  is  the  principal  thing;
.  .  .  with  all  thy  getting  get  understanding."

II.  That,  as  the  result  «f  their  knowledge,  thbib  character  may  ripen.  This  we
should  expect  from  prayer  for  knowledge  of  the  will  of  God  ;  not  His  essence,  nature,
attributes,  but  will.  Religion  is  not  a  system  for  speculation,  but  for  the  regulation
of  life.  What  the  apostle  here  taught,  viz.  that  the  end  of  ail  knowledge  is  conduct,
Jesus  Christ  made  gloriously  clear  in  his  words,  "  If  ye  kno-v  these  things,  happy  are  ye
if  ye  do  them."  No  more  than  you  would  be  satisfied  if  your  vines  year  after  year  only
"  made  wood,"  or  your  apple  trees  simply  grew  in  height  and  in  far-reaching  branches,
would  St.  Paul  or  Christ,  the  great  Husbandpian  himself,  have  been  satisfied  if  there
had  been  only  mental  growth,  intellectual  growth — "  culture,"  as  the  modern  phrase  is —
in  this  or  any  Church.  Hence  his  prayer  seeks  blessing  for  characler;  he  looks,  as  you
on  the  vine,  for  clusters  of  the  grape — for  fruit.  In  the  description  of  character  the
apostle  prays  for,  we  notice :  1.  A  walking  worthily  of  the  Lord.  A  walk,  a  progress,
an  activity,  wortliy  of  the  follower  of  him  who  "  has  left  us  an  example  that  we  should
follow  in  his  steps."  2.  An  increasing  knowledge  of  Ood.  So  knowledge  recurs,  and
tl^iji  tiro«  it  j»  ifior?  tJiau  a  knowledge  of  God's  \fill  j  it  is  »  knowledge  of  God  himself.


62  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [ch.  i.  1—29.

This  is  a  result  of  such  walking,  such  conduct.  Obedience  is  the  organ  of  spiritual
knowledge.  We  are  divinely  assured  that  they  who  "  do  the  will  shall  know  of  the
doctrine."  3.  The  being  strengthened  with  all  might  according  to  the  power  of  his
glory.  Inner  strength,  producing  not  only  endurance,  but  gentle  patience  in  sorrow,
i.  Giving  thanks  to  the  Father.  Thus  Ufe  shall  have  a  glow  on  it,  a  music  in  it.
Praying  that  their  life  may  have  this  glow,  this  music,  "  with  joyfulness,"  the  apostle
is  led  to  recall  the  reasons  for  their  profound  joy.  (1)  Meetness  for  blessedness :  "  Made
us  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light."  (2)  Deliverance  from
tryanny :  "  Delivered  us  from  the  power  of  darkness."  (3)  Settlement  in  liberty  and
honour :  "  Translated  us  into  the  kingdom  of  his  dear  Son."  And  all  this  is  through
Christ,  our  Ransom,  our  Eescuer ;  but  now  not  a  victor  rescuing  by  force  of  arm,  but  a
philanthropist  by  payment  of  ransom.  Thus  Paul  strikes  the  key-note  of  his  message
to  ColossEe — Jesus  Christ  the  King  of  the  kingdom  in  which  Christians  already  are ;
the  Source  of  their  deliverance  from  the  guilt  an<l  from  the  power  of  sin ;  Jesus  Christ
the  Fulness,  the  Plenitude  of  God's  presence  and  grace. — U.  E.  T.

Vers.  15 — 29. — Christ  all  in  aM.  The  truth  taught  in  our  text  is  that  Christ  is  all
and  in  all,  the  one  absolute  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  only  Eeoonciler  of
heaven  and  earth.     We  notice —

I.  The  Divine  pre-eminence  of  Christ.  This  includes :  1.  His  supremacy  in  relation
to  Ood.  He  is  his  Image,  Likeness,  Eepresentation.  Heathen  idolatries  utter  the  long-
ing of  the  soul  for  him.  To  the  prayer, "  Show  us  the  Father,"  Christ  answers,  "  He  that
hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  2.  His  supremacy  in  relation  to  nature.  He  is
"  the  Firstborn."  To  all  creation  he  stands  as  Heir.  We  notice:  (1)  His  creative  agency.
Christ  is  the  Wisdom  of  God ;  Christ  is  the  Word  of  God ;  Christ  is  the  Arm  of  God.
(2)  His  sustaining  energy.  He  binds  all  things  together.  (3)  His  consummating  glory.
He  is  the  End  of  creation,  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega.  As  the  bow  of  Ulysses  could  only
be  bent  by  its  master,  so  creation  only  fully  responds  to  the  touch  of  Christ.  3.  His
supremacy  in  relation  to  the  Church.  He  is  the  Head.  This  implies  sovereignty  and
syi^athy — vital  union.  We  say  that  "  the  blood  of  the  martyrs  is  the  seed  of  the
Church."  In  an  infinitely  higher  sense  the  blood  of  Christ  is  the  seed  of  the  Church.
4.  His  supremacy  in  relation  to  the  Besurrection.  He  is  "  the  Firstborn  from  the  dead."
The  risen  Christ  is  the  life  of  the  Church.

II.  The  explanation  or  this  Divine  pre-eminence  is  the  Divine  plenitude.
Christ  is  as  supreme  as  the  apostle  has  been  describing  because  he  is  so  full  of  God.  He
is  the  Pleroma.  This,  as  Archdeacon  Parrar  shows,  is  the  key-note  of  the  Epistle.
When  we  say  this,  we  mean  that  in  Jesus  is  found  "  the'totality  of  Divine  attributes  and
powers."  For  in  him  there  is :  1.  Fulness  of  might.  He  is  manifested  in  his  miracles
and  in  his  own  resurrection  as  the  Lord  of  nature.  Its  forces  are  subject  to  him.  2.
Fulness  of  wisdom.  He  claims,  and  as  far  as  can  be  these  claims  are  verified,  to  reveal
God  and  to  know  what  is  in  man.  He  did  not  misinterpret  the  Divine  nor  misunder-
stand the  human.  3.  Fulness  of  i<n;e.  God  is  love.  But  could  there  be  an  amplitude
of  love  beyond  that  which  is  manifested  in  Jesus  Christ?  Where  is  the  love  of  God
and  where  the  God  of  love,  if  not  in  Je^us?

III.  The  work  or  Christ  in  his  pre-eminence  and  plenitude  is  the  work  of
eeconciliation.  Our  Lord  is  thus  set  forth  as  in  his  supremacy  and  fulness  the
great  Eeoonciler.  This  is  God's  purpose ;  nay,  God's  passion.  But  all  words  are  faint
in  describing  any  emotion  in  the  infinite  heart.  The  clear  teaching  here  is,  not  that
God  loves  because  Christ  died,  but  that  Christ  died  because  God  loves.  Eeconciliatiou
is  the  Father's  desire,  the  Father's  work.  Much  is  left  in  necessary  mystery,  but
Paul's  words  here  answer  for  us  two  great  questions.  1.  What  is  God  reconciling  to
himself  through  Christ  ?  We  must  not  be  afraid  of  the  assertion — "  all  things."  By  that
I  read  all  things  (1)  in  this  world's  activities  and  institutions ;  (2)  in  human  hearts  and
minds.  The  whole  universe  of  being  is  to  find  its  lapsed  harmony  in  Jesus  Christ ;  to
be  set  again  in  its  right  relation  to  the  righteous  Father.  2.  How  is  God  reconciling
all  things  to  himself  through  Jesus  Christ?  Such  a  work  involves  even  Divine  effort  j
such  a  work  is  worth  accomplishing  at  a  tremendous  cost.  Hence  "  the  blood  of  the
cross,"  i.e.  life  poured  out  in  a  sacrifice  of  utmost  pain  and  darkest  shame.  The  highest
can  only  serve  through  sulfenng ;  the  mightiest  ce^q  mly  save  by  sacrifice.    Tbre;


CH.  1. 1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSrANa  C3

practical  questions,  (t)  Has  Ohrist  pre-eminence  in  all  thinii  with  us  f  Do  all  our
sheaves  make  obeisance  to  his  in  the  great  field  of  life  and  love?  (2)  Is  Christ
the  Plenitude  of  all  things  to  us*  Kepler  felt,  in  studying  the  laws  of  nature,  that
he  was  thinking  over  again  the  thoughts  of  God.  Is  it  so  with  us  in  duty,  thought,
and  love?  Is  Christ  all  in  all?  (3)  Hks  Ohrist  reconciled  us  to  Qodl  Are  we  (a)
forgiven;  (6)  resigned;  and  (c),  most  difficult  of  all,  ceaselessly  obedient  to  God?—
TJ.  R.  T.

Vers,  23 — 29. — The  ministry  of  the  mystery.  In  these  words  the  apostle  dwells  on
his  own  part  in  carrying  out  Christ's  work  of  reconciling  men  to  God.  That  he  does
this  in  no  boastful  spirit  goes  without  saying ;  but  that  he  does  so  without  any  affecta-
tion of  reserve  or  of  modesty  is  equally  plain.  Indeed,  he  sets  forth  with  unusual
emphasis  the  glory  of  the  Word  the  apostle  has  to  proclaim,  and  the  greatness  of  the
work  that  proclamation  involves :  that  Word,  he  shows,  is  a  sublime  mystery ;  that  work
a  manifold  ministry.

I.  The  work  op  the  ministry  is  the  peoclaimino  op  a  blessed  mtstebt.  The
term  "  mystery,"  as  Paul  here  twice  uses  it,  and  often  in  this  Epistle,  does  not  describe
what  is  essentially  incomprehensible,  but  rather  what  was  hidden  but  is  now  revealed.
The  gospel  is  a  mystery,  but  a  mystery  that  is  to  be  preached  fully,  as  Bishop  Lightfoot
renders  the  word  "  fulfil ; "  a  mystery  that  is  made  manifest,  a  mystery  into  which  (as
the  word  borrowed  from  the  ancient  mysteries,  in  ver.  28,  suggests)  every  man  may  be
initiated.  1.  The  gospel  a  mystery.  All  religion  deals  with  mystery.  Genuine  mystery
is  the  stamp  of  a  religious  divinity;  false  mystery  is  the  counterfeit  superstition
stamps.  In  its  aspect  towards  the  vast,  the  infinite,  the  Divine,  religion  must  always
have  some  mystery  to  man.  2.  The  sospel  a  mystery  that  was  long  secret  from  man.
"  Hidden  things  belong  to  God."  'J'here  are  hidden  facts  and  laws  in  nature  that
science  has  only  gradually  discovered  or  is  now  only  gradually  discovering ;  hidden
moral  meanings  in  nature  and  history  that  poet's  sight  only  can  descry  and  poet's  song
only  describe.  There  were  hidden  things  in  religion  that  only  holy  men  of  old  moved
by  the  Holy  Ghost  could  reveal.  3.  The  gospel  is  a  mystery  that  is  now  fully  revealed.
Whatever  may  have  been  the  guesses  of  nobler  pagans,  or  the  anticipations  of  patriarchs,
or  the  predictions  of  prophets,  all  was  only  the  pale  light  of  very  early  dawn  upon  the
hills  of  ancient  time.  It  was  noon  when  Christ  lived,  taught,  died.  The  Seal  was
broken,  the  secret  was  revealed.  What  secret  ?  4.  The  gospd  is  the  revealed  secret  of
Ood's  universal  redeeming  love.  Christ  is  fully  proclaimed.  And  Christ  is  the  Mystery.
In  hira  are  all  the  treasures,  all  the  wealth,  of  God  stored  away.  (1)  All  the  mystery  is
revealed  in  Christ.  As  the  rainbow  has  all  possible  colours  in  its  wondrous  arc,  as  the
fabled  music  of  the  spheres  has  all  possible  tones  in  its  chord,  so  in  Christ  is  aU  the
wisdom,  all  the  righteousness,  all  the  love,  of  God.  (2)  All  mm,  may  receive  the  bless-
ings of  this  mystery.  Christ,  and  Christ  freely  given  to  the  Gentiles,  and  Christ  freely
given  to  be  an  indwelling  Power  in  them,  is  the  great  Mystery,  which,  as  Paul  dwelt  on
it,  made  him  proclaim  it  with  newer  and  deepening  joy.  "  Now,"  when  I  see  the  full
extent  of  God's  mercy — "now,"  when  I  ponder  his  mighty,  all-sufficient,  all-embracing
love,  I  rejoice,  not  only  to  proclaim,  but  to  suffer  untold  sacrifices  in  proclaiming  it  to
men.  Anything,  Paul  felt  and  said,  was  worth  doing,  anything  was  worth  suffering,  if
he  might  but  preach  the  whole  gospel  without  reserve,  to  all  men  without  restriction.
This  leads  us  to  notice —

II.  This  work  involves  complete  consecsbation  on  the  part  of  its  ministers.
This  consecration  may,  indeed  often  does,  involve:  1.  Intensity  of  suffering.  Very
bold  does  the  assertion  of  the  apostle  seem  about  "  filling  up  what  is  behind  of  the
sufferings,  of  Christ."  Were  his  sufferings  incomplete,  then  ?  No  and  yes.  Yes ;  for  he
left  work  to  be  done  that  involves  suffering.  There  must  be  suffering  sympathy,  suffer-
ing self-denial,  sometimes  suffering  death,  in  carrying  on  the  work  of  bringing  men  to
God.  This  consecration  will  involve :  2.  Manifoldness  of  labow.  There  is  the  three-
fold function  of  the  Christian  worker  denoted  here.  This  consecration  is  the  result  of:
3.  The  highest  constraint. — U.  E.  T.

Vers.  1,  2, — The  salutation.  We  propose  to  offer  laief  hints  towards  a  consecutive
esfjjositiftn  of  this  invaluftble  Epistl*,  taking  the  Revised  Vcrsjon  ^8  our  te:^t.    In  tbii


84  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [0H.1. 1— 2ft

0)iening  sentence  we  learn  four  things  respecting  the  writer  and  his  fellow-Chiistians
to  whom  reference  is  made.

I.  Paul's  consciousness  of  authoeitt  as  an  apostle.  Observe  how  quietly  Paul
takes  for  granted  his  apostolical  authority.  Where  it  was  assailed,  as  at  Corinth  or  in
Galatia,  he  was  prepared  to  defend  it.  His  credentials  were  every  whit  as  valuable  aa
those  of  the  eleven.  Were  they  witnesses  of  the  risen  Christ  (Acts  i.  21,  22)  ?  So
was  he  (1  Cor.  ix.  1).  Were  they  selected  and  called  by  Christ  himself  (Mark  iii.
14 ;  Luke  vi.  13)  ?  So  was  he  (Acts  ix.  15 ;  xxvi.  16 — 18).  Were  they  inspired  by
his  Spirit  (.John  xvi.  13;  xx.  21,  22)?  So  was  he  (Gal.  i.  11—16;  1  Cor.  vii.  40;
xiv.  37).  Had  they  power  to  proclaim  the  gospel  with  authority,  to  bind  and  loose,  to
perform  "  the  si^ns  of  an  apostle"  (Matt,  xxviii.  18 — 20;  John  xiv.  12  ;  xx.  23)?  So
had  he  (1  Cor.  v.  3 — 5  ;  ix.  16,  17  ;  2  Cor.  ii.  10 ;  xii.  12).  We  can  hardly  overrate  the
importance,  in  the  present  day,  of  maintaining  the  authority  of  all  the  apostles  as  inspired
by  the  Spirit  of  Christ  to  teach  the  doctrines  of  Christ,  and  of  the  authority  of  St.  Paul
among  the  rest.  Such  a  consciousness  of  a  Divine  mission  and  authority  on  the  part
of  any  Christian  "sent"  "by  the  will  of  God"  may  be:  1.  Admonitory.  "What
manner  of  persons  ought  we  to  be?"  "It  is  scandalous  to  be  compelled  to  say  of
ministers  what  Tacitus  writes  of  Licinius,  'Such  a  torpor  had  invaded  his  mind
that,  unless  others  had  remi  nded  him  that  he  was  a  prince,  he  would  have  forgotten
it.' "  Dr.  Payson  tells  us  that  as  he  went  about  his  work  he  could  sometimes  hardly
restrain  himself  from  shouting  aloud  from  very  joy,  "  I'm  a  minister  of  Christ ;
I'm  a  minister  of  Christ."  2.  Encouraging.  For  if  we  are  sent  "by  the  will  of
God "  to  preach  or  teach  that  gospel  which  is  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation
to  every  one  that  believeth,"  we  may  go  and  proclaim  it,  expecting  it  will  be  made
a  blessing,  and  making  the  watchword  of  the  Crusaders  our  own,  "  God  wills  it."  And
we  may  emulate  Paul's  enthusiasm  in  preaching  "  the  Word  of  reconciliation"  (2  Cor.
V.  13—21).

II.  Paul's  fellowship  with  Timothy.  The  relations  of  Timothy  to  Paul  are
described  by  various  suggestive  terms.  1.  He  was  the  apostle's  spiritual  child,  his
"  own  son  in  the  faith  "  (1  Tim.  i.  2 ;  2  Tim.  i.  2).  But  here  and  in  the  inscriptions
of  other  Epistles  he  recognizes  him  as :  2.  A  brother  in  the  same  "household  of  faith,"
the  family  of  God,  in  which  the  Colossians  too  had  their  place,  in  which  "  one  is  your
Master,  even  Christ,  and  all  ye  are  brethren."  Elsewhere  he  recognizes  him  as:  3.  A
fellow-"  steward  of  tlie  mysteries  of  God."  Well  instructed  from  a  child  in  the  Scrip-
tures, he  preached  the  gospel  at  Corinth  in  company  with  Paul  (2  Cor.  i.  19),  and  could
be  trusted  to  pieach  the  same  truth  in  his  absence  (I  Cor.  iv.  17  ;  1  Thess.  iii.  2).  And
he  hiahly  commends  him  as :  4.  A  devoted  and  most  unselfish  fellow-worker  in  the
Church  of  Christ  (1  Cor.  xvi.  10,  11 ;  Phil.  ii.  19—22).  Further  illustrations  may  be
found  in  the  Epistles  to  Timothy.  Such  notices  as  these  show  the  humility  of  the
apostle.  There  is  no  pomp  of  ofiice  or  pride  of  power.  He  acts  in  the  spirit  of  his
own  precept  (Phil.  ii.  3).  He  delights  to  honour  a  brother,  though  confessedly  his
inferior,  by  associating  his  name  with  his  own,  thus  vouching  for  his  faith  and  com-
mending him  to  the  confidence  of  brethren  who  did  not  know  him.

III.  Paul's  estimate  of  the  Colossianb.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  the  apostle  assumes
that  the  Christian  community  he  addresses  is,  in  the  main,  worthy  of  the  titles  "  saints
and  faithful  brethren  in  Christ  Jesus."  These  words  imply  that  all  who  are  members
of  a  Church  should  be  expected  to  be  "  saints,"  i.e.  persons  consecrated  to  the  service
of  Christ ;  to  be  "  brethren,"  adopted  into  the  family  of  God  and  therefore  "  members
one  of  another,"  and  as  brethren  to  be  "faithful,"  to  "  show  all  good  fidelity  in  all
things,"  to  "hold  the  beginning  of  their  confidence  steadfast  unto  the  end."  But  such
a  character  can  only  be  maintained  "  in  Christ  Jesus,"  by  union  with  him.  One  of  the
Fathers  tells  us  that  a  saint,  sanctus,  is  so  called  from  two  words  sanguinne  tinctus,  i.e.
as  it  were  tinged  with  blood,  "  because  anciently  they  who  wished  to  be  purified  were
sprinkled  with  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice."  The  lesson  suggested  is  valuable,  though
the  etymology  may  not  be  correct  (Heb.  ix.  14 ;  x.  22).  Augustine,  commenting  on
Ps.  Ixxxvi.  2,  says,  "  If  thou  shalt  say  that  thou  art  holy  of  thyself,  thou  art  proud ;
but  being  a  believer  in  Christ  and  a  member  of  Christ,  jf  thou  shall  not  acknowledge
thyself  to  be  holy,  thou  art  ungrateful.  Say  unto*God, '  I  am  holy ;  for  thou  hast  sanc-
tified me.' "  Our  napaes  are  a  perpetual  appeal  to  us  tg  gopsecration,  purity,  and  fidelity,


CH.  1. 1-29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  BR

or  they  are  witness  against  us.     It  is  not  enou?;h  to  be  called  "  faithful ; "  "  it  is  required
in  stewards  that  a  man  he  foimd faithful"  (Ps.  cxxxix.  23,  24).

IV.  Paul's  affectionate  oebbtino  to  them.  "  Grace  "  is  the  initial  good  and
"  peace  "  the  final  good.  Grace  is  "  the  well-spring  of  all  mercies,  peace  the  crown  of
all  blessings."  The  old  Hebrew  salutation,  "  peace,"  expands  under  the  light  and  love
of  Christ  to  "  grace  and  peace"  in  many  of  Paul's  Kpistles,  and  to  "  grace,  mercy,  and
peace  "  in  some  of  the  later  0"es  (1  Tim.  i.  2 ;  2  Tim.  i.  2 ;  Titus  i.  4).  These  bless-
ings come  from  God  our  Father  the  Fountain  (Ps.  xxxvi.  9 ;  Jas.  i.  17) ;  they  are
treasured  up  in  Christ  the  Reservoir,  ever  full  of  "living  water "(ver.  19 ;  John  iv.  10,
14),  and  conveyed  to  us  by  the  Holy  Spirit  as  a  channel;  one  yet  manifold  ("  the  seven
Spirits,"  Kev.  i.  4),  because  distributin;^  to  the  necessities  of  each  individual  believer.
We  can  wish  fur  one  another  no  better  blessings  than  God's  grace  and  God's  peace ;  for
"  in  his  favour  is  life ; "  "  the  peace  of  God  passeth  all  understanding." — E.  S.  P.

Vers.  3 — 8. — Hie  thanksgiving.  Good  news  from  ColosasB  had  been  brought  to  Paul
at  Rome  by  Bpaphras.  This  devoted  servant  of  Christ  (oh.  iv.  12)  had  probably  been
the  first  evangelist  sent  by  Paul  to  Colossse,  and  the  founder  of  the  Cburch  there  (ver.  7,
Revised  Version).  He  brought  also  news  which  caused  the  apostle  much  anxiety
(ch.  ii.  1,  2,  8,  etc.).  But  before  he  utters  cautions  he  pours  forth  thanksjjivings.  Wo
are  thus  reminded  of  two  things.  1.  Paul's  largeness  of  heart.  Love  "  rejoiceth  in  the
truth"  and  "envieth  not"  thuse  who  have  either  more  spiritual  gifts  or  more  temporal
blessings  (Rom.  xii.  15).  The  fruit  of  Bpaphras'  ministry  was  a  source  of  joy  to  him.
He  felt  grateful  for  the  gifts  in  money  from  the  Philippians  brought  by  Epaphroditus
(Phil.  iv.  17,  18),  but  more  for  "the  love  in  the  Spirit"  of  the  Colossians  reported  by
Epaphras.  2.  Paul's  sympathy  with  the  mind  of  his  Master.  Christ  also  dictated
Epistles.  Wherever  there  is  anything  to  commend  in  the  Churches  of  Asia,  the  Lord
mentions  this  before  he  utters  a  word  of  censure.  The  apostle,  writing  earlier,  but
taught  by  the  same  Spirit  of  Christ,  pursues  a  similar  course  in  nearly  all  his  Bpistlea
(Rom.  i.  8;  1  Cor.  i.  4;  Bph.  i.  16;  Phil.  i.  3;  1  Thess.  i.  2;  2  Thess.  i.  3).  "The
meeknefis  and  gentleness  of  Christ "  enable  him  to  praise  and  congratulate  even  the
disorderly  Church  at  Corinth.  The  apostle  blends  thanksgivings  with  his  prayers,
especially  on  account  of  that  triad  of  fjraces,  faith,  love,  hope,  which  elsewhere  he
rejoices  in  (1  Cor.  xiii.  13;  1  Thess.  i.  3).  Their  faith  worked  by  love  and  was
sustained  by  hope.  Their  permanent  fruitfulness  proved  the  reality  of  their  spiritual
life.  We  must,  however,  observe  that  the  term  "hope"  is  used  here  in  a  sense  some-
what different  to  that  in  the  other  passages  quoted  above.  It  is  the  object  of  hope  (as
in  Gal.  v.  5;  Titus  ii.  13;  Heb.  vi.  18),  implying  subjective  hope.  That  "hope  set
before  us  "  "  we  have  as  an  anchor  of  the  soul,  a  hope  both  sure  and  steadfast,  and  enter-
ing into  that  which  is  within  the  veil."  Following  the  suggestions  of  this  figure,  we
may  notice  some  of  the  links  of  the  chain  of  spiritual  blessings  by  which  the  souls  of
converts  are  connected  with  that  anchor,  and  on  account  of  which  ministers  may  give
thanks  on  behalf  of  Christians  who  in  these  respects  resemble  the  Colossians.

I.  We  have  heard  "  the  Word  op  thk  tbuth  of  the  gospel."  No  gospel,  no  hope
(B|)h.  ii.  12).  We  did  not  come  to  the  gospel;  it  "  is  come  unto"  us.  The  Physician
sought  the  patient,  the  Saviour  the  sinner  (Isa.  Ixv.  1 ;  Luke  xix.  10).  The  gospel  in
its  triumphant  progress  throughout  all  the  world  reached  Great  Britain,  an  Ultima
Thule,  brought  by  unknown  missionaries  who  "  for  his  Name's  sake  went  forth,  taking
nothing  of  the  Gentiles."  We  ourselves  have  heard  "  the  joyful  sound,"  the  genuine
gospel,  "  the  grace  of  God  in  truth  "  (Gal.  ii.  6;  1  Pet.  v.  12),  the  gospel  of  Christ  which
alone  is  "  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation."

II.  We  have  trusted  ourselves  to  Christ.  "  Your  faith  in  Christ  Jesus."  We
have  not  only  heard,  but  we  lenow, "  the  grace  of  God  in  truth."  Wo  know  it  because
we  have  had  a  Divine  Teacher.  "In  coelo  cathedram  habet  qui  corda  ducet"  (Augus-
tine). Our  faith  is  the  gift  of  God;  it  rests  not  "in  the  wisdom  of  man,  but  in  the
power  of  God."  Thus  we  "  know  whom  we  have  believed,"  etc.  (2  Tim.  i.  12 ;  1  John
V.  13,  19,  20).     Belief  conducts  to  knowledge  (John  vi.  69).

III.  We  jiRE  BRINGING  FORTH  FRUIT.  Whcrcvcr  the  gospel  comes,  i.e.  comes  homo
to  men's  consciences  and  hearts,  it  must  be  a  fructifying  power.  "  Even  as  it  is  also  in
all  the  world  bearing  fruit,"  etc.    Ours  is  not  a  faith  which  "  ii  dead  in  itself  bo,  ause  it

C0L®8ST\NS.  F


6«  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oh.  i.  1—29

has  not  works."  "  Can  that  faith  save  "  ns  (Jag.  il.  17, 14)  ?  Ours  is  a  "  faith  working
thiuiyli  love."  The  quiokeuiug  Spirit  within  iis  will  Ijring  forth  "  fruit  after  his  kind"
(Gal.  V.  22,  23).  One  of  the  most  characteiistio  fruits  is  love.  "  The  love  which  ya
have  toward  all  the  saints."  We  cherish  love  toward  them  because,  in  spite  of  all
their  failings,  they  are  beloved  children  of  our  Father  God  (I  John  iv.  7 ;  v.  1).

IV.  Our  fruits  are  visible  and  permanent.  They  are  such  as  an  Bpaphras  could
discern  and  report.  Our  lights  shine ;  our  good  works  are  seen  (cf.  1  Thess.  i.  7 — 9 ;
3  John  6).  This  fruit-bearing  is  prompt.  "  Since  the  day,"  etc.  The  fruit  itself
multiplies;  the  gospel  is  "beaiing  fruit  and  increasing."  Side  by  side  with  the  out-
ward growlh  of  the  gospel  (which  may  be  illustrated  by  the  notices  of  the  increase  of
the  Church  in  Judsea  from  the  "  about  a  hundred  and  twenty  "  to  the  "  many  myriad-  "
of  Acts  xxi.  20;  and  from  progress  in  our  own  days),  there  is  the  ripening  of  GhrisUan
character  (2  Thess.  1.  3 ;  Heb.  vi.  10)  and  the  leavening  influence  of  the  gospel  on
modern  society.  For  all  these  things  we  thank  God,  but  especially  if  our  fruit  is
permanent.  The  gospel  still  is  hearing  fruit  in  us  (Fs.  i.  3).  Our  hearts  are  not  the
stony  or  thorny  ground.  Christ's  object  is  being  fulfilled  (John  xv.  16).  We  have
not  forgotten  our  first  love ;  our  last  works  are  more  than  our  first.  "  The  past  things
perish  if  those  things  which  were  begun  cease  to  go  on  to  perfection"  (Cyprian).
Growth  and  persistence  are  causes  for  sincerest  thanks.

V.  "The  hope  which  is  laid  up  in  the  heavbks"  sustains  oub  faith  and  love.
" Faith  .  .  .  and  love  .  .  .  because  of  the  hope."  This  hope  laid  up  is  itsilf  one  of
the  things  "  hoped  for."  It  is  a  reserved  blessing,  part  of  that  great  goodness  of  God
"  laid  up  for  them  that  fear  thee  "  (Ps.  xxxi.  19 ;  1  Pet.  1.  4,  5).  But  the  links  in  the
chain  of  spiritual  blessin>;s  we  have  examined  unite  our  souls  here  to  the  inheritance
yonder  (Eom.  viii.  24,  25).  Such  hope  maketh  not  ashamed  (Rom.  v.  5;  Jude  20,  21).
If  our  souls  are  not  firmly  moored  to  that  object  of  hope  "laid  up  for  us  in  the
heaveus,"  let  us  ask — Which  is  the  missing  link? — E.  S.  P.

Vers.  9 — 12. — The  intercession.  The  news  brought  by  Epaphras  had  a  further  effect
on  the  apostle.  It  prompted  him,  not  only  to  thanksgivings,  but  to  intercessions.  In
the  Christian  life  some  prayers  receive  definite  answers  and  need  not  be  re]ieated.
But  new  subjects  are  perpetually  coming  before  us.  Thus  there  is  a  call  on  us  to
"pray  (ir/joo-eiixoM"')  without  ceasing"  and  to  "make  request  (oireo/ioi)"  with  per-
severance for  definite  blessings  till  they  are  granted,  and  petitions  are  changed  into
thanksgivings  or  are  clearly  refused.  Note  how  Paul,  while  "  in  labours  more  abundant,"
found  time  for  prayers  "  without  ceasing  "  also  (Bom.  i.  9 ;  PhiL  i.  4 ;  2  'I'im.  i.  3).  As
a  specimen  of  his  intercessions  take  this  prayer.  The  requests  end  with  the  words,
"  Giving  thanks  unto  the  Father,"  though  the  prayer  may  be  said  to  include  the
statements  of  sublime  truth  which  follow  (vers.  12 — 14),  which  suggest  motives  for
seeking  the  blessings  asked  on  their  behalf.  And  the  prayer  itself  comes  to  no  definite
end,  but  may  be  said  to  lose  itself  in  adoration  as  the  apostle  unveils  the  mystery  of
<ihe  person  and  glory  of  Christ.  The  key  to  the  somewhat  involved  clauses  of  the
sentence  is  in  ver.  10,  "to  walk  worthily  of  the  Lord  unto  all  pleasing."  And  the
objects  of  the  prayer  are —

I.  Fuller  knowledge  with  a  view  TO  A  more  consistent  character.  Paul
prays  that  the  Colussians  may  receive  what  they  already  possess  (vers.  6,  9 ;  cf.
Ps.  cxvi.  2;  Matt.  xiii.  12).  The  more  God  gives,  the  more  we  should  ask  of  him.
Gud's  "  will "  includes  doctrines  to  be  believed  and  duties  to  be  discharged  (cf.
John  vi.  40 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  3).  The  two  questions  put  by  Paul  on  the  day  of  his  con-
version, "Who  art  thou.  Lord?"  and  "Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?"  arc  tl  e
two  ^reat  queslions  of  the  Christian  life.  An  uneducated  conscience  is  a  more  serious
obstacle  to  growth  in  grace  than  an  unenlightened  intellect.  Our  "wisdom  and  under-
standing "  need  to  be  "  spiritual "  (Ps.  xxv.  9, 14 ;  1  Cor.  ii.  9 — 12)  as  contrasted  with
"  philosophy  and  vain  deceit"  and  mere  worldly  policy  (ch.  ii.  8, 18,  23).  The  Holy
S|iirlt  cun  make  us  discriminating  as  well  as  sensitive.  The  wisdom  needed  may  be
had  for  the  asldns;  (Jas.  i.  5).  For  all  the  knowledge  gained  is  in  order  to  enable  us
"  to  walk  worthily  of  the  Lord  unto  all  pleasing."  The  end  of  all  knowledge  is
conduct  (John  xiii.  17).

II.  A  consistent  character  in  all  its  various  asieots.    Three  signs  of  a  fall-


OH.  I.  1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSI ANS.  67

orbed,  consistent  Christian  character  are  mentioned  in  three  clauses  (see  Greek,  vers.
10 — 12).  They  are  comprehensive  enough  to  describe  a  completely  sunctified  life.
1.  Fruit/ulness.  This  is  the  natural,  as  it  is  also  the  appointed,  end  of  spiritual  life
(John.  XV.  16) ;  "  fruit  after  its  kind."  But  whereas  a  fruit  tree  can  bring  forth  only
one  variety  of  fruit,  we  are  to  be  "bearing  fruit  in  every  good  work" — all  manner  of
fruit,  like  the  tree  of  life  in  the  Paradise  of  God.  "Twelve  manner  of  fruits  "are
said  to  be  borne  by  that  celestial  tree.  And  no  less  than  nine  varieties  of  "  the  fruit
t!  the  Spirit "  (note  "  fruit,"  not  "  fruits,"  unity  in  diversity)  are  enumerated  in  a  single
passage  (Gal.  v.  22,  23).  Any  manifestation  of  Christian  consistency  may  be  fruitful,
though  here  the  reference  is  chiefly  to  the  active  Christian  life.  While  bearing  fruit,
iFe  ourselves  shall  be  "growing"  and  "increasing."  A  fruitful  life  is  a  healthy  life.
The  "spiritual  wisdom  and  understanding"  already  asked  for  will  be  means  of  grace
and  of  growth,  like  rain  and  dew  to  the  plant  (Dent,  xxxii.  2 ;  Hos.  xiv.  5).  We  shall
increase  "  by  the  knowledge  of  God "  (Revised  Version,  margin).  Such  spiritual
fruitfulness  and  growth  will  be  most  "  pleasing "  to  Gk)d  (John  xv.  8).  2.  Patience.
(Ver.  11.)  The  reference  here  is  to  the  passive  virtues.  "Patience  and  long-suffering"
remind  us  of  the  heroic  endurance  and  the  superhuman  self-restraint  by  which  suffering
Christians  may  glorify  God.  To  enable  us  to  suffer  patiently  and  to  suffer  long,  the
omnipotence  of  God  is  put  forth.  His  almighty  and  everlasting  arms  are  placed
beneath  us  to  prop  up  our  poor  feeble  patience.  So  great  are  "  the  riches  of  his  glory  "
and  "  the  might  of  his  glory,"  that  he  can  enable  us  to  endure,  not  only  with  patience,
but  even  "with  joy  "  (Eora.  v.  3;  2  Cor.  xii.  9,  10).  Suffering  may  be  as  high  a
vocation  as  preaching.  Notice  how  our  Lord,  passing  over  all  the  active  labours
of  Peter  with  a  word  ("  Feed  my  sheep "),  fixes  attention  on  his  last  sufferings  and
death  as  the  special  means  by  which  (in  St.  John's  words)  "he  should  glorify  God"
(John  xxi.  18,  19).  3.  Thankfulness.  (Ver.  12.)  Some  of  the  causes  for  thankfulness
are  brought  before  our  thoughts  in  the  clauses  that  follow.  But  we  need  go  no  further
than  that  name  "the  Father,"  for  hallelujahs  to  rise  to  our  lips.  (Illustrate  this  from
some  of  the  Father's  names,  "Father  of  mercies,"  "Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"
etc.,  and  some  of  the  statements  respecting  him — ^"The  Father  himself  loveth  you;"
"  Your  Fatlier  knoweth,"  etc.)  Such  thankfulness  strengthens  patience.  (Ulustrations  •
German  Reformers,  in  times  of  special  trouble,  cheering  one  another  by  singing  the
forty-sixth  psalm.  Some  Malagasy  Christians,  during  the  persecution,  when  meeting
with  the  late  Rev.  W.  Ellis  and  enjoying  secret  Christian  fellowship,  on  one  occasion
said,  "  We  are  so  happy  we  must  sing."  Warned  of  the  danger  of  being  heard,  they
restrained  themselves  for  a  time,  but  soon  said  agaiu,  "TFe  must  sing ;"  and  they  sang
in  a  whisper.

If  this  prayer  is  answered  in  our  experience,  we  enjoy  the  three  elements  of  a
consistent  and  robust  Christian  life  described  by  our  Lord  in  John  xiiL  17,  viz.  knowing,
doing,  feeling  :  "  If  ye  know  these  things,  happy  are  ye  if  ye  do  them." — B.  S.  P.

Vers.  12 — 14. —  The  love  of  the  Father.  We  have  seen  that  the  apostle's  prayer
loses  itself  in  utterances  of  adoring  gratitude  to  the  Fountain  of  all  good.  In  the
work  of  our  salvation  we  have  proofs  of  *he  love  of  the  Father  (John  iii.  16;  Rom.
viii.  32),  the  love  of  the  Son  (Gal.  ii.  20  ;  Eph.  v.  2),  and  the  love  of  the  Spirit
(Rom.  XV.  30 ;  Eph.  iv.  30),  of  the  one  "  God  of  our  salvation."  In  vers.  12—14
Paul  reminds  the  Colossians  of  the  love  of  the  Father,  and  that  the  blessings  which
this  love  secures  to  us  are  powerful  motives  for  gratitude  and  for  seeking  to  attain
to  that  character  for  which  he  has  been  praying.  The  blessings  which  the  Father's
loTe  procures  for  us  includes  four  changes — a  change  oi place,  oi  character,  of  kingdom,
and  of  state,

I.  A  CHANGE  OF  PLACE.  There  is  an  "inheritance"  which  has  been  "prepared
and  ia  "reserved"  for  us  (Matt.  xxv.  34;  1  Pet.  i.  5).  It  is  not  here,  but  "in
heaven;"  not  here,  amid  darkness  and  ignorance,  "  the  shadow  of  death,"  and,  what
is  worse,  the  stern  realities  of  sin  and  of  death  itself;  but  "in  light" — note  various
uses  of  this  figure  (Isa.  Ix.  19,  20 ;  Eph,  v.  8,  9 ;  1  John  1.  6 ;  ii.  8—10 ;  Rev.  xxi.  23 ;
xxii.  5,  etc.).  That  inheritance  is  possessed  only  by  God's  "  saints,"  whether  angelic
or  human.  The  sanctity  needed  for  this  inheritance  is  something  more  than  that
"consecration*  of  heart  to  God  which  even  we  sinful  children  of  Grod  may  enjoy  as  wo


68  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8,  [oh.  1. 1—29.

render  service  in  the  lower  sanctuary  of  "  this  present  evil  world."  The  "  saints  in
light "  are  "  without  blemish,"  "  fnultless."  God,  who  is  himself  "  light,"  is  our  pledge,
tliat  in  that  inheritance  there  shall  be  "  no  darkness  at  all,"  nothing  "  that  deflleth,"  etc.
(Rev.  xxi.  27).

II.  A  CHANOE  OF  CHARACTER.  "Who  made  us  meet,"  etc.  The  reference  la  not
here  to  that  growth  in  the  elements  of  spiritual-mindedness  by  which  we  become
increasingly  fitted  for  the  employments  and  enjoyments  of  the  heavenly  inheritance.
Paul  has  been  praying  for  these  (vers.  9 — 11) ;  but  here  he  recoguizes  that  the  new
nature  which  God  has  bestowed  on  us  has  already  qualified  us  "  to  be  partakers,"  etc.
A  king's  child  is  already,  by  his  birth,  capable  of  taking  some  part  in  the  life  and  the
engagements  of  the  palace.  The  penitent  robber  could  take  a  place  in  Paradise  on
the  day  of  his  conversion.  If  we  are  partakers  of  the  Divine  nature  we  are  meet  for
the  Divine  inheritance.  Already  we  are  "children  of  the  light."  Our  darkness  is
past,  never  to  return ;  the  light  shineth,  and  when  we  change  our  place  it  must  needs
be  to  an  inheritance  suited  to  our  new  natures  and  present  characters  (John  xvii.  24).
Without  the  new  bii  tb  we  shall  be  as  unfit  for  our  inheritance  above  as  a  boorish  peasant,
who  had  suddenly  come  to  a  peerage,  for  his  new  position,  and  as  incapable  of  enjoying
and  really  "inheriting"  it  as  one  who  had  no  taste  for  art  or  sacred  music  would
be  if  admitted  to  a  picture-gallery  or  an  oratorio ;  he  could  not  "  see  the  kingdom
of  God."  What  a  glorious  gilt  our  new  nature  is  I  It  is  only  by  means  of  it  we  are
made  capable  of  receiving  the  blessings  offered  to  us;  as  though  a  monarch  could  not
only  give  us  a  high  place  in  his  service,  but  at  the  same  time  could  endow  us  with
power  to  discharge  its  duties,  without  which  the  mere  position  would  be  a  burden
rather  than  a  blessing.     Thus  God  deals  with  us  (2  Cor.  v.  5  ;  Eph.  ii.  10).

in.  A  CHANQE  OF  KINGDOMS.  (Ver.  13.)  The  change  of  nature  is  accompanied  by
a  twofold  deliverance — we  are  rescued  from  a  lawless  tyranny  (ver.  13)  and  delivered
from  a  lawful  condemnation  (ver.  14).  We  speak  of  a  change  of  kingdoms,  for  else-
where we  read  of  the  "  kingdom  "  of  Satan  who  is  "  the  prince  of  this  world."  But
here  the  term  suggests  mere  power  ("the  power  of  darkness,"  spoken  of  by  Christ,
Luke  xxii.  53).  The  agents  of  Satan  are  described  as  "  the  powers,  the  world-rulers  of
(his  darkness  (Eph.  vi.  12).  We  were  under  their  power  and  under  the  tyranny
of  "  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air,"  who  i»  at  their  head  (Luke  xi.  21 ;  Eph.  ii.  2).
The  mental  anarchy  of  demoniacal  possession  is  a  fit  symbol  of  the  lawless  tyranny  of
the  kingdom  of  Satan.  Piom  that  tyranny  the  Father,  with  a  strong  haii'i,  rescued
us,  emancipated  us,  and  transferred  us  into  a  Divine  kingdom,  of  which  "  the  Son  of
his  love"  is  the  Head.  Love  is  as  much  the  essence  of  the  only  begotten  Sun  as  it  is
of  the  Father  (1  John  iv.  8 — 10).  So  that  his  kingdom  is  a  kingdom  where  love
is  the  ruling  power,  and  where  promises,  privileges,  and  benedictions  are  the  main
motives  for  wearing  his  easy  yoke.  We  are  made  free  citizens  of  that  kingdom  and
shall  share  in  its  triumphs  here  and  in  its  final  glnry.

IV.  A  CHANGE  OF  STATE.  (Ver.  14.)  The  kingdom  which  Christ  established  in
our  hearts  is  based  on  his  work  as  a  Redeemer  (Koin.  xiv.  9 ;  Phil.  ii.  7 — 11).  The
pardon  of  sins  and  the  translation  into  the  kingdom  are  inseparable.  Each  blessing
would  be  incomplete  and  insufficient  without  the  other.  Pardoned  sinners  left  under
the  power  of  Satau  can  no  more  be  thought  of  than  subjects  of  Christ's  kingdom  still
under  wrath.  We  were  under  a  lawful  condemnation  as  well  as  a  lawless  tyranny.
From  that  merited  curse  we  have  been  ransomed  by  the  Father's  love  tlirough  the
redeeming  work  of  Christ  (Eph.  i.  7 ;  Titus  iii.  5—7).  The  fundamental  facts  and
doctrines  of  the  gospel  are  all  implied  here  (Rom.  iv.  25 ;  v.  1 — 11 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  3,  4 ;
Gal.  iiL  10^-13,  etc.).  We  thus  enjoy  a  change  of  state,  being  justified  and  no  longer
condemned.  Note  the  words,  "in  whom,"  etc.  Luther  remarks  that  there  is  a  good
deal  of  divinity  in  the  pronouns;  so  is  there  also  in  the  prepositions.  Christians  not
only  receive  blessings  throwjh  Christ,  but  in  Christ  (ver.  19;  1  Cor.  L  30;  1  John
V.  20,  etc.);  from  whose  fulness  we  receive  (like  the  air,  in  which  we  live  and  move
and  draw  our  breath  without  limitation  or  restraint;  not  like  water,  supplied  to  us  from
time  to  time  in  a  limited  cistern).  Notice  too  the  necessity  of  all  these  four  blessings
to  us,  and  how  absolutely  dependent  we  are  for  them  upon  the  love  Of  God  which  is  in
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  Our  enfranchisement  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ  includes  free
^giveneSB,  secures  for  us,  by  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  "  the  sanctification,  without  which


eH.1.1— 29.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANSl  M

no  man  can  see  the  Lord,"  and  ensures  our  admission  to  the  heavenly  inheritance
"  Blessed  are  they  that  wash  their  robes,"  etc.  (Eev.  xxii.  14;  see  also  Acts  xx.  32  j
xxvi.  17, 18  ;  Eotn.  viii.  29,  30 ;  Phil.  iii.  20).  What  motives  for  "  giving  thanks  unto
the  Father "  arise  from  the  reception  of  such  glorious  gifts  I — E.  S.  P.

Vers.  15 — 17. — Tlw  glory  of  the  Son.  The  Mpssinga  which  flow  to  us  from  the
love  of  the  Father  (vers.  12 — 14)  are  only  enjoyed  by  union  with  "the  Son  of  hia
love,"  "  in  whom  "  we  are  (1  Oor.  i.  30),  and  "  in  whom  we  have  our  redemption  "  and
all  its  allied  blessings.  Who  is  this  Son  of  God?  In  answering  this  question  the
apostle  unfolds  the  true  doctrine  of  the  Christ,  and  meete  one  of  the  errors  that  was
seeking  a  home  in  the  Colossian  Church.  The  error  of  the  heretical  teachers  was  two-
fold— "  They  had  a  false  conception  in  theology  and  a  false  basis  of  morals.  These
two  wPre  closely  connected  together  and  had  their  root  in  the  same  fundamental  error—
the  idea  of  matter  as  the  abode  of  evil  and  thus  an'agonistio  to  God.  As  the  two
elements  of  the  heretical  doctrine  were  derived  from  the  same  source,  so  the  reply  to
both  was  sought  by  the  apostle  in  the  same  idea — the  conception  of  the  person  of  Christ
as  the  one  absolute  Mediator  between  God  and  man,  the  true  and  only  Reconciler  of
heaven  and  earth."  The  practical  error  is  dealt  with  in  the  second  chapter;  the
doctrinal  heresy  is  refuted  here.  The  false  teachers  seem  to  have  believed  in  a  variety
of  angelic  or  superhuman  mediators  who  had  some  place  in  the  works  of  creation  and
redemption.  Paul  teaches  that  both  in  the  universe  and  in  the  Church,  in  crention  and
redemption,  Christ  is  the  one  and  all-sufficient  Mediatnr.  He  alone  could  fill  the  void
between  God  and  man ;  he  alone  could  be  the  great  Beconciler;  and  to  him  alone  was
due  the  homage  which  these  false  teachers  were  div<  rting  to  angels  or  other  beings
standing  in  the  place  which  God  claims  for  "  the  Son  of  his  love."  The  apostle's
teaching  is  "that  in  all  things  he  might  have  the  pre-eminence" — in  relation  to  God;
to  the  universe,  the  natural  creation;  and  to  the  Church,  the  moral  creation  (veri.
IS— 18).

I.  The  qlobt  of  the  Sow  nr  eelation  to  God.  "Who  is  the  Image  of  the
Invisible  God."  The  two  chief  ideas  seem  to  be  representation  and  revelation.  Else-
where the  Son  is  called  "  the  Effulaence  of  his  glory  [revelation],  and  the  very  Image  of
his  substance  [representation]"  (Heb.  i.  3).  We  may  find  an  important  application  of
this  truth  in  the  life  and  character  of  the  Incarnate  Word.  Christ's  words,  "  He  that
hath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father,"  seem  to  require  this.  The  Father's  perfections
were  represented  and  reflected  in  the  sinless  character  of  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  as  the
biightness  of  the  midday  sun,  on  which  we  cannot  gaze,  may  be  reflected  in  a  lake  or
mirror,  and  under  certain  limitations  its  rays  may  be  examined  and  analyzed.  Through
the  words  and  conduct  of  Jesus  we  may  learn  much  concerning  the  truthfulness,  the
unselfishness,  the  indignation,  and  the  love  of  God.  But  while  this  truth  may  have
been  a  thought  in  Paul's  mind,  the  truth  he  teaches  here  is  part  of  the  revelation  which
Sciipture  gives  respecting  the  nature  of  the  Triune  Jehovah.  That  the  term  " Image  "
refers  to  the  pre-incarnate  Christ,  we  infer  from  (1)  the  creation  being  ascribed  to  him ;
and  (2)  the  term  "Firstborn,"  etc.,  being  coupled  with  it — a  tei-m  which  includes  bnth
priority  and  supremacy.  Notice :  1.  There  is  that  in  the  Divine  nature  which  is  both
invisible  and  incomprehensible.  (Bxod.  xxxiii.  20 ;  John  i.  18;  1  Tim.  vi.  15, 16.)  As
we  cannot  see  "  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ "  with  mortal  eyes,  neither  can  we
fully  comprehend  a  Divine  Being  who  is  absolute,  infinite,  without  beginning  and  with-
out end.  2.  Tet  God  hath  been  seen  by  mortal  eyes.  (Gen.  xviii.  22 — 33 ;  xxxii.  28 — 30 ;
Exod.  xxiv.  10, 11 ;  xxxiii.  23 ;  Josh.  v.  13 — 15 ;  vi.  2,  etc.)  And  men  have  learned  to
see  God  by  the  eye  of  faith,  to  know  him  as  their  own  God.  The  doctrine  of  the  Word
of  God,  who  is  "  the  Image  of  God  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  4),  "  the  Life  "  and  "  the  Light  of  men  "
(John  i.  4;  1  John  i.  2),  is  the  reconciling  truth.  There  is  a  glory  in  God  which  no
creature  can  behold;  but  the  Divine  Word  is  a  ray  of  that  glory.  There  is  a  Divine
personality  which  is  invisible;  but  the  Wori  is  the  express  image  of  that  Person.
There  is  a  Divine  silence  respecting  mysteries  we  cannot  comprehend ;  but  there  is  also  •
Divine  "  Word  "  which  breaks  the  silence  and  reveals  to  us  something  of  the  infinite  and
incomprehensible  (John  i.  1,  14, 18).  Every  manifestation  in  time  has  been  through
him  who  is  "  the  Image  of  the  invisible  God."  But  "  who  by  searching  can  find  out
God"etc.  (Jobxi.  7— 9)?


70  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  CX)LOSSIANS.  [cH.  l  1—29

"  Thought,  repress  thy  weak  endeavour  I
Here  must  reason  prostrate  fall ;
Oh,  the  ineffable  for  ever.
And  the  eternal  all  in  all  I"

II.  The  globt  of  the  Son  in  relation  to  the  oebation.  Thisi  is  unfoUled  by
four  truths  respecting  him.  1.  He  is  "the  Firstborn  of  all  crealidn."  In  the  New
Testament  the  term  "Firstborn"  is  applied  five  times  to  Christ  (vers.  15  and  18;
Bom.  viii.  29 ;  Heb.  i.  6 ;  Eev.  i.  6).  Its  use  here  figuratively  reminds  us  of  the  place
which  the  firstborn  occupied  in  a  Hehrew  fiiinily.  Having  priority,  he  had  also  a
certain  supremacy  over  the  other  members  and  a  double  portion  of  the  inheritance.
Our  Lord  Christ  has  priority ;  "  before  Abraham,"  before  all  creation  (Jolin  i.  1,  2) ;
absolute  pre-existence,  "before  all  things"  (ver.  17).  He  has  supremacy.  If  Paul
heie  alludes  to  Ps.  Ixxxix.  27,  we  are  reminded  that  the  Messiah  is  " higher  than  the
kings  of  the  earth,"  "  King  of  kings,"  "  Lord  of  all,"  etc.  And  he  enjoys  more  than  the
firstborn's  double  portion  (John  iii.  34,  35 ;  v.  22,  23,  26,  27).  2.  A  is  the  means  q/
all  creation.  The  sixteenth  verse  confutes  the  notion  of  the  Son  of  Gud  being  himself
a  creature,  though  the  highest.  He  is  theCreator,  notof  "therest"  of  the  uui verse,  but
of  "all  things."  Who  can  adequately  interpret  that  mysterious  term  "in  him,"  etc.  ?
We  can  only  venture  to  suggest  such  truths  as  these :  Apart  from  Christ  there  would
have  been  no  creation  at  all.  He  was  the  reason  fur  it.  He  was  the  First  Cause  and  the
Final  Cause,  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega  of  creation.  The  term  "in  him"  includes  both
the  following  truths  "by  him"  and  "for  him,"  " through  him  and  unto  him."  The
same  preposition  (iv),  which  the  apostle  so  often  uses  to  describe  the  relations  between
the  Saviour  and  his  people,  he  here  employs  to  teach  us  the  relations  between  Christ
the  Cieator  and  the  universe.  But  these  are  but  guesses  towards  an  interpretation
(Luke  X.  21).  We  are  at  any  rate  expressly  taught  that  all  things  were  created
"through  him"  or  "by  him"  (John  i.  3);  "in  the  heavens"  (revelations  of  the  tele-
scope, Isa.  xl.  26)  "  and  upon  the  earth  "  (revelations  ot  the  microscope,  making  "  things
invisible"  become  visible), — all  were  created  by  Christ.  From  the  world  of  matter
we  turn  to  the  world  of  spirits,  to  things  strictly  "invisible."  The  false  teachers  may
have  indulged  speculations  as  to  the  ranks  and  power  and  authority  of  angels.  With-
out discussing  the  subject,  Paul  teaches  that,  whoever  they  may  be  and  whatsoever
their  authority,  they  are  all  created  by  and  subordinated  to  Christ,  the  "  Firstborn  of
all  creation."  3.  He  is  the  object  of  all  creation.  We  need  not  dissociate  the  human
nature  of  our  Lord  in  his  present  glory  from  the  Divine  nature  when  we  reflect  on
the  truth  that  all  things  were  created  "  for  him,"  "  unto  him."  It  is  a  sublime  thought
that  everything  in  creation  and  in  history  was  planned  for  the  glory  of  our  blessed
Redeemer".  This  world  with  its  mountains  and  lakes  and  cataracts,  its  flowers  and
fruits  and  birds,  was  made  so  beautiful  because  it  was  Christ's  world.  Other  worlds,
peopled  by  the  heavenly  hosts,  were  created  thut  his  glory  might  be  revealed  to
them  and  through  them.  Man  was  created  and  the  ages  of  history  were  all  arranged
for  him.  Sin  was  permitted  for  him  (like  a  dark  cloud  showing  more  clearly  the
glory  of  the  rainbow).  The  eternal  purposes  of  redemption  and  their  fulfilment  in
time  were  all  for  him.  What  a  proof  of  the  Deity  of  Christ  is  supplied  by  comparing
ver.  16  with  Eom.  xi.  36 !  4.  He  is  the  upholder  of  all  creation.  (Ver.  17.)  Being  "  before
all  things"  from  the  moment  of  creation  down  to  the  present  time,  he  had  upheld
all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power,  and  "in  him  all  things  consist,"  i.e.  hold
together.  He  is  the  Comer-stone  of  the  universe  no  less  than  of  the  Church.  Behind
the  laws  of  nature  we  see  the  mind  of  Christ.  If  he  were  to  cease  to  uphold  things
they  could  not  "hold  together;"  their  harmony,  nay  more,  their  very  existence,  would
cease ;  for  in  him  all  things  live  and  move  and  have  their  being.  But  "  My  Father
worketh  even  until  now,  and  I  work  "  (John  v.  17, 19 ;  x.  30).

All  these  truths  respecting  the  glory  of  Christ  remind  us  of  the  supreme  claims
over  each  one  of  us  of  that  Divine  Son  who  created  us  for  his  own  glory  and
redeemed  us  by  his  own  precious  blood,  that  he  might  reign  over  us  for  our  salvation
(Acts  V.  31 ;  Eom.  xiv,  7— 9).— E.  S.  P.

Vers.  18 — 20. — The  supremact/  of  Christ  in  the  moral  wniverse.  So  si  preme  is  the
glory  of  Christ,  that  he  occupies  a  similar  position  in  the  moral  as  he  does  in  th«


CH.  1. 1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  71


material  universe.    We  may  linger  on  the  ezliaustless  theme  of  the  glory  of  Christ
as  we  see  further  illustrations  of  it —

I.  In  his  relation  to  the  Chuboh.  L  "  He  is  the  Head  of  the  hody,  the  Church."
For  he  is  its  Founder ;  the  Church  is  his  creation  (Matt.  xvi.  18 ;  xvili.  17—20).  Having
"all  power  in  heaven  and  earth,"  his  glory  and  grace  are  so  great  that  he  cau  sustain
the  whole  Church  in  life,  and  rule  and  guide  each  member  of  it.  Our  life  is  bound  up
with  his  life ;  our  interests  are  made  his  own  by  the  symfiathy  of  our  living  Head.
(Illustrate  from  Acts  vii.  56;  ix.  4;  xviii.  9,  10;  xxiii.  11;  xxvii.  23,  24;  2  Tim.  iv.
17,  18.)  2.  "  Who  is  the  Beginning  " — the  first  in  tinu  and  the  first  in  power  in  relation
to  the  Church.  Because  he  is  "  the  First  and  the  Last,"  "  the  Beginning  of  the  creation
of  Goii,"  he  is  also  the  Fountain, "  the  Prince  [or,  'Author  *]  of  life  "  (Acts  iii.  14)  to  his
Church.  Every  act  of  pardon  granted,  every  shower  of  revivijig  grace  bestowed,  every
interposition  of  Providence, is  from  him.  (Illustrate  from  Jesus  Christ's  use  of  "I"  and
"  me  "  in  John  xiv. — xvi.)  3.  "  The  Firstborn  from  the  dead."  He  is  the  supreme  Lord
from  among  all  who  have  entered  the  grave,  by  virtue  of  his  being  the  first  to  rise  to
the  nev?  life  from  the  dead.  Note  the  contrast  between  the  resurrection  of  Christ  and
of  others.  Dying  voluntarily,  though  sinless  (John  x.  17,  18),  he  rose  by  his  own
power  (John  ii.  20),  not  to  die  again  (Rom.  vi.  9),  in  an  immortal  body  (Eev.  i.  18).
Thus  he  is  the  Cause,  the  Pledge,  and  the  Pattern  of  our  resurrection,  and  has  supremacy
over  his  Church  in  both  worlds  (Rom.  xiv.  9).  Already  we  have  seen  that  he  is
"  Firstborn,"  and  Lord  of  the  material  creation ;  and  he  has  the  same  position  in  the
spiritual  creation,  "that  in  all  things  he  miglit  have  the  pre-eminence."  He  is  the
Image  and  Manilestation  of  God,  the  First  Cause  and  the  Final  Cause,  the  Creator  and
Preserver  of  the  universe,  the  Head  and  Lord  of  the  Church,  the  Author  and  Pattern  of
our  glorious  resurrection.  Yes;  and  in  all  things  he  shall  have  the  pre-eminence
(Ps.  Ixxii.  17;  1  Cor.  xv.  25).  The  day  will  come  when  commerce,  science,  art,
literature,  shall  all  be  consecrated  to  him ;  when  the  minority  shall  become  a  majority,
and  an  innumerable  multitude  shall  "honour  the  Son  even  as  they  honour  the  Father"
(John  V.  23 ;  Eev.  vii.  9—17).

II.  In  his  work  AB  the  universal  Reconoilbr.  Whichever  of  the  alternative
renderings  of  ver.  19  in  the  Revised  Version  we  adopt,  the  precious  practical  truth  is
the  same.  The  pre-eminence  of  Christ  is  assured  by  "  the  fulness  "  that  abides  in
him.  All  the  Divine  perfections  are  his  (ch.  ii.  9).  We  may  take  the  term  in  its
widest  signification — a  fulness  of  life  and  power  and  glory,  of  goodnois  and  grace,
without  limit  and  without  end.  Thus  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  full  of  a  Divine  life
(John  iii.  34 ;  v.  26),  was  qualified  to  be  the  Agent  by  which  the  great  reconciliation
in  the  universe  should  be  accomplished  (ver.  20).  "  The  well  is  deep ;  "  the  place  is
"holy  ground."  The  reconciliation  of  "things  upon  the  earth"  is  a  mystery;  how
much  more  of  " things  in  the  heavens"!  Notice:  1.  Sin  introduced  discord  into  the
universe,  which  spread  to  this  earth.  It  not  only  separates  men  from  God,  but  brings
thereby  calamities  to  "  the  whole  creation."  Sin  left  to  itself  works  universal  ruin ;
"  when  it  is  full  grown  it  bringeth  forth  death."  God  must  gland  in  a  different
relation  to  sinners  and  to  the  unfallen.  If  the  guilty  are  to  be  saved,  a  new  relation
must  be  established  between  them  and  God.  This  is  "  the  reconciliation"  (Rom.  v.  ll).
The  change  in  man's  heart  is  a  result,  but  the  sequel  of  the  change  of  relations
established  by  "the  reconciliation  "  (2  Cor.  v.  18,  19).  2.  To  effect  this  reconciliation
a  propitiatory  sacrifice  was  neeiled.  To  show  righteous  grace  to  the  guilty  both
the  holiness  and  the  love  of  God  called  for  a  Divine  sacritioe.  No  theory  can  fully
clear  up  this  mystery  of  Divine  mercy ;  but  faith  accepts  it  and  Christian  experi-
ence attests  it  (Luke  vii.  35).  No  sacrifice  less  than  "the  death,"  "the  blood  of
the  cross,"  could  effect  this  reconciliation  (Rom.  v.  6 — 10;  2  Cor.  v.  21).  0  paradox
of  mercy !  The  sheddinj;  of  human  blood  stirs  up  strife ;  Christ's  blood  brings
down  peace.  Innocent  blood  cries  for  vengeance;  the  blood  of  the  cross  pleads  for
pardon  (Heb.  xii.  24).  3.  But  what  is  meant  by  the  reconciliation  of  the  things  in
the  heavens?  It  is  not  universal  restoration  of  the  devils  and  the  damned;  for  Paul
is  speaking  of  what  God  has  already  done  by  the  blood  of  the  cross,  and  in  ver.  23
he  speaks  of  the  final  salvation  of  believers  as  conditional.  The  passage  which  best
illustrates  ours  is  Eph.  i.  10.  We  can  only  throw  out  hints  as  to  the  meaning.  We
know  that  angels  are  intensely  interested  in  the  work  of  redemption  (Eph.  iii.  10;


n  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSIAN&  [ch.  1. 1— 2».

1  Pet.  i.  12).  The  entrance  of  sin  and  its  spread  among  the  human  race  may  have
produced,  tliough  not  distrust,  yet  something  lilte  dismay.  But  the  death  o£  Chi  ist
rsvealed  the  majesty  and  mercy  of  God  as  they  had  never  been  combined  before.  The
very  fact  that  the  lost  sons  of  men  could  he  "  made  nip[h "  by  the  death  of  Christ
brought  these  celestial  sons  of  God  still  nearer.  The  bonds  which  unite  these  unfallen
yet  finite  creatures  to  God  become  firmer  than  ever,  and  thus  the  harmony  of  the
universe  becomes  more  complete.  Such  are  some  of  the  jewels  in  the  crown  of  our
Divine  Mediator  and  Eeileemor.

Learn  :  1.  The  glory  of  the  cross.  Though  "all  the  fulness"  dwelt  in  Christ,  even
he  could  not  effect  a  reconciliation  except  by  death  (Gal.  vi.  14).  2.  The  eflicacy  of
the  cross.  Though  erected  on  this  tiny  globe,  its  power  extends  througliout  the
universe.    8.  The  motives  from  the  cross  (2  Cor.  v.  14, 15,  20). — E.  S.  P.

Tors.  21 — 2S.—The  apoKth's  comprehensive  view  of  salvation.  The  work  of  Christ,
though  comprehensive  enough  to  aifeot  the  whole  universe,  is  so  penetralive  and  personal
that  not  a  single  human  soul  is  overlooked  in  it.  Note  how  Paul  narrows  his  range  ol
view  from  the  universe  to  the  individual:  "To  reconcile  all  things  .  ,  .  you  hath  he
reconciled  .  ,  .  I  was  made  a  minister."  But  in  his  view  of  what  the  salvation
of  each  individual  was,  there  was  no  narrowness.  In  vers.  21 — 23  he  gives  us  a  com-
prehensive view  of  Siilvaiion.    He  speaks  of  the  past,  the  present,  and  the  future.

I.  What  wb  were.  "  Alienated."  True  in  an  especial  sense  of  the  heathen  Colossians
(Eph.  ii.  11,  12 ;  iv.  17 — 19),  we  yet  must  not  shrink  from  recognizing  this  as  a  descrip-
tion of  the  natural  state  of  ail  sinful  men  who  have  not  yet  accepted  the  offer  of
reconciliation.  It  thus  agrees  with  our  Lord's  verdict  on  humanity  (John  iii.  3).  If  we
do  not  relish  communion  with  God  or  conversation  about  him,  and  have  no  eager  desire
to  do  his  will  and  enjoy  his  favour,  these  are  clear  signs  of  alienation,  that  there  is
a  gulf  between  us  and  our  Father.  Such  alienation  does  not  end  in  mere  indifference;
it  leads  to  positive  enmity  (Rom.  viii.  7).  This  "hard  saying"  of  Scripture  can  easily
be  justified  in  the  court  of  conscience,  and  needs  to  be  impressed  on  the  hearts  of
the  unconverted.  They  may  feel  a  complacent  regard  towards  a  God  of  their  own
imagining,  but  a  positive  aversion  to  the  living  and  true  God,  who  hates  iniquity  and
"  is  angiy  with  the  wicked  every  day."  Are  they  subject  to  the  Law  of  God  ? — that  is
the  test.  They  are  not.  Both  hearts  and  acts  are  in  antagonism  to  him ;  "  enemies  in
yciur  mind  in  your  evil  works."  Not  to  speak  of  those  sins  of  the  flesh  from  which
they  may  have  been  restraimd,  selfishnrss  and  all  its  kindred  sins  of  the  Spirit  are
sufficient  proofs  of  the  alienation  and  enmity  of  mind  in  its  relations  to  God.  The
lamentable  indifference  of  men  to  Christ  and  his  salvation  is  the  crowning  proof  of  the
enmity  of  the  heart  towards  God  (John  iii.  18,  19).

II.  What  we  are.  "  Eeconciled."  The  work  of  reconciliation  is  twofold.  There
was  a  reconciliation  effected  on  the  cross  (ver.  23 ;  2  Cor.  v.  19).  There  is  a  reconcilia-
tion still  to  be  accomplished  in  the  heart  of  every  impenitent  sinner  (2  Cor.  v.  20).  For
there  are  two  obstacles  in  the  way  of  complete  reconciliation — the  one  is  in  the
character  of  God;  the  other,  in  the  character  of  man.  The  first  arises  from  God's
holiness ;  the  second,  from  man's  wilfulness.  The  first  was  removed  by  the  work  ol
Christ  as  a  propiti  't'Ty  sacrifice — "  that  lie  mijiht  himself  be  just,  and  the  justifierof  him
that  hath  faith  in  Jesus;"  the  second  is  taken  away,  immediately  by  the  work  of  the
Holy  Spirit  on  man's  heart,  but  mediately  through  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ
and  all  the  spiritual  powers  that  flow  therefrom  (John  xvi.  7 — 11 ;  Eom.  v.  10).  What
a  manifestation  of  "the  riches  of  his  grace  which  he  made  to  abound  toward  us  in  all
wisdom  and  prudence,"  thus  to  open  a  pathway  by  which  a  holy  God  might  righteously
make  the  first  overtures  of  mercy  to  a  reluctant  rebel  race!  And  was  it  not  equally
glorious  to  be  able,  without  destroying  man's  freedom  or  doing  any  violence  to  his
nature,  to  overcome  his  own  unwillingness,  and  open  a  pathway  into  his  sinful  heart  for
"the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding"?  But  at  what  a  cost  this  has
been  dune!  Paul  never  shrinks  from  "  the  offeree  of  the  cross."  In  the  face  of  false
teachers  at  Coloss89  and  amongst  ourselves,  he  affirms  the  reality  of  the  sacrificial  death
of  the  Divine  Son  in  whom  "all  the  fulness"  dwelt.  None  but  incarnate  God  could
effect  this  reconciliation,  and  even  he  only  "  in  the  body  of  his  flesh  through  death
(Heb.  X.  5— 10>


•CH.  1.1-39.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  73

III.  What  wk  shall  be.  "  Presented  faultless."  That  the  apostle  is  looking
forward  tu  the  future  we  infer  from  ver.  23.  He  holds  out  before  us  the  prospect  of
attaining  that  perfection  of  character  which  we  are  striving  to  attain  to,  but  which,  as
an  ideal,  is  perpetually  rising  and  recedinc;  as  we  reach  after  it  (Phil.  iii.  12 — 14).  We
shall  (j;ain  that  holiness  which  we  now  "  follow  "  (Heb.  xii.  14 ;  1  Pet.  i.  13 — 16).  We
shall  be  "unblamable,"  or  "without  blemish"  (a  sacrificial  term).  The  precept  in
Kora.  xii.  1  will  be  perfectly  fulfilled  then.  The  concession  in  1  Cor.  iv.  3  will  be
needless  then.  We  shall  be  "  unreprovable."  Now  Christ  must  at  least  say, "  I  have
a  few  things  agninst  thee,"  and  we  confess  Job  ix.  20,  etc.  But  then  neither  the
accuser  of  the  biethren,  nor  our  own  enlightened  consciences,  nor  God  himself,  will
reprove  us  (Rom.  viii.  33,  34).  And  all  this  "  before  him."  We  shall  be  pure  enough  to
bear  the  scrutiny  and  to  b^  happy  in  the  presence  of  that  God  whose  holiness  is  a  con-
suming fire  and  whose  presence  would  therefore  be  intolerable  to  a  sinful  soul  (1  John
iii.  1,  2;  Jude  24,  25).  But  there  is  a  condition  attached.  Paul  describes  it  in  terms
of  generous  confidence: "  If,  as  I  would  take  for  granted,"  etc.  (cf.  Phil.  i.  6).  There  is  a
truth  to  be  believed  (''  the  gospel "),  a  confidence  to  be  maintained  (yovir  " faith,"  2  Cor.
i.  24),  and  an  expectation  to  be  cherished  ("hope  ;"  cf.  Heb.  iii.  14;  vi.  11;  1  Pet.  L
3 — 5;  Jude  20,  21).  Learu:  1.  Our  steadfastness  in  Christ  is  the  best  evidence  of  our
reconciliation  by  Christ,  and  our  earnest  of  a  presentation  in  glory.  The  loss  of  faith
is  the  knell  of  hope.  2.  Our  assurance  of  reconciliation  and  our  hope  of  final  perfection
are  both  bound  up  with  the  glorious  gospel,  and  may  be  the  privilege  of  all;  for  that
go»pcl  Is  a  message  of  salvation  for  every  creature,  under  heaven. — B.  S.  P.

Ver.  24. —  The  privilege  of  suffering.  Following  the  Revised  Version,  and  omittin;;
"  who,"  we  notice  that  there  is  an  abruptness  in  the  way  iu  which  the  apostle  breaks
forth  into  thanksgiving  at  the  thought  of  his  sufferings.  "  Now  I  rejoice,"  etc.  The
underlying  thought  seems  to  be  this:  "If  ever  I  have  been  disposed  to  repine  at  my
lot,  if  ever  I  have  felt  my  cross  almost  too  heavy  to  bear,  yet  now,  now  when  I  con-
template the  lavish  wealth  of  God's  mercy,  now  when  I  see  all  the  glory  of  bearing  a
part  in  this  magnificent  work,  my  sorrow  is  turned  into  joy  "  (Lightfoot).  In  a  measure
every  (;hristian  labourer  may  enter  into  Paul's  joy  because  he  may  share  bis  motives
also.     We  note  two  reasons  for  regarding  suffering  as  a  f)rivilege.

I.  We  mat  thus  know  the  fellowship  of  Cubist's  sufferings.  "  I  fill  up  on
my  part  that  which  is  lacking  of  the  afflictions  of  Christ  in  my  fiesh."  The  onemss
of  Christ  and  his  people  is  the  key  to  these  mysterious  words.  In  1  Cor.  xii.  12  even
the  name  "  Christ"  is  given  to  the  body  as  well  as  the  Head.  The  sufferings  which
Christians  endure  are  endured  by  Christ  their  Head  in  them;  e.g.  Matt.  xxv.  35,  etc.;
Acts  ix.  4 ;  2  Cor.  i.  5 ;  Heb.  xiii.  13.  Jesus  Christ  during  his  eartlily  life  endured
sufferings  which  were  peculiar  to  himself.  They  were  vicarious,  propitiatory,  and
meritorious.  They  are  "finished"  (Rom.  vi.  9,  10).  But  the  time  of  suffering  is
not  yet  past  (Eom.  viii.  23).  Till  the  period  of  education  and  probation  is  past,  there
are  afllictions  of  Christ  yet  to  be  filled  up  (cf.  Rev.  xxi.  4,  5).  They  are  needful
for  the  accomplishment,  not  of  the  atoning,  but  of  the  saving  work  of  Christ.  And  if
he  selects  us  to-  be  members  in  whom  he  is  pleased  to  fill  up  some  of  his  sufferings,
we  may  regard  it  as  a  privilege  rather  than  as  an  infiiction.  The  term  for  "  fill  up"
is  very  emphatic.  It  suggests  the  thought  of  completing,  iu  response  to  or  in  exchange
for  something  else ;  as  though  Paul  meant "  He  suffered  for  my  redemption ;  shall  I  not
in  my  turn  suffer  for  his  glory  and  the  good  of  his  Church?"  All  sufferings  which
we  endure  as  Cl)ristians  may  be  privileges  because  promoting  the  work  of  full  salvation
in  our  own  souls  (John  xv.  2 ;  1  Pet.  v.  10,  etc.).  But  when  the  apostle  expresses  his
ardent  desire  to  "  know  the  fellowship  of  his  sufferings  "  (Phil.  iii.  8 — 10),  we  think  he
desired  to  share  sufferings  like  those  of  Christ  so  far  as  a  saved  sinner  can  enter  into
fellowship  with  the  sinless  Saviour.  This  may  be  the  case :  1.  When  our  sufferings
arise  from  the  same  cause,  viz.  sin,  whether  in  ourselves  (2  Cor.  vii.  9)  or  in  others.
Our  Lord's  three  recorded  weepings  were  occasioned  directly  or  indirectly  by  sin
(Luke  xix.  41;  John  xi.  33 — 35;  Heb.  v.  7 — 9).  Paul  wept  in  sympathy  with  his
Master  (Acts  xx.  19,  31;  2  Cor.  ii.  4;  Phil.  iii.  18).  2.  Wheu  they  are  endured  for
the  same  end  (1  John  iii.  8).  In  seeking  to  rescue  souls  from  sin  we  must  needs
undergo  self-denial  and  suffering.    But  thus  in  an  especial  manner  shall  we  be  "  fill-


y4  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN3,  [cH  i.  1—29

ing  up,"  etc.,  so  that  Christ  may  the  sooner  "  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul  and  be
satisGed."

II.  We  mat  thus  render  valuable  sebvice  to  our  fbllow-Chbistians.  Paul's
present  sufferings  as  an  apostle  and  as  an  ambassador  in  londs  at  Eome  were  especially
"for  you"  Gentiles.  And  already  they  were  the  means  of  conferring  great  beneBis
on  his  fellow-Ohristians  (Phil.  i.  12 — 14).  This  was  a  motive  with  the  apostle  at
other  times  (2  Cor.  i.  5;  iv.  8 — 15;  2  Tim.  ii.  10).  It  may  be  enjoyed  by  others — by
the  persecuted  (Acts  v.  41 ;  Phil.  i.  27 — 29),  by  the  self-denying  missionary  whose
heroism  kindles  the  flame  of  zeal  in  other  hearts,  by  earnest  workers  (1  Thess.  1.  6 — 8)
and  self-denying  givers  (2  Cor.  viii.  1,  2),  by  the  invalid  who  can  say  2  Cor.  i.  3,  4;
xii.  9, 10 ;  Phil.  iv.  11 — 13.  Some  of  the  best  blessings  have  come  to  Christ's  "  body,
the  Church,"  through  those  members  of  it  who  are  selected  for  especial  suffeiinj.  So
long  as  Christ's  purposes  are  fulfilled  in  us  we  may  well  leave  the  method  of  our
ministry  calmly  in  his  hands.  Suffering  may  be,  not  a  release  from  service  or  a  sub-
stitute for  it,  but  the  highest  form  of  it.  We  may  enjoy  the  sacred  indifference  of  the
apostle  (Phil.  i.  20),  and  look  forward  to  an  ample  "  recompense  of  rewaid  "  (2  Cor.  iv.
17, 18 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  12 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  12, 13).— E.  S.  P.

Vers.  24 — 29. — St.  PauVs  view  of  his  ministry.  In  these  verses  we  have  a  compre-
hensive view  of  the  ministry  of  the  apostle,  which  suggests  truths  respecting  the  nature,
subject,  and  object  of  every  ministry  that  claims  to  be  apostolic  in  its  spirit.  He  teaches
us  the  following  truths  : —

I.  That  his  ministry  was  a  stewardship  of  the  Word  op  God.  Twice  we  find
the  personal  claim,  "I;"  "I  Paul  was  made  a  minister."  But  far  from  the  spirit  of
egotism,  we  hear  in  these  words  the  echo  of  such  expressions  of  gratefiol  humility  as
we  find  in  1  Cor.  xv.  8—10 ;  Eph.  iii.  7,  8 ;  1  Tim.  i.  12 — 14.  For  his  ministry  was
a  «'  stewardship."  He  was  entirely  dependent  for  it  on  another.  He  went  forth,  not  to
publish  the  thoughts  excogitated  in  his  own  mind,  but  to  "deliver"  testimonies  and
doctrines  which  he  had  received  (1  Cor.  xv.  1 — 4).  The  "  mysteries  "  he  had  to  deal
with  were  not  sacraments,  but  truths ;  and  he  was  not  a  priest,  but  a  preacher  "  of  the
gospel . . .  whereof  I  Paul  was  made  a  minister "  (ver.  VS).  The  stewardship  was
entrusted  to  him  at  his  conversion  (Acts  xxvi.  17, 18).  From  it  he  could  not  escape
(1  Cor.  ix,  17).  But  he  gloried  in  it  (1  Cor.  iv.  1,  2 ;  Eph.  iii.  8).  Being  a  minister
of  Christ,  he  was  a  minister  for  the  whole  Church ;  "  whereof,"  i.e.  of  which  Church,  "  I
was  made  a  minister."  And  as  such  he  willingly  recognized  himself  even  as  a  bond-
servant of  the  Church  as  well  as  of  Christ  (SoiKos)  "  for  Jesus'  sake  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  5 ;  see
also  1  Cor.  ix.  19—23).  His  one  aim  was  to  be  faithful,  "  to  fulfil  the  Word  of  God  "
(Bom.  XV.  19 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  17).

II.  That  the  Word  entrusted  to  htm  was  a  mystery.  A  mystery,  according
to  St.  Paul,  is  a  truth  which  was  once  hidden  but  is  now  revealed.  It  is  not  discovered
by  men,  but  revealed  to  men.  This  applies:  1.  To  the  whole  gospel  (K)3h.  vi.  20).
Who  could  have  discovered  or  even  conceived  God's  "way  of  salvation"?  It  was  a
mystery  of  mercy.  But  it  is  now  an  open  secret,  revealed  by  Christ's  own  lips  and
through  his  apostles  and  committed  to  our  trust  (1  Tim.  i.  11;  Jude  3).  2.  To  the
precious  truth  that  was  especially  entrusted  to  St.  Paul  as  the  apostle  of  the  Gentiles
(Eph.  iii.  1 — 7).  The  admission  of  us  Gentiles  to  all  the  blessings  of  the  gospel  on
terms  of  perfect  equality  with  the  Jews  was  a  truth  which,  in  spite  of  such  predictions
as  Gen.  xxii.  18 ;  Isa.  Ivi.,  Ix.,  etc.,  was  "  hid  from  all  ages  and  generations,"  even
from  the  apostles  of  Christ  during  his  earthly  life  (Matt.  x.  5 ;  xv.  24).  Before  his
conversion  Paul  would  have  been  shocked  at  it  as  a  blasphemous  heresy.  But  God  had
revealed  his  Son  in  him  (Gal.  i.  15,  16).

III.  That  this  mystubt  found  its  solution  in  Christ.  1.  When  in  the  fulness
of  time  God,  transceuding  the  hopes  of  the  most  sanguine  anticipants  of  a  glorious
future,  "  sent  forth  his  Son,"  "  his  unspeakable  gift,"  it  would  have  been  unlike  God
to  confine  so  great  a  blessing  to  such  a  fraction  of  humanity  as  th*  Jews.  2.  The
appearing  of  Christ  was  the  greatest  vindication  of  God's  dealings  with  the  heathen
nations  which  in  time  past  were  suffered  "  to  walk  in  their  own  ways  "  (Acts  xiv.  16).
3.  The  atonement  of  Christ  explained  the  forgiveness  of  sins  anions,'  Gentiles  as  well
as  Jews  in  all  ages  (Bom.  iii.  25,  26).    4.  The  resurrection  of  Christ  brought  life  and


OH.  I.  1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  75

immortality  to  liglit  in  a  world  which  sorrowed  over  its  dead  as  liaving  "  no  hope."
5.  The  ideal  humanity  of  Christ  ("  the  Son  of  man  ")  pointed  him  out  as  "  the  Way  to
the  Father"  for  all  men  apart  fiora  the  hedges  and  barriers  of  the  Jewish  fold  (John  x.
16).  6.  The  reception  of  Christ  in  any  soul  brings  a  new  life  and  love  and  a  new  "  hope
of  glory  "  Ko  wonder,  then,  that  here  and  elsewhere  the  apostle  adds  term  to  term
("  riches  of  his  gh^ry,"  "  exceeding  riches  of  his  grace,"  etc.)  to  describe  God's  mystery
of  mercy  for  us  Gentiles,  "  which  is  Christ  in  you  the  Hope  of  glory."

IV.   TUAT  THE   PKBACHINO   OF   ChRIST   AtMS   AT  THE   PEEFBCTiON  OF   MEN.        (Vers.

28,  29.)  We  set  before  ourselves  the  highest  standards.  We  aim  to  present  men
"  perfect,"  in  the  manifold  senses  in  which  that  word  is  used  in  the  New  Testament —
perfect  in  condition  (Heb.  v.  9),  in  knowledge  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12),  in  character  (Judu  24),
because  perfect  "  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  But  for  this  end :  1.  We  must  preach
"Christ  "in  all  his  fulness,  as  our  Imraanuel,  our  atoning  Priest,  our  Divine  Head,
our  perfect  Pattern,  our  final  Judge,  as  "  the  Way  and  the  Truth  and  the  Life,"  as  "  all
and  in  all."  2.  We  must  be  discriminative  in  our  preaching — "  warning  "  "  teaching,"
"every  man  ""in  all  wisdom."  3.  We  must  be  earnest  and  "  labour,"  "  striving,"
etc.  4.  We  must  be  dependent,  trusting  to  Christ's  "  working  which  wurketh  in  m«
mightily."— B.  S,  P.

Ver.  6. —  The  fruilfulness  of  the  gospel.  L  Thb  gospel  is  fruitful.  It  is  not  a
barren  doctrine.  It  is  a  living  truth  that  produces  effects  in  the  hearts  of  men  which  are
made  manifest  through  the  influence  of  them  on  external  conduct.  It  is  fruitful  in  two
ways.  1.  In  increase.  The  truth  spreads  like  leaven  ;  the  mustard  seed  grows  into  a
great  tree ;  the  two  or  three  in  an  upper  room  multiply  into  the  thousands  of  Pentecost
and  into  the  millions,  the  Churches  of  modern  Christendom.  2.  In  good  influences.
The  tree  not  only  puts  forth  new  shoots  and  so  grows  in  size,  it  blossoms  and  bears
fruit.  The  fruits  of  the  gospel  are  the  same  graces  as  aie  elsewhere  called  "  the  fruits  of
the  Spirit"  (Gal.  v.  22,  23).  Christianity  makes  happier  and  better  men  of  us.  These
fruits  are  as  visilile  as  the  fact  of  the  numerical  increase  of  the  Church.  All  modern
history  bears  witness  to  them,  especially  in  the  elevation  of  woman,  the  abolition  of
slavery,  the  recognition  of  national  justice,  the  spread  of  a  spirit  of  humanity,  the
creation  of  institutions  of  charity,  and,  better  still,  the  doing  of  innumerable  nameless
deeds  of  kindness.

II.  The  field  of  the  gospel's  fruitfulness  is  the  world.  It  was  not  preached
in  the  wliole  world  in  St.  Paul's  day,  nor  is  it  even  yet.  But  the  process  of  buaring
fruit  throughout  the  world  tlien  began  and  still  continues.  1.  The  fruit  is  seen  in  this
world.  The  ripest  fruit  may  not  be  perfected  here,  but  if  there  is  no  fruit  on  earth
there  will  be  none  in  heaven.  The  gospel  is  first  of  all  good  news  of  peace  on  earth— it
promises  blessings  for  the  present  life  (1  Tim.  iv.  8).  2.  The  gospel  brings  Uessings  to
the  whole  earth.  It  is  suited  to  all  kinds  of  men,  of  all  nations  and  in  all  ages,  because
it  speaks  to  the  common  heart  of  mankind,  offering  the  supply  of  universal  wants  and
conferring  graces  that  are  universally  good.  3.  The  gospel  bears  fruit  throughout  the
world  by  first  of  all  bearing  fruit  in  the  Church.  "  As  it  doth  in  you  also."  We
can  only  enjoy  the  fruits  of  the  gospel  by  entering  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  The  fruit-
fulness  of  the  Church  is  the  direct  cause  of  the  spread  of  Clhristianity  throughout  the
world.    Thus  God  is  glorified  in  our  fruitfiilness  (John  xv.  8).

III.  The  secret  of  the  gospel's  frditfulness  is  the  true  knowledge  of  the
GRACE  of  God  of  which  it  is  the  declaration.  1.  The  energy  of  fruit-bearing
re-ides  in  the  grace  of  Ond.  When  men  feel  that  grace  they  become  new  creatures.
The  constraining  love  of  Christ  works  the  miracle.  2.  The  ri-ceipt  of  this  energy  depends
on  the  knowledge  of  Divine  grace.  It  does  not  work  by  magic,  but  through  an  under-
standing of  its  ti  uths.  ThereSire  it  is  vain  to  pray  for  the  increased  Iruitfiilness  of"the
gospel  without  al.-o  preaching  the  gospel.  3.  A  true  understanding  of  the  grace  of  Ood
is  necessary  for  its  fruitf Illness.  It  must  be  known  "in  truth."  Perversions  of  the
gospel  hinder  the  fruitfulness  of  Christianity.  The  gospel  tells  of  facts.  Let  us  see
those  facts  clearly  separated  from  the  errors  and  imaginations  of  human  theology,
— W.  F.  A.

Vers.  9, 10. — The  knowledge  of  God^s  will.    I,  The  knowledge  of  Qod'b  will  n


7«  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIaNS.  Jch.  i.  l~2a

THE   KKOWLEMB  WHICH   IS   MOST   8UPHEMBLT   IMPORTANT.      1.   The    knowledge  of  Ood

is  the  most  iniport.int  knowledge  attain.ible.  Many  are  eager  in  pursuing  the  investi-
gation of  curious  questions  of  human  aff.iii's  who  are  quite  indifferent  to  the  truth  about
the  Being  who  fills  heaven  and  earth.  Others  are  busily  searching  into  the  mysteries
of  the  works  of  God,  while  quite  forgetful  of  the  Maker  of  them.  But  to  know  God
IB  to  know  the  Highest  and  Best.  2.  The  knowledye  of  the  will  of  God  is  the  most
important  knowledge  of  God.  (1)  It  is  the  highest  knowledge  of  God ;  for  the  dis-
position of  the  will  is  the  chief  characteristic  of  a  spiritual  being.  (2)  It  is  the  know-
ledge of  God  with  which  we  have  most  concern  ;  for,  though  there  must  be  glories  and
wonders  in  all  the  great  thontjlits  of  God,  for  ns  it  is  most  needful  that  we  should
understand  what  he  is  purposing  to  do  and  what  he  wishes  us  to  do.  (3)  It  is  the
most  attainable  knowledge  of  God.  The  abstract  ideas  of  the  mind  of  God  are  far  above
our  reach.  The  practical  thoughts  and  laws  and  commandment  of  his  will  are  what
he  has  most  clearly  revealed.

II.  The  knowledoe  op  God's  wili,  mat  be  acquired  through  spikitual  wisdom.
1.  It  may  he  acquired.  Tliis  branch  of  theology  is  within  our  roach.  In  our  darkest
moments,  when  we  cannot  understand  the  thoughts  and  plans  of  God,  we  may  discover
what  God  wills  ns  to  do.  2.  It  is  to  be  got  at  through  spiritual  wisdom.  We  have  it
not  by  nature.  We  cannot  reach  it  by  efforts  of  bare  human  intelligence.  Philosophy
will  not  reveal  it.  A  higher  wisdom  than  the  earthly,  a  purer  wisdom  than  the  carnal,
heavenly  and  spiritual  wisdom  is  necessary  for  this  knowledge.  3.  This  spiritual
wisdom  is  a  Divine  inspiration.  St.  Paul  prays  for  it.  It  is  not  a  product  of  experi
ence  like  our  knowledge  of  the  world.  The  man  of  the  world  learns  much  about  evil
by  his  experience,  but  little  about  goodness.  Goodness  and  the  will  of  God  with  which
it  is  identical  are  only  seen  by  a  spiritual  light  which  little  children  may  have  more
clearly  than  learned  men  and  experienced  observers.  It  is  an  inward  light,  a  spiritual
inspiration.

III.  The  knowlkdob  op  God's  will  is  fruitful  in  qrkat  practical  results.
This  is  not  a  barren  knowledge  acquired  only  for  the  satisfaction  of  idle  curiosity,  nor
even  merely  a  worthy  object  of  contemplation.  1.  We  must  know  the  will  of  God  in
order  that  our  life  may  be  worthy  of  Christ,  This  is  an  important  point  not  sufEciently
considered  by  those  people  who  slight  the  contemplative  side  of  Christianity.  The
practical  side  will  be  a  blundering  failure  without  the  due  cultivation  of  the  contem-
plaiive.  A  lame  man  with  good  eyes  can  walk  more  straightly  than  a  man  with  sound
limbs  who  is  blind.  To  please  God  we  must  first  of  all  know  his  will.  2.  This  know-
ledge helps  us  to  be  fruitful  in  good  works  to  men.  We  can  never  benefif  men  so  much
as  by  doing  Go^'s  will.  Our  duty  to  God  and  our  duty  to  men  are  mutually  inclusive.
We  must  study  the  will  of  God  more  carefully  in  order  that  our  work  amongst  men
may  be  more  wise  and  successful.  We  often  fail  in  our  conscientious  efforts  to  benefit
men  because  we  do  not  work  according  to  the  method  of  God's  will. — W.  P.  A.

Ver.  12.^ — The  inheritance  of  tlie  saints.  I.  Christians  are  heirs  op  a  rich
inheritance.  1.  The  gospel  offers  Divine  wealth.  Its  blessings  are  not  confined  to
biire  deliverance  from  ruin.  They  include  hidden  treasures,  pearls  of  great  price,
princely  feasts,  a  whole  kingdom  of  glory.  2.  This  wealth  is,  for  the  most  part,  ^ro-
tpective.  It  is  an  inheritance  not  yet  possessed.  The  heir  may  be  in  severe  straits
before  be  comes  into  his  property.  We  have  foretastes  of  the  future  blessedness,  but
the  chief  part  of  this  blessedness  is  yet  to  come.  3.  The  possession  is  to  be  had  with-
out any  action  of  ours  in  acquiring  it.  The  heir  does  not  seize  his  estate  and  hold  it
by  right  of  conquest ;  he  does  not  purchase  it ;  he  does  nothing  to  earn  the  worth  of
it;  he  simply  receive.-!  it  by  bequest  from  another.  We  do  nothing  to  win  or  earn
our  Christian  heritage.  Christ  obtains  it  and  bequeaths  it,  and  as  his  heirs  we  simply
enter  into  possession  as  the  son  of  a  great  warrior  peaceably  takes  possession  of  the
kingdom  won  by  the  sword  of  his  father.  4.  Still,  the  inheritance  is  received  hy  right.
The  heir  has  a  right  to  his  estate.  Laws  and  documents  secure  it  to  him.  'I'he
Divine  covenrmt  of  grace  is  the  Christian's  title-deed,  giving  him  no  precarious  hope,
but  a  certain  promise  and  right  to  his  future  blessedness.

II.  Christians  are  being  trained  for  their  great  inheritance.  The  heir  of  a
nobleman  must  be  educated  (o  a*  to  be  fitted  for  his  position  in  society.    The  heir  of  a


CM.  1. 1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  T7

throne  needs  a  special  training  in  order  that  he  may  enter  upon  the  duties  as  well  as
the  privileges  of  royalty.  It  would  be  useless  to  bequeath  a  library  to  a  man  who  had
no  interest  in  literature,  or  to  leave  an  art  collection  to  a  man  of  boorish  tastes.  The
heir  must  be  suited  to  the  inheritance.  We  hear  much  of  the  acquisition  of  our
inheritance,  and  some  seem  to  think  thai  their  great  task  is  thus  to  secure  it  for  them-
selves. But  we  should  remember  that  this  tiling  is  done,  the  kingdom  won  by  the
victory  of  Christ,  the  riches  bought  by  his  sacrifice  of  himself.  Now,  the  sole  requisite
is  that  we  should  be  ready  to  enter  into  possession.  And  this  is  a  great  and  essential
requisite.  An  impure  soul  could  not  be  admitted  into  heaven ;  but,  if  .admitted,  such  a
soul  would  find  no  joy  there.  Note :  1,  Ood  is  making  us  meet  for  the  great  iuheri-
tance  by  the  present  discipline  of  life.  2.  There  are  those  who  may  be  said  to  hava
heen  made  thus  ready,  because,  although  not  yet  perfect,  they  are  new  creatures  and
lia\e  characters  aud  sympathies  fitted  for  the  enJDyments  of  the  pure  delights  of
heaven.  3.  It  may  be  remarked  by  the  way  that  St.  Paul  knew  oi  no  purgatorial  fires
which  were  to  keep  Cliristians  out  of  the  joys  of  heaven  for  some  intermediate  period.

HI.  The  requisite  fitness  fob  the  Christian  inhekitancb  depends  on  the
CHARACTER  OF  THAT  INHEBITANCE.  1.  The  inheritance  is  271  light.  It  lies  in  the
clearer  realm  of  eternal  truth;  it  is  characterized  by  the  purity  that  excludes  all  dark
blots  and  stains  of  sin ;  it  is  radiant  with  the  summer  suushiue  of  heavenly  juy.  2.
Such  an  inheritance  requires  saintliness  as  a  suitable  condition  of  enjoying  it.  It  is  an
inheritance  of  saints.  Only  those  who  are  forgiven,  cleansed,  and  purified  cau  stand
in  the  searching  light  of  eternal  truth;  and  they  only  can  enjoy  the  blessings  of  a
kingdom  of  holiness  and  find  therein  true  gladness.  Nevertlieless,  this  is  no  reason  for
(liscoiavigement.  St.  Paul  thanks  God  lor  accomplishing  thu  necessary  preparation.
It  is  his  work,  and  he  will  perfect  it  with  all  who  trust  to  his  grace  and  the  power  of
his  Bpii  it.— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  14:.—Bedemption.    (See  on  Bph.  i.  7.)— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  15. — Christ  in  his  relations  to  Ood  and  to  the  world.  This  Epistle  to  the
Colossians  is  conspicuous  among  the  writings  of  St.  Paul  for  its  enthusiastic  assertion
of  the  supreme  glory  and  divinity  of  Jesus  Christ.  In  opposition  to  an  incipient
Gnosticism  which  would  lose  the  solitary  rank  of  the  Son  of  God  in  a  crowded  hicr.irohy
of  angels,  it  exalts  that  rank  with  an  elevatinn  and  a  distinctness  not  to  be  met  witii  in
any  previously  written  portion  of  the  New  Testament.  It  is  impossible  to  read  the
words  of  the  apostle  impartially  without  seeing  that  he  taught  the  full  divinity  and
pre-existence  of  Jesus  Christ,  The  old  unilarianisra  that  apjiealed  to  scriptural
autLurity  for  confirmation  was  simply  blind  with  prejudice.  Modern  uuitarianism  is
more  consistent  when  it  rejects  the  inspiration  of  the  book  which  plainly  contains  the
doctrine  it  repudiates.  It  is  true  that  the  ideas  of  St.  Paul  are  expressed  in  accordance
with  the  notions  of  his  times,  especially  in  rulation  to  the  "Logos"  doctrine  of  Alex-
andrian philosophy,  and  therefore  that  if  we  interpret  them  into  the  language  that  fits
our  modern  conci  ption  of  things,  they  may  ap.iear  to  change  their  form.  But  however
exfiiessed,  the  truths  taught  by  the  great  apostle  concerning  the  Divine,  pre-existent,
and  buprenie  Christ  are  essential  to  the  gospel  of  the  New  Testament.

I.  Christ  in  his  relation  to  God.  He  "  is  the  Image  of  the  invisible  God."  This
implies  two  facts.  1.  Resemhlance.  The  likeness  is  not  external  and  accidental,  "  as
one  egg  is  like  another" — the  " homoiousion "  of  the  aemi-Arians.  The  image  is  pro-
duced by  the  prototype  as  the  seal  by  the  die ;  it  is  "  the  impress  of  his  substance,"  as
the  writer  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  describes  it  (Heb.  i.  3).  The  language  of  the
apostle  refers  to  the  Divine  nature  of  Christ.  But  it  remains  true  after  the  Word  ha«
been  made  flesh.  Thus  we  may  see  that,  as  at  the  creation  man  was  made  in  the  image
of  God,  so  in  the  Incarnation  the  perfection  of  humanity  is  identical  with  the  exact
likeness  of  God.  Christ  became  no  less  human  because  he  was  the  Image  of  God,  but,
on  the  contrary,  just  perfectly  human.  Our  highest  conception  of  divinity  is  our  ideal
of  manhood.  2.  Expresnion.  Christ  is  the  Image  of  the  invisible  God.  "No  man
hath  seen  God  at  any  time,"  etc.  (John  i.  18).  God  is  invisible  because  he  is  pure
spirit.  No  change  of  place  and  no  chaug,'  of  state  will  ever  enable  us  to  see  God  with
cur  physical  eyes.    The  light  which  suffuses  the  air  is  invisible  except  where  it  shines


78  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oh.  1. 1—29.

on  some  object  and  is  reflected  to  us.  God's  universally  diffused  presence  requires  and
reflection  for  us  to  see  it.  We  have  this  in  some  degree  in  the  works  of  nai  urc — stiir.
sea,  and  flower  reflecting  God's  glory.  But  it  is  only  in  Christ  tlie  perlect  linage  that
we  can  have  the  perfect  manife.station  of  God.  He  only  cau  say,  "He  that  hath  seen
me  hath  seen  the  Father  "  (John  xiv.  9).

II.  Christ  in  his  relation  to  the  world.  He  is  "the  Piistliorn  of  all  crration.''
That  this  expression  refers,  not  to  the  Incarnation,  but  to  the  Divine  i  ire-existence  oi
Christ,  is  plain  if  only  from  the  language  of  the  following  verse  (ver.  16).  It  expre.sf.es
two  facts.  1.  Fre-existence.  We  have  no  reason  lor  tldoking  that  the  human  -oul  of
Christ  existed  before  the  Incarnation.  But  it  is  plainly  taught  hy  S'.  P.ml  that  thai
which  is  Divine  in  him  did  so  exist.  Our  Lord  said  the  .same  of  hiin-self  (John  viii.  58).
Without  attempting  to  understand  the  mystery  of  the  natnie  of  God,  we  may  'jather
this  important  lesson — that  all  those  Divine  characteristics  which  are  so  beautifully
revealed  in  Jesus  of  Nazareth  were  not  produced  for  the  first  time  in  the  New  'i'es'a-
nieut  days.  Though  loss  known,  they  were  as  really  existing  in  the  age  of  iMoses  and
even  at  the  first  creation  of  the  world.  Therefore  the  very  scheine  of  nature  and  the
whole  government  of  the  world  must  be  in  accordance  with  what  we  know  of  Christ.
As  Christ  will  finally  judge  the  world,  and  all  that  we  know  of  his  Spirit  w  ill  lead  us  to
be  thankful  that  such  a  one  is  the  Judge,  so  we  may  rejoice  that  tlie  same  S|iiri[  of  love
and  gentleness  has  been  from  the  first  eternally  pervading  all  things.  2.  Pre-endii  rice..
The  firstborn  has  the  chief  honour.  Christ's  rank  is  not  only  ahove  that  oi  the  liignest
archangels;  it  is  distinctive  in  kind.  He  is  not  the  flist  creature  of  many  creatures.
but  the  first  horn  of  all  creation,  in  the  deepest  sense  the  only  lieji>tteii  S  lU  of  th
Father.  (1)  Thus  he  who  is  most  pure  and  good  is  most  n  ble.  (2)  He  u  liu  Iniinlle.i
himself  and  sacrificed  himself  the  most  was  the  most  highly  exalted.  (3)  All  who
trust  in  Christ  may  have  the  assurance  that  they  could  have  no  greater  security  for
their  confidence.    (4)  Christ  is  worthy  of  worship. — W.  F.  A.

"Ver.  18. — "  The  Firstborn  ft'om  the  dead."  I.  Eesurkeotion  is  birth.  Christ
lising  the  fiisi  fiom  the  dead  is  called  the  first  lorn.  Ueaih  looks  ugly  to  us  because
we  only  see  the  earthly  side.  The  experience  of  Christ  should  help  us  to  look  on  to
the  other  side  and  the  issue  of  death  in  birth  in  the  heavenly  sphere.  Thus  the  sunset
of  the  east  is  the  sunrise  of  the  west.  The  Christian  luture  is  not  merely  rest;  it  is
life.     It  is  not  a  repetition  of  the  old  weary  lile  of  earth ;  it  begins  afresh  in  birth.

II.  Christ  institutes  a  new  order  of  life.  He  is  the  new  Adam.  Mankind
began  its  old  life  in  the  garden  of  Eden ;  it  begins  its  new  life  in  Joseph  of  Arimathsea's
garden.  The  sins,  sorrows,  and  failures  of  the  past  are  crucified  with  Christ,  dead  and
buried.  To  the  old  weary  earih  Christ  brings  a  new  spring-time,  and  with  it  the  birth
of  new  hopes  and  energies.  But  the  perfect  development  of  this  new  order  of  things  is
only  possible  after  death.  Christ  has  begun  it,  and  as  one  by  one  his  people  follow
him  they  too  enter  into  its  growing  glories.

III.  Christ  is  scpremb  in  the  new  life.  On  earth  he  was  lowly,  despised,  rejected,
and  slain.  Proud  enemies  seemed  to  triumph  over  him.  A  Tiberius  sat  on  tke  throne
of  the  world  and  the  Son  of  God  was  nailed  to  the  cross.  But  in  the  new  order  he  who
was  the  Firstborn  of  all  creation  (ver.  15)  resumes  his  rightful  rank  and  becomes  the
Firstborn  from  the  dead.  Therefore  "  he  is  the  Head  of  the  body,  the  Church."  From
this  fact  we  may  derive  some  important  inferences ;  e.g. :  1.  Christ  being  supreme  in  the
heavenly  world,  his  Spirit  of  purity  and  love  will  pervade  and  rule  all  its  life.  2.  They
who  follow  Christ  most  closely  in  obedience  to  his  will  and  in  imitation  of  his  character
will  enjoy  the  highest  places  iu  heaven.  3.  Christ  is  worthy  of  the  highest  adoraticu
now  and  through  all  eternity.

IV.  The  resurrection  op  Christ  is  the  earnest  op  the  futubb  life  of  bh
PEOPLE.  He  is  the  Firstborn,  not  the  Only  begotten  irom  the  dead ;  and  he  is  "  the  First-
born among  man>  brethren  "  (Eom.  viii.  2i)).  1.  The  historical  fact  of  the  resurrection
of  Christ  demonstrates  by  one  instance  the  fact  that  death  does  not  necessarily  end  all
and  indicates  the  possibility  of  a  sinrilar  bit  th  for  us  into  a  future  life.  2.  The  character,
teaching,  mission,  and  work  of  Christ  all  teach  us  that  he  ia  not  content  to  enjoy  the
resurrectioQ-lile  by  himself,  but  will  bring  many  suns  to  glory.  3.  The  risen  lue  cf
Christ  is  the  type  and  pattern  of  the  future  life  of  his  people. — W.  F.  A.


cii.  1. 1—29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  7«

Ver.  19.— (See  on  ch.  u.  9.)— W.  P.  A.

Ver.  20. — The  great  reconciliation.  The  world  wants  not  only  education,  improve-
ment, and  development ;  it  has  a  sorer  need — the  necessity  of  forgiveness,  reconciliation
to  God,  renewal,  and  restoration.  It  is  the  ^lory  of  the  gospel  that  it  recognizes  this
deep  fact,  too  often  ignored  by  philosophic  schemes  of  life,  and  that  it  provides  for  it  by
offering  the  satisfaction  of  the  world's  great  need  in  reconciliation  through  Christ  and
his  atonement.

I.  It  is  God  who  bkinqb  about  the  gbeat  kbconciliation.  Two  errors  in  regard
to  this  glorious  truth  are  very  prevalent.  1.  The  error  of  attempting  to  effect  the
reconciliation  for  ourselves.  Costly  sacrifices,  hard  penance,  prayers,  and  almsgiving
have  been  resorted  to,  but  in  vain.  The  work  is  God's,  not  man's.  The  first  mistake
js  closely  associated  with  another,  viz. :  2.  The  error  of  supposing  that  Qod  needs  to  be
reconciled  to  us.  It  is  commonly  thought  that  the  great  work  is  to  move  God  into  a
favourable  consideration  for  us.  But  the  first  step  in  the  reconciliation  began  with
God.  He  des'red  it  and  prepared  the  way  for  it  before  men  took  any  steps  towards
realizing  it.  For  this  reason  he  first  of  all  sent  his  Son  into  the  world  (John  iii.  16),
and  is  now  sending  ambassadors  and  beseeching  us  by  them  to  be  reconciled.  We
began  the  separation,  for  ours  was  the  offence,  but  God  begins  the  reconciliation.  He
does  not  need  to  be  reconciled  to  us.  He  waits  to  be  gracious.  The  necessary  recon-
ciliation is  on  our  side.     We  need  to  be  reconciled  to  God.

II.  All  things  in  earth  and  heaven  are  thb  subjects  of  the  great  begojsuilia
TioN.  1.  The  reconciliation  is  to  be  universal.  It  is  God's  good  pleasure  to  reconcile
all  things.  Nothing  short  of  that  complete  restoration  would  satisfy  him.  If  ninety
and  nine  sheep  are  safe,  the  shepherd  will  not  rest  imtil  he  has  found  the  hundredth.
Nevertheless,  though  this  universal  restitution  is  God's  desire,  there  is  a  dark  and
difficult  question  as  to  how  far  the  imperious  will  of  man  may  stand  out  against  it.  2.
The  reconciliation  begins  with  things  on  earth.  Here  is  the  great  wrong.  In  this  life
we  become  reconciled  to  God.  The  full  success  of  Christ  will  involve  the  creation  of  a
new  earth.  Though  the  laws  of  nature  may  not  be  altered,  yet  to  us  the  wilderness
will  become  a  garden  when  we  become  reconciled  to  the  God  of  nature,  3.  The  recon-
ciliation reaches  up  to  things  in  heaven.  It  unites  earth  to  heaven.  Through  union
with  God  all  beings  and  all  things  become  united  among  tlicmselves.  Thus  peace  is
established  on  earth,  heavenly  mindedness  becomes  a  sympathetic  link  between  the
toilers  and  sufferers  in  this  world  and  the  angels  and  spirits  of  the  just  in  the  higher
world.

III.  Christ  and  his  atonement  are  the  means  thbottgh  which  this  reconcilia-
tion IS  effected.  1.  Christ  is  the  Mediator  in  the  quarrel  between  us  and  God,  the
Peacemaker  (Eph.  ii.  14),  the  "Daysman"  who  lays  his  hand  on  God  and  on  us.  The
angel-mediators  of  Cdlossian  Gnosticism  could  not  do  this,  being  neither  Divine  nor
human.  Because  all  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwells  in  (Christ,  he  brings  God  to  us  in
merciful  loving-kindness ;  and  because  he  is  alio  "  very  Man,"  he,  as  our  Eepresentative,
brings  us  back  to  God,  2.  The  sacrifice  made  by  Christ  in  his  death  is  the  atonement
which  accomplishes  our  reconciliation.  "  The  blood  of  his  cross  "  signifies,  not  merely  the
fact  that  Christ  died  on  the  cross,  but  also  the  peculiar  value  of  his  death  in  the  shedding
of  his  precious  blood,  t.e.  in  the  giving  up  of  his  life  for  us  with  all  its  wealth  of  purity
and  love.— W.  P.  A.

Vers.  21 — 23, — Our  reconciliation.  St,  Paul  had  just  been  describing  the  great
universal  reconciliation.  He  now  directs  attention  to  the  enjoyment  of  a  share  in  it
by  himself  and  his  readers.  It  is  useless  to  think  of  a  grand  and  glorious  restoration
if  we  lie  outside  its  blessings,  dead  and  lost.  Yet  there  is  a  constant  danger  lest  we
should  be  merely  interested  in  the  contemplation  of  the  riches  of  redemption  from  the
outside.  Esiecially  when  we  are  considering  very  large,  sublime  truths,  we  are
tempted  to  ignore  our  own  experience.  It  is  instructive  to  observe  that  St.  Paul
always  connects  his  most  abstract  speculations  with  practical  results,  and  descends
from  soaring  visions  of  truth  to  personal  experience.

I,  A  past  alienation.  This  was  the  early  condition  of  the  Colossians ;  it  is  the
condition  of  all  of  us  before  we  are  renewed- in  Christ.    1.  The  alienation  arises  out  of


80  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L08S1ANS.  [oh.  1. 1—29.

wicked  worTes.  We  cannot  keep  our  sins  to  ourselves.  They  affect  our  relations  with
God ;  they  separate  us  from  him.  This  is  the  worst  result  of  them.  2.  The  aliena-
tion consists  in  the  state  of  our  minds.  The  deeds  of  the  hand  react  on  the  thoughts
of  the  heart.  He  who  begins  by  breaking  God's  Law  ends  by  separating  his  whole
inner  life  from  God.  3.  The  alienation  results  in  enmity  to  Ood.  It  cannot  remain  in
passive  neglect  of  the  will  of  God.  He  who  is  not  with  Christ  is  against  him.  He  who
does  wicked  works  may  think  that  his  deeds  have  no  relation  to  God ;  but,  in  truth,
he  is  fighting  against  God.

II.  A  PRESENT  REooNOit.iATioN.  1.  It  IS  accomplished  at  a  great  cost.  Nothing
less  than  death — the  death  of  the  Son  of  God — could  bring  it  about.  How  stubborn
must  have  been  our  enmity]  How  great  must  the  love  of  God  be!  How  highly
should  we  value  the  "reconciliation  which  God  has  provided  at  such  a  fearful  price !
2.  It  is  enjoyed  through  our  union  with  Christ.  The  reconciliation  is  "in  the
body  of  his  flesh."  As  we  eat  his  flesh,  spiritually,  by  faith  and  communion,  we
receive  the  blessing  of  reconciliation.  3.  It  is  a  present  condition.  "  Yet  now  hath
he  reconciled."  Reconciliation  is  accomplished  at  once,  fully,  perfectly,  and  ungrudg-
ingly, with  no  hints  or  reminders  of  the  old  sins  ever  again  brought  up.  In  the
strength  of  the  reconciliation  we  go  on  to  the  working  out  of  the  salvation  that  is  only
perfected  when  all  sin  is  conquered.

III.  A  FUTURE  PERFECTION.  Though  reconciled,  we  are  not  yet  presented  to  God.
A  process  of  preparation  is  necessary  for  this.  1.  The  reconciled  must  he  made
holy.  Forgiveness  is  the  first  step;  but  it  is  not  the  last.  Without  holiness  no  man
can  see  God.  The  whole  of  life  should  be  a  cleansins:  and  purifying  and  preparing  for
the  unblemished  condition  in  which  only  Christ  can  piesent  us  to  God.  But  the
reconciliation  is  a  necessary  prelimiuary,  an  importaat  beginning,  and  a  constraining
motive  for  the  perfect  purification.  2.  We  must  do  our  part  to  realize  the  future
perfection.    It  depends  on  our  continuing  in  the  faith. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  27. — Christ,  the  Hope  of  glory.  I.  Christianity  brings  a  hope  of  glort.  1.  It
brings  a  hope.  All  men  who  live  at  all  live  in  the  future.  The  past  is  irretrievable.
The  present  is  but  a  passing  moment.  Life  reaches  out  to  what  lies  before  it.  For
this  we  need  to  be  buoyed  up  by  some  hope —

"  Ever  by  a  mighty  hope
Pressing  on  and  bearing  up."

The  man  with'mt  a  hope  is  as  good  as  dead.  Who  will  care  to  walk  on  over  the
weary  path  of  his  pilgrimage  if  no  light  cheers  him  in  the  distance,  if  only  deepening
gloom  besets  his  uncertain  footsteps  ?  It  is  the  glory  of  the  gospel  that  it  speaks  of
a  hope  of  glory.  2.  The  object  of  the  Christian  hope  is  glory.  It  is  more  than  bare
escape  from  ruin  ;  more  than  mere  gladness.  There  is  something  ennobling  and
elevating  in  the  best  sense  of  the  word  "  glory."  It  not  only  includes  the  greatest
blessings ;  it  calls  us  off  from  low,  selfish,  epicurean  conceptions  of  future  happiness,
and  points  to  a  pure  and  lofty  aim  for  our  aspirations.

II.  This  Christian  hope  is  for  AiL.  The  emphasis  of  the  phrase  lies  on  the  word
"  you."  "  Christ  in  you,"  etc.  1.  All  nations  are  included.  The  narrower  Jew  kept
the  glory  of  redemption  to  himself,  though  he  would  allow  some  of  its  minor  blessings,
overflowing  from  his  own  full  cup,  to  spread  among  the  Gentiles.  Christ  brings  the
richest  blessings  to  all  peoples  without  distinction.  2.  All  characters  are  included.
St.  Paul  has  just  been  describing  the  early  conditions  of  the  Colossiaus.  They  had
been  alienated  and  enemies  to  God  in  their  mind  (ver.  21).  Yet  these  men  have  the
hope  of  glory.  Thus  there  is  a  wonderful  revelation  of  the  love  ol  God  in  the  thought
— even  to  you,  Colossians,  once  great  enemies  to  God,  Christ  is  the  Hope  of  glory.  And
so  always  the  worst  sinners,  when  redeemed  by  Christ,  may  anticipate,  not  only
pardon,  but  the  highest  glory.

III.  Christ  is  the  Foundation  of  the  Christian  hope  or  glory.  1.  It  is  first
of  all  based  ma  the  atonement  of  Christ.  By  his  shame  comes  our  glory.  He  first
reconciles  us  to  God  and  then  leads  us  on  to  glorification.  2.  The  hope  of  glory  for
Christians  is  dependent  en  the  glory  of  Christ.  He  wins  glory  through  his  triumph
over  sin  and  death.     But  he  does  not  keep  the  glory  to  himself ;  he  fieely  shares  it


CH.  1. 1^29.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN3.  81

with  his  people.  Then  the  Christian  glory  is  just  a  share  of  this  glory  of  Christ's.  It
is  no  selrtsli  thing,  much  less  is  it  an  earthly,  corrupt  thing  like  muth  that  degrade*
the  name  of  glory  among  men.  3.  CAri'siAimseZ/' is  the  Centre  of  this  glory.  Christ  is
the  Hope  of  glory,  not  merely  the  teaoliings  of  Christ,  the  work  of  Christ,  the  sacrifice
of  Christ.  In  him  is  glory — the  glory  of  the  Only  begotten  from  the  Father  (John  i,  14).
He  is  the  glory  of  his  Church.

IV.  We  enjoy  the  hope  of  globt  bt  recbivinq  Christ  spiritually.  Christ  in
you  is  the  hope  of  glory.  So  long  as  we  are  separated  from  Christ  we  dwell  i^
darkness  and  no  ray  of  his  glory  is  ours.  No  external  relations  with  Christ  will  mak?
the  hope  ours.  We  must  enter  into  personal  relations  with  Christ;  we  nmst  receive
him  into  our  hearts.  Wlien  he  dwells  in  our  hearts  by  faith  he  brings  to  us  his  own
life,  and  with  this  the  glory  that  belongs  to  it. — W.  F.  A,

Vers.  28,  29. — The  mission  of  Christian  preaching.  In  describing  bis  own  practice
St.  Paul  describes  the  model  mission  of  the  Christian  preacher.  Nothing  less  than  this
great  ideal  should  satisfy  a  Christian  minister.  But  nothing  outside  it  should  be
assumed  by  or  expected  of  hinL  The  apostle  is  but  a  preacher  and  teacher,  not  a
priestly  authority.

I.  The  subject  op  Christian  PREACHiNa  is  Christ.  It  does  not  consist  in  vague
speculations  on  religion.  It  is  clear,  positive,  definite,  and  concrete.  The  preacher  ii
to  uphold  Christ.  He  is  to  tell  the  siory  of  the  life,  deatli,  and  resurrection  of  Christ;
to  draw  the  portrait  of  Christ  (Gal.  iii.  1) ;  to  proclaim  the  grace  of  Christ;  to  set  forth
the  claims  of  Clirist ;  and  to  show  the  relation  of  Clirist  to  everything  in  life.  1.  There
is  a  unity  in  this  preaching.  It  all  centres  in  Christ.  2.  There  is  a  breadth  in  it.
Christ  has  grace  and  authority  in  regard  to  all  aspects  of  life.  3.  There  is  power  in  it.
The  charm  and  spell  of  the  gospel  dwell  in  Christ  himself.  In  proportion  as  he  is
lifted  up  decs  he  draw  all  men  to  liimsplf,  and  in  proportion  as  the  preacher  wanders
into  side  issv.ei  does  he  lose  the  secret  of  his  influence.

II.  The  field  or  Christian  pbeachino  is  all  mankind.  Three  times  does  the
apostle  express  the  universality  of  this  truth  as  against  the  Jew  who  would  limit  the  best
treasures  to  his  nation,  and  the  Gnostic  who  would  keep  the  higher  truths  for  the  more
instructed.  "Admonishing  every  man  and  teaching euery  man  in  all  wisdom."  1.  Christ
is  for  all:  for  (1)  none  are  so  good,  or  wise,  or  safe,  or  happy  as  to  afibrd  to  do  without
him ;  and  (2)  none  are  so  ignorant,  or  foolish,  or  guilty  as  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of
his  blessings.  2.  In  Christ  all  wis<lom  is  for  all  men.  There  is  no  reserve,  at  least
of  the  highest  wisdom,  since  the  Chr!  jL  who  is  preached  to  all  men  freely  is  the  Word
and  the  Wisdom  of  God.

III.  The  METHOD  OF  Christian  PBEACHiNOiB  practical  INSTRUCTION.  1.  Proclaim-
ing Christ.  The  first  requisite  is  information  on  the  mnin  points  of  the  gospel.  The
Christian  preacher  is  a  herald  and  a  witness  (Acts  ii.  32;  iii.  15).  2.  Admonishing,
Men  must  be  charged  with  the  guilt  of  their  sins,  as  well  as  encouraged  by  the  offers
of  the  gospel.  An  earnest,  faithful  dealing  with  individuals  according  to  their  personal
condition  is  a  necessary  though  painful  part  of  a  minister's  work.  3.  Teaching.
Thorough  instruction  must  follow  the  general  proclaiming  of  the  gospel.  Growth  m
grace  depends  largely  on  growth  in  knowledge.  Neglect  of  this  laborious,  unexciting
part  of  the  preacher's  mission,  careful  teaching,  is  sure  to  be  avenged  by  ultimate
weakness,  if  not  by  disastrous  lapses  into  practical  errors.

IV.  The  END  OF  Christian  preaching  is  to  present  men  perfect  in  Christ.
We  are  not  to  be  satisfied  with  such  abstract  teaching  as  simply  informs  the  minds  of
people.  The  great  work  is  most  practical.  It  is  to  mould  lives,  to  develop  characters,
to  perfect  souls.  1.  It  is  to  Iring  men  into  living  union  with  Christ.  We  preach  Christ
in  order  that  men  may  live  Christ.  The  great  result  is  the  effecting  of  a  vital  union
with  Christ.  2.  It  is  also  to  lead  menon  to  perfe  tion  in  Christ.-  The  preacher  will  be
exi)eoted,  at  the  return  of  his  Master,  to  present,  as  the  fruit  of  his  life's  work,  not
a  crowd  of  raw  converts,  but  a  body  of  ripe  Christians.  The  work  is  not  finished  in
conversion.  It  only  begins  with  that.  Line  upon  line,  and  precept  upon  precept, .
often  with  sad  iteration  as  old  lessons  unlearnt  need  to  be  repeated,  charactei izes  the
necessary  task  of  the  Christian  preacher.     And  it  is  not  done  till  perfection  is  reached.

V.  Success  in  Tais  mission  depends  upon  working  hard  in  the  power  of  Christ.

OOLOSSIANS,  s


82


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.         [ch.  n.  1— 23


1.  It  requires  hard  work.  St.  Paul  "  labours,"  "  striving."  The  words  in  the  Greels
suggest  the  athlete  who  trains  himself  into  great  vigour  for  some  severe  enterprise.
Men  are  not  to  be  won  for  Christ  and  perfected  in  Christ  by  indolent,  self-indulgent
preachers.  No  work  is  harder  than  that  of  tlie  Christian  preaiher  when  it  is  laith  fully
discliarged.  2.  Success  is  also  only  attainable  through  \he  power  of  Christ.  He  works
mightily  in  the  preacher  as  well  as  in  the  hearer.  With  this  secret  of  strength  the
feeblest  preacher  may  succeed  wheie  a  Demosthenes  would  fail. — W.  F.  A.


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  n.


Vers.  1 — 1. — Section  IV.  The  Apostle's
Concern  for  the  Colossian  Church.  So
far  the  contents  of  the  letter  have  been
of  a  general  and  preparatory  character.
Now  the  writ«r  begins  to  indicate  the
special  purpose  he  has  in  view  by  declaring,
in  connection  with  his  concern  for  the  wel-
fare of  the  Gentile  Churches  at  large  (ch  1.
24—29),  the  deep  anxiety  which  he  at  present
feels  respecting  the  Colossian  and  neighbour-
ing Churches.

Ver.  1. — For  I  would  have  yon  know  how
great  a  strife  I  have  on  behalf  of  you  and
those  in  laodicea  (ch.  iv.  12,  13;  2  Cor.
xi.  28, 29 ;  Rom.  i.  9— 13 ;  Phil.  i.  8, 25—30 ;
1  Thess.  ii  17, 18 ;  Gal.  iv.  20).  The  apostle
has  dwelt  at  sucli  length  and  bo  earnestly
upon  his  own  position  and  responsibilities
(ch.  i.  24 — 29)  thut  the  Colossians  may  feel
how  real  and  strong  is  his  interest  in  their
welfare,  though  personally  strangers  to  him
(see  next  clause).  His  solicitude  for  them
is  in  keeping  with  the  toil  and  strife  of  his
whiile  ministry.  "  I  would  have  you  know;"
a  fan  iliar  Paulme  phrase.(l  Cor.  xi.  3 ;  Phil,
i.  12;  Rom.  i.  13,  etc.).  'HAinoi/  ("how
great")  has,  perhaps,  a  slightly  exclamatory
force,  as  m  Jas.  iii.  5  (only  ether  instance  of
the  word  in  the  New  T»  stament),  and  in
classical  Greeb.  For  "strife,"  see  note  on
"striving"  (ch.  1.  29):  the  energy  and
abruptness  of  language  characlerizing  this
second  chapter  hear  witness  to  the  inward
wrestling  which  the  Colossian  difficulty
I'Ccasioued  in  tne  apostlu's  mind.  (On  the
close  connection  of  Colussse  with  Laodicea,
comp.  ch.  iv.  13—17,  notes;  also  Introduc-
tion, §  I.)  The  danger  which  had  come  to
a  head  in  Coloosae  was  doubtless  threatening
its  neighbours.  The  words,  and  as  many
as  have  not  seen  my  face  in  (the)  flesh
(ver.  5;  oh.  i  8;  Ro....  i.  11;  Gal.  i.  22;
Acts  XX  2.5),  raise  the  question  whether
St.  Paul  hail  ever  visited  ColosstB.  The
laniiiiage  of  ih.  i.  7  (see  mte)  laisis  a  strong
presninption  Kgaiiist  hi.--  heing  the  fou  der
of  thi.-  Church,  ami  the  narrative  of  the
Acts  scarcely  admus  of  any  visit  to  tliis
region  in  former  missionary  journeys.  Theo-
doret  amongst  tl\e  Greeks,  followed  by  our


own  Lardner  and  s  few  recent  oritiCB,
contended  th*t  the  apostle  distinguishes
here  between  Colossians  and  Laodiceans  (or
at  least  the  former),  and  those  who  had  not
seen  his  face.  But  the  disjunction  is
grammatically  harsh  and  improbable  (see
EUicott).  (On  the  general  qnestion,  see
Introduction,  §  2.)  The  apostle  is  the  more
anxious  for  this  emlangered  Church,  as  the
gifts  that  his  presence  might  have  conveyed
(Rom.  i.  11)  wem  wanting  to  them.  He
says, "  In  flesh,"  for  "  in  spirit "  he  is  closely
united  with  them  (ver.  5 ;  rh.  1.  8 :  comp.

1  Cor.  V.  3,  4).  The  object  of  his  strife  on
their  behalf  is  —

Ver.  2. — That  their  hearts  may  be  en-
oonraged  (ch.  iv.  8;  Eph.  vi.  22;  1  Thess
iii.  2 ;  iv.  1 8  ;  2  Thess.  ii.  1 7 ;  2  Cor.  xiii.  1 1 ).
For  the  mischief  at  work  at  Colos-se  was  at
once  unsettling  (vers.  6,  7;  oh.  i.  23)  and
discouraging  (ch.  1.  23 ;  ii.  18 ;  iii.  15)  in  its
effects.  napoKoXw,  a  favourite  word  of  St.
Paul's,  means  "  to  address,"  "  exhort,"  then
more  specially  ''to  enconr.ige,"  "comfort,"
(2  Cor.  1.  4),   "to  beseech"  (E^h.  iv.  1;

2  Cor.  vi.  1),  or  "to  instruct"  (Titus  i.  9),
The  heart,  in  Biblical  langua^'e,  is  not  the
seat  of  feeling  only,  but  utaudB  for  the  whole
inner  man,  as  the  "  vital  centre  "  of  hi.i  per-
sonality (see  Beck's  '  Bibli'  al  Psycholnity  : '
comp.  Mark  vii  19,  21  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  4 ;  Rom.
vii.  22;  Eph.  iii.  16,  17).  Wuile  they  are
(literally,  they  having  been)  drawn  together  in
love,  and  into  all  (the)  riches  of  the  full
assurance  of  the  understanding,  unto  (or,
into)  (full)  knowledge  of  the  mystery  of  God,
(even)  Christ  (ver.  19 ;  ch.  i.  9 ;  iii.  10,  14 :
iv.  12;  Eph.  i.  17,  IK;  iii.  17—19;  iv.  2,  3.
W,  16;  PhU.  i.  9;  ii.  2;  1  Cor.  i.  10;  2  Cor.
xiii.  11).  In  the  best  Greek  copies  '  drawn
together"  is  nominative  masculine,  agreeing
with  "  they,"  the  logical  subject  implied  in
"their  hearts"  (feminine).  2u/i6i;8afa?  has
the  same  sense  in  ver.  19  and  Eph.  iv.  10;
in  1  Cor.  ii.  10  it  is  quoted  from  the  LXX
in  another  sense;  and  it  has  a  variety  ot
meanings  in  the  Acts.  "  Drawn  together  "
expresses  the  double  sense  which  accrnes  tn
the  verb  in  comb. nation  with  the  two  pre-
positions "  in  "  and  "  into  : "  "  united  in
love,"  Christians  are  prepared  to  be  "  led
into  all  t^e  wealth  of  Divii^e  knowledge."


CH.n.1— 23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.


83


This  combination  of  "  love  and  knowledge  "
appears  in  all  St.  Paul's  letters  of  this  period
(comp.  Eph.  iv.  12 — 16 ;  Phil.  i.  9 ;  and  con-
trast 1  Cor.  viii.  1—3  ;  xiii.  1,  2,  &— 13).
"  The  riches  of  the  full  assurance,"  etc.,  and
"the  knowledge  of  the  mystery"  are  the
counterpart  of  "  the  riches  of  the  glory  of
the  mystery,"  of  ch.  i.  27 ;  the  fulness  of
conviction  and  completeness  of  knowledge
•ttainable  by  the  Christian  correspond  to
the  full  and  satisfying  character  of  the
revelation  he  receives  in  Christ  (comp.
Eph.  i.  17—19).  (On  "  understanding,"  see
note,  ch.  L  9.)  "Full  assurance,"  or  "con-
viction" (v\npo4>opla),  is  a  word  belonging
to  St.  Luke  and  St.  Paul  (with  the  Kpistle
to  the  Hebrews)  in  the  New  Testament
(not  found  in  classical  Greek),  and  de-
notes radically  "  a  bringing  to  full  measure
or  maturity."  Combined  with  "under-
standing," it  denotes  the  ripe,  intelligent
persuasion  of  one  who  enters  into  tlie  whole
wealth  of  the  "  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesug  "  (comp.
ch.  iv.  12,  R.V. ;  also  Bom.  iv.  21  and  xiv.  5,
for  corresponding  verb).  In  this  inward
"  assurance,"  as  in  a  fortress,  the  Colossians
were  to  entrench  themselves  against  the
attacks  of  error  (ch.  1.  9  ;  iii.  15,  and  notes).
Eis  (iriyvoKrtv  is  either  in  explanatory  apposi-
tion to  the  previous  clause,  or  rather  denotes
the  further  purpose  for  which  this  wealth
of  conviction  is  to  be  sought :  "  knowledge
of  the  Divine  mystery,  knowledge  of  Christ  "
— this  is  the  supreme  end,  ever  leading  on
and  upward,  for  the  pursuit  of  which  all
strengthening  of  heart  and  understanding
are  given  (ch.  iii.  10 ;  Epli.  iii.  16 — 19 ;
Phil.  iii.  10).  The  Revisers  have  corrected
the  erroneous  "acknowledgment"  by  their
paraphrastic  rendering,  "  that  they  may
know."  (On  iiriyvwiris  (comp.  yvaffis,  ver.  3),
see  note,  oh.  i.  6.)  Tlie  (jbject  of  this  know-
ledge is  the  great  manifested  mystery  of  God,
namely  Christ  (oh.  i.  27).  We  confidently
accept  here  the  Revised  reading,  that  of
nearly  all  recent  textual  critics,  which  umits
the  words  found  in  the  Received  Text
between  "  God  "  and  "  Christ. "  There  are
extant  eleven  distinct  variations  of  this
reading,  and  that  of  the  Textus  Beceptus
is,  to  all  appearance,  the  latest  and  worst ;
"the  passage  is  altogether  an  instructive
lesson  on  textual  criticism  "  (Lightfoot,  pp.
252,  253 ;  also  Westcott  and  Hort,  '  Intro-
duction :  Notes  on  Selected  Readings,'  pp.
125,  126).  The  words  thus  read  have  bten
interpreted  "  mystei  y  of  the  God  Christ "
(the  Latin  Hilary,  and  a  few  moderns);  "of
tlie  God  of  Christ"  (Meyer,  quoting  Eph.  1.
17;  John  xx.  17;  Matt,  xxvii.  46);— both
interpretations  grammatically  correct,  but
unsuitable  here,  even  if  in  harmony  with
Pauline  usage  elsewhere.  Alford  omits  "  of
Christ "  altogether,  distrusting  the  textual


evidence.  Meyer  objects  to  the  rendering
we  have  followed  (that  of  EUicott,  Lightfoot,
Revisers),  that  the  apostle,  if  this  be  hii
meaning,  has  expressed  himself  ambigu-
ously; but  comp.  ch.  i.  27  (see  note);  ^Iso
1  Tim.  iii.  16,  "The  mystery,  who  was
manifested  in  flesh."

Ver.  3. —  In  whom  (or,  which)  are  all  the
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  hid-
den(ly)  (Eph.  i.  8,  9;  iii.  8;  Bom.  xi.  33;
1  Cor.  i.  5, 6, 30 ;  u.  7 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  3).  Bengel,
Meyer,  Alford,  and  others  make  the  relative
pronoun  neuter,  referring  to  "  mystery ; "  but
"  Christ,"  the  nearer  antecedent,  is  preferable
(vers.  9,  10 ;  ch.  i.  16,  17,  19).  In  him  the
apostle  finds  what  false  teachers  sought
elsewhere,  a  satisfaction  for  the  intellect  as
well  as  for  the  heart — treasures  of  wisdom
and  knowledge  to  enrich  the  understanding,
and  unsearchable  mysteries  to  exercise  the
•peculative  reason.  "  Hidden  "  is,  therefore,
a  secondary  predicate  :  '^  in  whom  are  these
treasures, — as  hidden  treasures"  (EUicott,
Lightfoot).  (For  a  similar  emphasis  of
position,  compare  "  made  complete,"  ver.  10,
and  "  seated,"  oh.  iii.  1.)  Meyer  and  Alford,
with  the  Vulgate,  make  "hidden  "  an  attri-
butive: "in  whom  are  hidden  treasures."
Chrysostom  and  leading  versions  make  it
primary  predicate :  "  in  whom  are  hidden,"
etc.,  against  the  order  of  the  words.  This
word  also  belongs  to  the  dialect  of  the
mystic  theosophists  (see  note,  ch.  i.  27 :
comp.  1  Cor.  ii.  6—16 ;  Isa.  xlv.  3 ;  Prov.  ii.
1 — 11).  (On  "  wisdom,"  see  note,  ch.  i.  9.)
Knowledge  (yiiu(ni,  not  fmyvacns,  ver.  2 ;
ch.  i.  9;  iii.  10;  for  this  phrase  is  more
comprehensive)  is  the  more  objective  and
purely  intellectual  side  of  wisdom  (comp.
Rom.  xi.  33).

Ver.  4.— In  this  verse  the  apostle  first
definitely  indicates  the  cause  of  his  anxiety,
and  the  Epistle  "begins  to  assume  a  po-
lemic tone.  This  verse  is,  therefore,  the
prelude  of  the  impending  attack  on  the
false  teachers  (vers.  8 — 23).  This  I  say,
that  no  one  may  be  deluduig  you  in  per-
suasive speech  (vers.  8,  18,  23;  Eph.  iv.
14 ;  X  Cor.  u.  1, 4, 13 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  20;  Ps.  Iv.
21).  This  was  the  danger  which  made  a
more  adequate  comprehension  of  Christianity
so  necessary  to  the  Colossians  (vers.  2,  3).
ni6ai'oAa7(ii,  one  of  the  numerous  hapax  lego-
mena  of  this  Epistle  (words  only  used  here
in  the  New  Testament),  compounds  into  one
word  the  ireiflol  \6yot  ("  persuasive  words  ")
of  1  Cor.  ii.  4  (compare  "  word  of  wibdom,"
ver.  23).  In  classical  writers  it  denotes
plausible,  ad  eaptandwn  reasoning.  Uapa-
Xoyi^o/iai  (only  here  and  Jas.  i.  22  in  the  N  ew
Testament)  is  "  to  use  bad  logic,"  "  to  play
off  fallacies  (paralogisms)."  The  new
teachers  were  fluent,  specious  reasoners,  and
'  had  4  store  of  sophistical   aigumentg  «■


81


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa  [ch.  n.  1— 2a


command.  The  tense  of  the  verb  indicates
au  apprehension  as  to  what  may  be  now
goinq  on  (vers.  8, 16, 18,  20 ;  ch.  i.  2:i) .  We
shall  see  afterwards  (vers.  8 — 23)  what  was
the  doctrine  underlying  this  "persuasive
speech."

Ver.  5. — ror  if  indeed  I  am  absent  in  the
fesh,  yet  in  the  spirit  I  am  with  yon
(1  Thess.  ii.  17 ;  1  Cor.  v.  3,  4).  The  con-
nection of  this  verse  with  the  last  is  not
obvious.  Ellicott,  following  Chrysostom,
makes  St.  Paul's  spiritual  presence  the
reason  for  his  being  able  to  give  the  Oolos-
siang  this  warning ;  Meyer,  his  bodily
absence  the  reason  for  their  needing  it.  It  is
better,  with  Lighlfoot,  to  see  here  a  general
explanatory  reference  to  the  previous  context,
a  renewed  declaration  (ver.  1)  of  watchful
interest  in  these  distant  brethren  and  a
hearty  acknowledgment  of  their  Christian
loyalty.  The  tone  of  authoritative  warning
just  assumed  (ver.  4)  is  thus  justified,  and
yet  softened  (compare  the  apologetic  tone  of
Bom.  XV.  14,  15).  The  phrase,  "if  I  am
absent,"  does  not  imply  a  previous  presence
(see  note,  ver.  I).  Rejoicing  and  beholding
your  order,  and  the  steadfastness  of  your
faith  iu  Christ  (Phil.  i.  4—8,  27;  1  Cor.  i.
5—8 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  13 ;  2  Thess.  i.  4).  St.  Paul
docs  not  say, "  rejoicing  in  beholding."  The
oonsoiousnesB  of  union  with  brethren  far
away,  whom  he  has  never  seen  (ver.  1),  is
itself  a  joy ;  and  this  joy  is  heightened  by
what  he  sees  through  the  eyes  of  Epaphrus
(ch.  i.  4,  6—8  :  comp.  2  Cor.  vii.  7)  of  the
condition  of  this  Church.  Talis  and  inepiana
are  military  terms,  denoting  the  "  ordered
array  "  and  "  solid  front "  of  an  army  pre-
pared for  battle  (Lightfoot,  Hofmann) :
comp.  Eph.  vi.  11,  etc. ;  Phil.  i.  27.  Others
find  the  figure  of  a  building  underlying  the
second  word — ^Vulgate,  firmamentum  ("  solid
basis  ") — and  this  is  its  more  usual  meaning,
and  agrees  with  ver.  7  and  ch.  i.  23  (comp.
2  Tim.  ii.  19 ;  1  Pet.  v.  9 ;  Acts  xvi.  5 ;  also
Fi.  xviii.  2,  liXX,  for  the  noun,  not  found,
elsewhere  in  the  New  Testament).  The
precise  expression,  "  faith  in  Christ "  (liter-
ally, into — Eis,  not  ^v,  as  in  ch.  i.  4,  see  note)
occurs  only  here  in  the  New  Testament;
in  Acts  xxiv.  24  read  "in  Christ  Jesus."
In  such  passages  as  Bom.  iii.  22,  26  (where
ir/o-Tis  is  followed  by  the  genitive),  Christ
appears  as  object  of  faith ;  iu  such  as  ch.  i.  4
and  ii.  5  he  is  its  ground  or  stAttratum,  that
in  which  it  rests  and  dwelli,  into  which  it
roots  itself.

Ver.  6. — ^Ab  therefore  ye  received  Christ
JesuB  the  Lord,  walk  in  him  (Phil.  i.  27;
ii.  9— 11 ;  1  Thesa.  Iv.  1 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  13—15;
1  Cor.  XV.  1, 2 ;  Gal.  iii.  2—4 ;  v.  1 ;  Heb.  iu.
6 ;  iv.  14 ;  X.  23 ;  John  vii.  17 ;  xv.  5—10 ;
Bav.  iii.  11).  Such  a  walk  will  be  con-
«i»tent  with  their  previous  steadlastness,  ^nd


will  lead  them  to  larger  spiritual  attain-
ments (ch.  i.  10 ;  see  note).  "  Ye  received  "
(TrapaA.ajuSai'w,  not  Sexofiat,  as  in  oh.  iv.  10 :
oomp.  1  Thess.  ii.  13)  reminds  the  Colossians
of  what  they  had  received  (compare"  ye  were
taught,"  ver.  7  and  oh.  I.  7)  rather  than  nf  the
way  of  their  receiving  it.  "  Christ  Jesua
the  Lord,"  is  literally,  the  Christ  Jesus,  the
Lorii — an  expression  found  besides  only  in
Eph.  iii.  11  (Revised  Text).  The  prefixed
article  points  out  Christ  Jesus  in  hid  full
style  and  title  as  the  Person  whom  the
Colussians  had  received,  and  received  as
the  Lord.  " The  Lord "  has  a  predicative
force,  as  in  1  Cor.  xii.  3  (R.V.);  2  Cor.  iv.  5;
Phil.  ii.  11.  "Jesus  is  Lord"  was  the
testing  watchword  applied  in  the  discerning
of  spirits ;  "  Jesus  Clirist  is  Lord  "  is  to  be
the  final  confession  of  i^re''onciled  universe ;
and  "Christ  Jesus  is  Lord"  is  the  rule  of
faith  that  guides  all  conduct  and  tests  all
doctrine  within  the  Church  (comp.  ver.  19 ;
Bom.  xvi.  18).  It  is  "  a  summary  of  the
whole  Christian  confession"  (Meyer).  To
vindicate  this  lordship,  on  which  the
Colossian  error  trenched  so  seriously,  is  the
main  object  of  the  Epistle  (ch.  i.  13 — 20).
We  must  not,  therefore,  with  Alforil,  Light-
foot,  Hofmann,  analyze  "  Ihe  Clirist  Jesus: "
"  Ye  received  the  Christ,  (namely)  Jesus,  who
is  the  Lord."  The  writer  has  already  used
"  Christ  Jesus"  as  a  single  proper  name  at
the  outset  (ch.  1.  1,  4) ;  and  it  was  the  Urrd-
ship  of  Christ  Jesus,  not  the  Messiahghip  oj
Jesus,  that  was  now  in  question.  In  Acts
xviii.  5,  28  the  situation  is  entirely  differ-
ent. In  the  following  clause,  "  in  him  "  is
emphatic,  as  in  ver.  7  (compare  the  predomi-
nant a^Toi  of  ch.  i.  16 — 22 ;  ii.  9 — 15).  Hence
the  contradiction  of  figure,  "  walk,  rooted,
and  builded  up,"  does  not  obtrude  itself.  (On
"  walk,"  see  note,  ch.  i.  10 ;  and  ou  "  in
Christ  "  in  this  connection,  sen  notes,  oh.  i.
4 ;  ii.  10 ;  and  comp.  Rom.  vi.  3 — 11 ;  viii.  1 ;
2  Cor,  V.  17 ;  John  xv.  1—7.)

Yer.  7. — ^Booted  and  bnilded  up  in  him
(ch.  i.  23;  ii.  5;  Eph.  ii.  20,  21 ;  iii.  18;
iv.  16;  1  Cor.  iii.  9—12;  Jude  20;  Luke
vi.  47,  48).  "Booted "  is  perfect  participle,
implying  an  abiding  fuct  ("fast-rooted");
while  "  builded  up "  (literally,  upon  or
unto)  is  iu  the  present  teniie  of  a  continued
process,  the  prefix  eirl  also  implying  growth
and  gain  (oh.  i.  6,  10 ;  ii.  19).  Meyer  and
Ellicott  view  iv  aiir^  as  a  mere  complement
of  the  latter  participle :  "  being  bnilded  in
him."  This  weakens  the  force  of  both
prepositions  (eVl  and  dp),  and  the  emphasis
of  the  repeated  "in  him."  The  ideas  of
planting  and  building  are  similarly  combined
in  1  Cor.  iii.  9;  Eph.  iii.  18;  anil  ro.ted  is
a  figure  applied  to  buildings  in  other  Greek
writers  (Lightfoot).  "  Christ  is  the  ground
for  the  roots  below,  and  the  foundatioQ  (ui


ch.it.  1—23.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN9.


85


the  building  above"  (Meyer).  And  stab-
lished  in  (or,  hy)  your  faith,  according  as  ye
were  taught  (ch.i.  5—7,  23  ;  1  Cor.  i.  6—8;
1  Thess.  ill.  2 ;  iv.  1 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  13—15 ;
1  Pet.  V.  9,  10).  ■Ei'  before  irfo-rt i  ("  fnitli ")
it  struck  out  in  the  Eevised  Text,  and  is
probably  a  correct  gloss.  The  inBtiumental
dative,  preferred  by  Meyer  and  Lightfoot,
does  not  accord  so  well  with  ver.  5  and  oh.
i.  23  (comp.  Phil.  i.  27:  1  Cor.  xvi.  13;
1  Tim.  V.  8;  2  Tim.  iv.  7;  1  Pet.  v.  9).
"Stablished"  {ffeffcuoifi.ei'oi,  heing  kept  firm)
is  prtseu'.  in  tense,  like  "buibled  up"  (ver.
6,  see  note)  :  comp.  Bum.  iv.  16  ;  Phil.  i.  7  ;
Heb.  iii.  6 ;  vi.  19 ;  xiiL  9 ;  and  distinguish
from  (TTijpifo),  to  make  stable,  fix  firmly.
In  "  as  ye  were  taught "  the  apostle  reminds
his  readers  again  of  their  first  lessons  in
the  gospel  (ch.  i.  5 — 7,  see  notes  ;  2  Thess.
ii.  15).  Abounding  in  it,  with  thanks-
giving ;  or,  ahounding  in  thanksgiving
(cb.  I  3,  12;  iii.  15,  17;  iv.  2;  Eph.  v.
4,  20  J  1  Thess.  v.  18 ;  Heb.  xiii.  15).  The
Eevisers  relegate  "in  it  (your  faith)"  to
the  margin,  following  the  judgment  of
Tisehendorf  and  Tregelles ;  wliile  Westoott
and  Hort,  Alford,  EUicott,  Lightfoot,  retain
the  words  in  the  text.  The  reading  "in
him,"  found  in  the  Vulgate  and  leading
Western  documents,  throws  doubt  on  these
words;  but  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  they
should  have  been  inserted  if  not  authentic,
and  they  might  easily  be  confused  by  a
copyist  with  the  foregoing  "  in  him."  The
second  eV,  if  iv  avrf  be  retained,  becomes
^c  of  aoeompaniment,  and  may  be  rendered
"  with,"  as  in  ch.  i.  29 ;  Epli.  vi,  2.  (On
"  thanksgiving,"  see  note,  cli.  i.  12.)

Vers.  8— 15.— Section  V.  The  Chris-
tian's C0MPI,ETENE8B  W  ChRIST.  The
apostle  has  first  defined  hi^  own  dortrinal
position  in  the  theological  delivi  ranee  of
ch.  i.  15 — 20,  and  has  then  skilfully  brought
himself  into  suitable  personal  relations  with
bis  readers  by  the  statements  and  appeals
of  ch.  i.  23  —  ii.  7.  And  now,  after  a
general  indication  in  ver.  4  of  the  direction
in  which  he  is  about  to  strike,  he  unmasks
the  battery  he  has  been  all  the  while  pre-
paring, and  delivers  his  attack  on  the
Coloman  error,  occupying  the  rest  of  this
second  chapter.  He  denounces  (1)  its/alie
philosophy  of  religion  (vers.  8—15);  (2)  it$
arbitrary  and  obaolete  ceremonialism  (vers.
16,  17) ;  (3)  its  visionary  angel-worship
(vers.  18,  19);  (4)  its  ascetic  rules  (vers.
20  —  22 ;  ver.  23  reviewing  the  whole
system  is  a  brief  characterization  of  its
most  prominent  and  dangerous  features.  It
will  be  convenient  to  treat  separately  the
first  of  these  topics,  under  the  heading
already  given,  which  indicates  the  positive
tfuth  developed  by  St.  Paul  in  antagonism
\/o  the  «Ror  against  which  he  contends — •


truth  which  is  the  practical  applicaticn  ol
the  theological  teaching  of  the  first  chapter.
Ver.  8. — Beware  lest  there  shall  be  some
one  who  maketh  you  his  spoil  throngh  his
philosophy  and  empty  deceit  (vers.  4,  18,  23 ;
Eph.  iv.  14 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  20  ;  1  Cor.  li.  1,  4 ;
Gal.  i.  7 ;  Acts  xx.  30).  "  Beware ; "  literally,
tee  (to  it),  a  common  form  of  warning  (ch.
iv.  17).    The  future  indicative  "  shall  bo,"
used  instead  of  the  more  regular  subjunctive
"should  be,"  implies  that  what  is  feared
is  too  likely  to  prove  the  case  (comp.  Heb.
iii.  12  and  (with  another  tense)  Gal.  iv.  11).
"Some  one   who   maketh  (you)  his    spoil
(S  avKar/mywv) "  is  an  expre.ssion  so  distinct
and     individualizing    tliat    it    appears   to
single  out  a  definite,  well-known  person.
The    denunciations    of    this    Epistle   are
throughout  in  the  singular  number  (vera.
4,  16,   18),  in  marked  contrast  with  the
plwraX  of  Gal.  i.  17,  and  that  prevails  in
the  apostle's  earlier  polemical  references.
It  is  in  harmony  with  the  philosophical,
Gnosticizing    charactur    of    the    Colossian
heresy  that  it  should  rest  on  the  authority
of  some  single  teacher,  rather  than  on  Scrip-
ture or  tradition,  as  did  the  consCTvative
legalistic    Judaism.       ^vXayayyiiv,    a    very
rare  word,  hapax  legomenon  in  the  New  Tes-
tament, bears  its  meaning  on  its  face.     It
indicates  the  selfish,  partisan   spirit,  and
the  overbearing  conduct  of  the  false  teacher.
Against  such  men  St.  Paul  had  forewarned
the  Ephesian  elders  (Acts  xx.  20,  30).  "  And
empty    deceit"    stands    in    a    qualifying
opposition  to  "philosophy:"    "His  philo-
sophy, indeed  !    '  It  is  no  better  than  a  vain
deceit."    This  kind  of  irony  we  shall  find
the  writer  using  with  still  greater  efiect  in
ver.  18.    Deceit  is  empty  (/cEj/iir :  comp.  Eph.
V.  6;  1  Thess.  ii.  1 ;   1  Coj-.  xv.   14;  dis-
tinguish from  fidraios,  fruitless,  vain),  which
deceives  by  being  a  show  of  what  it  is  not,
a  hollow  pretence,     from  the  prominence
given  to  this  aspect  of  the  new  teaching,
we  infer  that  it  claimed  to  be  a  philosophy,
and  made  this  its  special  distinction  and
ground  of  buperiority.     And  this  considera-
tion points  (comp.   Introduction,  §  4),  to
some  connection  between    the    system  of
the  Culossian    errorists    and   the   Alexan-
drine Judaism,  of  which  Philo,  an  elder
contemporary    of   St.  Paul,    is    our   chief
exponent.    The  aim  of  this  school,  which
had  now  existed  for  two  centuries  at  least,
and  had  diifused   its  ideas  far  and  wide,
was  to  transform  and  sublimate  Judaism  by
interpreting   it   under   philosophical   prin-
ciples,    lis  teachers  endeavoured,  in   fact,
to  put  tlie  "  new  wine "  of  Plato  into  the
"  old  bottles  "  of  Muses,  persuading  them-
selves that  it  was  originahy  there  (comp.
note  on  "mystery,"  ch.  i.  27).    In  PhUo,
philosophy  is  tb*  oajae  for  ^m^  religion.


S6


THE  EWSTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  [ok.  it.  I— 2&


whoie  essence  consists  in  the  pursuit  and
cnn  teraplation  of  pure  spiritual  truth.
II  ses  and  the  patriarchs  are,  with  him,
till  "philosophers;"  the  writers  of  tlie  Old
Tesiament  "  pliilosophize;"  it  is"the  philo-
sophical man"  who  holds  converse  with
God.  This  is  the  only  place  where  philo-
snphy  is  expressly  mentioned  in  the  New
Testament ;  in  1  Cor.  i.  2^  and  context  it  is,
however,  only  verhally  wanting.  According
to  the  tradition  of  men,  according  to  the
rudiments  of  the  world,  and  not  according
to  Christ  (vers.  17,  20,  22;  Gal.  i.  11.  12;
iv.  3,  9;  1  Cor.  i.  20,  21 ;  iii.  19—21 ;  Matt.
XV.  2;  Mark  vii.  8;  1  John  iv.  5;  1  Pet.
i.  1 8).  This  clause  qualifies  "  making  spoil "
(Meyer,  Ellicott)  rather  tlian  "  deceit ; "
b  iiman  authority  and  natural  reason  furnish
the  principles  and  the  method  according  to
wliich  the  false  teacher  proceeds.  "  Tra-
iliiion"  does  not  necessarrly  imply  antiquity
(oomp.  1  Cor.  xi.  2;  2  Tliess.  ii.  15  ;  iii.  6);
"of  men"  is  the  emphatic  part  of  the
phrase.  These  words  are  cliaraoteristio  of
St.  Paul,  who  was  so  profoundly  conscious
of  the  supernatural  origin  of  his  own
doctrine  (see  Gal.  L  11 — 17;  1  Cor.  xi.  23;
1  Thess.  iv.  15 :  comp.  John  iii.  31  — 35  ;
viii.  23;  1  John  iv.  5).  Similarly,  "the
rudiments  of  the  world"  are  the  crude
beginnings  of  truth,  the  childishly  faulty  -
and  imperfect  religious  conceptions  and
usages  to  which  the  world  had  attained
apart  from  the  revelation  of  Christ  (oomp.
Gal.  iv.  3,  9;  also  Heb.  v.  12,  for  this  use
of  rroixeia)  It  is  not  eitlier  Jewish  or  non-
Jewish  elements  specifically  that  are  intended.
Jew  and  Greek  are  one  in  so  far  as  their
religious  ideas  are  "not  according  to  Christ."
Greek  thought  had  also  contributed  its
rudiments  to  the  world's  education  for
Christ :  hence,  comprehensively,  "  the  rudi-
ments of  the  world "  (comp.  1  Cor.  i.  21).
The  blending  of  Greek  and  Jewish  elements
in  the  Colossian  theosophy  would  of  itself
Bug;;  est  this  generalization, already  shadowed
forth  in  Gal.  iv.  3.  Neander,  Hofmann,
and  Klopper  (the  latest  German  commen-
tator), have  returned  to  the  view  that  pre-
vailed amongst  the  Fathers,  from  Origen
downwards,  reading  this  phrase,  both  here
and  in  Galatians,  in  a  physical  sense,  as
in  2  Pet.  iii.  10,  12;  the  elementa  mundi,
"  the  powers  of  nature,"  "  heavenly  bodies,"
etc.,  worshipped  by  the  Gentiles  as  gods,
and  which  the  JewB  identified  with  the
angels  (ver.  18;  Heb.  i.  7)  as  Gods  agents
in  the  direction  of  the  world.  This  inter-
pretation has  much  to  recommend  it,  but
it  scarcely  harmonizes  with  the  parallel
"tradition  of  men,"  slill  less  with  the
context  of  ver.  20,  and  is  absolutely  at
variance,  as  it  seem*  to  us,  with  the  argu-
ment  inyolveil   in  Qal.  ir.  8.     Not  the


doctrine  of  Christ,  but  Christ  himself  is
the  substitute  for  these  discarded  rudiments
(vers.  17,  20).  His  Person  is  the  norm  and
test  of  truth  (1  Cor.  xii.  3 ;  1  John  iv.  1 — 3).
Tbe  views  combatted  were  "  not  according
to  Christ,"  for  they  made  him  something
less  and  lower  than  that  wliich  he  is.

Ver.  9. — Because  in  him  dwelleth  all  the
fulness  (or,  completeness)  of  the  Bedhead
bodUy  (ch.  i.  19 ;  Phil.  ii.  6—8 ;  Kom.
i.  3,  4;  ix.  5;  John  i.  1,  14).  In  t;h.  i.
18 — 20  we  viewed  a  series  of  events  ;  here
we  have  an  abiding  fact.  The  whole
plenitude  of  our  Lord's  Divine-human
person  and  powers,  as  the  complete  Christ,
was  definitively  con.-.tituted  when,  in  the
exercise  of  his  kingly  prerogative,  "he  sat
down  on  the  rit;ht  hand  of  the  Majesty  on
high."  "  From  henceforth "  that  fulness
evermore  resides  in  him  (comp.  note,  ch.
i.  19).  The  undivided  pleroma  of  ch.  i.  19
now  reveals  its  twofold  nature:  it  ia  "the
fulness  of  the  Godhead,"  and  yet  "  dwells
corporeally  in  him."  '•  Godhead  "  (_ee6Tns)
is  the  abstract  of  "  God  "  (fleiis),  not  of  the
adjective  "Divine"  (9e?or :  the  Vulgate
therefore,  wrongly,  divinitatis  :  comp.  Rom.
i.  20 ;  Acts  xvii  29 ;  Wisd.  xviii.  9),  and  de-
notes, "not  DivineexcellenceSjbut  the  Divine
nature"  (Bengel);  see  Trench's  •  Synonyms.'
Schenkel  and  others,  guided  by  a  con-
jecture of  Theodoret,  have  found  here  the
Church,  supporting  their  view  by  a  very
doubtful  interpretation  of  Eph.  1.  23.  Still
more  groumlless  is  the  identification  of  this
pleroma  with  the  created  world.  The
apostle  unmistakably  affirms  that  the  Divine
nature, in  its  entirety.belongs  to  the  Church's
Christ.  The  literal  sense  of  "bodily"
(maintained  by  Meyer,  Alford,  Ellicott,
liightfoot,  Hofmann,  after  Chrysostom  and
Athanasius)  has  been  avoided  by  those
who  render  it  "  wholly  "  (Jerome) ;  "  essen-
tially, substantially"  (Cyril,  Theophylaet,
Calvin,  Klopper),  as  opposed  to  "  relatively  "
or  " parlially ; "  "truly  "  (Augustine,  Eras-
mus, Bengel,  Bleek),  as  opposed  to  "  figura-
tively "  (ver.  17).  The  adverb  aa/iaTiKus
(always  literal  in  classical  usage,  along
with  its  adjective)  occurs  only  here  in  the
New  Testament;  the  adjective  "bodily"
in  1  Tim.  iv.  8  ;  Luke  iii.  22.  "  The  body
of  his  flesh"  in  ch.  i.  22  affords  a  truer
parallel  than  the  language  of  ver.  17,  where
(Tu/ia  bears  an  exceptional  sense  (see  note).
Elsewhere  St.  Paul  balances  in  simUar
fashion  expiessions  relating  to  the  twofold
nature  of  Christ  (see  pirfallels).  The  asser-
tion that  "all  the  fulness  of  Deity"  dwells
in  Christ  negatives  the  Alexandrine  "philo-
sophy," wiih  its  cloud  of  mediating  angel-
powers  and  spiritual  emanations;,  tha
assertion  that  it  dwells  in  him  bodily  equally
condemns  that  contempt  for  the  body  an4


0H.0. 1— 23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SS1AN&


ei


the  material  world  which  was  the  chief
practical  tenet  of  the  same  school  (comp.
notes  on  ch.  i.  22  and  ii.  23).

Yer.  10.— And  (because)  ye  are  in  him
made  complete;  or, fulfilled  (Eph.  i.  3,7 — 11,
23;  iil.  IS,  19;  It.  13;  Phil.  iv.  19;  Gal.
iii.  14,  2i;  V.  1,  4;  1  Cor.  i.  80;  ii.  2).
A  complete  Christ  makes  his  people  com-
plete ;  his  pleroma  is  our  plerosis.  Finding
the  whole  fulness  of  God  brought  within
our  reach  and  engaged  in  our  behalf  (Phil,
ii.  7;  Matt.  xx.  28)  in  him,  we  need  not
resort  elsewhere  to  supply  our  spiritual
needs  (Phil.  Iv.  19).  "  In  him  "  is  the  pri-
mary predicate  (see  Alford,  Ellicott,  against
Meyer:  comp.  ver.  3):  "Ye  are  in  him"
is  the  assumption  (Eom.  viii.  1 ;  xvi.  7) ;
"  (ye  are)  made  complete  "  is  the  inference.
(On  the  verb  T\rip6a>  (the  basis  of  pleroma),
used  in  peifect  participle  of  abiding  result,
see  notes,  oh.  i.  9,  19.)  This  completenest
includes  the  furnishing  of  men  with  all
that  is  required  for  their  present  and  final
salvation  as  individuals  (vers.  11—15;  oh.
i.  21,  22,  28),  and  for  their  collective  per-
fection as  foriiiinj;  the  Church,  the  body  of
Christ  (vers.  2,  19  ;  ch.  i.  19 ;  Eph.  i.  23 ;
V.  26,  27);  for  this  twofold  completeness,
comp.  Eph.  iv.  12 — 16.  Who  is  the  Head
of  all  principality  and  dominion  (vers.
15  IS;  oh.  i.  16;  Eph.  i.  21;  Phil.  ii.  10, 11;
1  Cor.  XV.  24;  Heb.  i.  6,  14;  1  Pet.  iii.  22).
(On  "  principality,"  etc.,  see  note,  oh.  i.  16.)
The  Colossians  were  being  taught  to  replace
or  supplement  Christ's  offices  by  those  of
angel-powers  (see  notes,  vers.  15,  18).
Pliilo  ('  Concerning  Dreams,'  i.  §§  22,  23)
wiites  thus  of  the  angels:  "Free  from  all
bodily  encumbrance,  endowed  with  larger
and  diviner  mtrlleot,  tliey  are  lieutenants
of  the  All-ruler,  eyes  and  ears  of  the  great
K-ing.  Philosophers  in  general  call  them
demons  (Sal/M>v(s);  the  sacred  Scripture
angels,  for  they  report  (Sio77^AAou(ri)  the
injunctions  of  the  Fatlier  to  his  children,
ai  id  the  wants  of  the  oliildren  to  their  Father.
.  .  .  Angels,  the  Divine  words,  walk  about
[comp.  2  Cor.  vi.  16]  in  the  souls  of  those
who  have  not  yet  completely  washed  off  the
(old)  life,  foul  and  stained  through  their
cumbersome  bodies,  making  them  bright
to  the  eyes  of  virtue."  In  such  a  strain
the  Colossian  "philosopher"  may  have
lieen  talking.  But  if  Christ  is  the  Maker
aud  Lord  of  these  invisible  powers  (oh.
i.  15,  16),  and  we  are  in  Mm,  tiien  we  must
uo  longer  look  to  mem  as  our  saviours.

Var.  11. — In  whom  also  ye  ware  circum-
cised, with  a  circumcision  not  wrought  by
hands  (Eph.  ii.  11 ;  Phil.  iii.  3;  Gal.  v.  2— 6;
vi.  12—15;  Eom.  ii.  25—29;  iv.  9—12;
1  Cor.  vii.  18;  Acts  xv.  1,  5;  Dent,  xxx,  6).
Circumcision  was  insisted  on  by  the  new
"philosophical"    teacher    as  necessary  to


spiritual  completeness;  but  from  a  different
standpoint,  and  in  a  manner  different  irom
that  of  the  Pharisaic  Judaizers  of  Galatia
and  of  Acts  xv.  1.  Bv  the  latter  it  was
preached  as  matter  of  Law  and  external  re-
quirement, and  so  became  the  critical  point  in
the  decision  between  the  opposing  principles
of  "  faith  "  and  "  works."  By  the  philoso-
phical school  it  was  enjoined  as  matter  of
symbolic  moral  efficiency.  So  Philo  speaks
of  circumcision  ('  On  the  Migration  of  Abra-
ham,' §  16)  as  "  setting  forth  the  excision  of
all  the  pleasures  and  passions,  and  the
destruction  of  impious  vain  opinion  '  (see
also  his  treatise  '  On  Circumcision ').  From
this  point  of  view,  baptism  is  the  Christian
circumcision,  the  new  symbolic  expression  of
the  moral  change  which  St.  Paul  and  his
opponents  alike  deemed  necessary,  though
they  understood  it  in  a  different  sense  from
him  (see  vers.  20 — 23).  In  this  respect  the
Christian  is  already  complete,  for  his  circum-
cision took  place  in  the  stripping  off  of  the
body  of  the  flesh,  in  the  circumcision  of  Christ
(ch.  iii.  5, 8, 9 ;  E|  .h.  iv.  22—25 ;  Eom.  vi.  6 ;
vii.  18—25 ;  xiii.  12 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  1 ;  iv.  1,  2).
The  inserted  "of  the  sins"  is  an  ancient
gloss.  'Air-EK-Suiris,  a  double  compound,
found  only  in  this  Epistle  (see  corresponding
verb  in  ver.  15;  ch.  iii.  9),  denotes  both
"  stripping  off"  and  "  putting  away."  "  The
stripping  off  of  the  body"  was  the  ideal
of  the  philosophical  ascetics  (see  note  on
"  body,"  ver.  23,  and  quotations  from  Philo).
The  apostle  adds  "  of  the  flesh ;  "  i.e.  of  the
body  in  so  far  as  it  was  the  body  of  the  flesh
(vers.  13,  18,  23  ;  oh.  iii.  5).  "  The  flesh  "
(in  oh.  i.  22  that  which  Christ  had  put  on ;
here  that  which  the  Christian  puts  off:
comp.  Eom.  viii.  3)  is  "  the  flesh  of  sin,"  of
Eom.  viii.  3 ;  Gal.  v.  19 ;  Eph.  ii.  3,  etc.
"  The  body,"  while  identified  with  this
"  flesh,"  is  "  the  body  of  sin  "  and  "  of  death  "
(Eom.  vi.  6 ;  vii.  24 ;  see  Meyer,  Godet,  or
Beet) ;  sin  inhabits  it,  clothes  itself  with  it,
aud  presents  itself  to  us  in  its  form;  and
this  being  the  normal  condition  of  unre-
generate  human  nature,  the  sinful  piinciple
is  naturally  called  the  flesh.  So  "  the  (bodily)
members "  become  "  the  members  that  are
upon  the  earth,"  employed  in  the  pursuit  of
lust  and  greed,  till  they  become  practically
one  with  these  vices  (ch.  iii.  5,  see  note ;
also  Eom.  vii.  5,  23).  Yet  "  the  body  "  and
"the  (sinful)  flesh,"  while  in  the  natural
man  one  in  practice,  are  in  piinciple  ilis-
tingoishable  (ver.  23  :  comp.  ch.  i.  22),  aud
separ.Jile  (Bom.  vi.  12).  The  deliverance
from  tlie  pliysical  acts  and  habits  of  the  old
sinful  life,  experienced  by  him  who  is  "  in
Christ  "(ver.  10;  Eom.  viii.  1 — 1;  2  Cor,
V.  17),  is  "the  cirenmcision  according  to  the
Christ,"  or  here  more  pointedly  "  of  ()hrist "
— a  real  and  complete,  instead  of  a  partia)


88


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


LoH.  II.  1— 2a


and  symbiilic,  pulling  away  of  tha  orgBnio
life  and  dominalion  of  sin  which  made  the
body  its  scat  nnd  its  instrument.  The  geni-
tive "  of  Christ "  is  neither  objective  ("under-
gone by  Christ ").  nor  subjective  ("  wrought
by  Christ "),  but  stands  in  a  more  general
relation  —  "  belonging  to  Christ,"  "  the
Christian  ciroumoitiion."  The  occasion  of
this  new  birth  in  the  Colossiana  was  their
lapiiim —

Ver.  12— When  ye  were  (literally,  having
heen)  buried  with  him  in  your  baptism  (vtr.
20 ;  ch.  iii.  3 ;  Bom.  vi.  1— H ;  Gal.  iji.  26,
27 ;  Eph.  iv.  5 ;  V.  26 ;  Titus  iii.  5 ;  1  Pet,  iii.
21 ).  BuiTTio-Mfis,  the  rarer  form  of  the  word,  is
preferred  byTregelles,Alford,  Lightfoot  (see
his  note),  being  found  in  Codex  B,  with  other
good  authorities;  it  indicates  the  process
("  in  your  baptizing  ").  B6,TrTi<riJ.tt,  the  usual
tbrin  of  the  word,  is  retained  by  Revisers,  after
Tisohendorf,  Ellicott,  Westcott  and  Hort.
Baptism  stands  for  the  entire  change  of  the
nian  which  it  symbolizes  and  seals  (Bom.  vi.
3—5 ;  Gal.  iii.  27).  The  double  aspect  of
this  change  was  indicated  by  the  twofold
moyement  taking  place  in  immersion,  the
usual  form  of  primitive  baptism—first  the
KoT(£5u(rij,  the  descent  of  the  baptized  person
beneath  the  symbolic  waters,  figuring  his
death  with  Christ  as  a  separation  from  sin
and  the  evil  past  (ver.  20), — there  for  a
moment  he  is  buried,  and  burial  is  death
made  complete  and  final  (Horn.  vi.  2 — i);
then  the  amSuiris,  the  emerging  ftom  the
baptismal  wave,  which  gave  baptism  the
positive  side  of  its  significance.  In  which
(or,  whom)  also  ye  were  raised  with  (him),
through  your  faith  in  the  workuig  of  God,
who  raised  him  from  the  dead  (ch.  iii,  1 ;
i.  18 ;  Eph,  ii,  6,  8 ;  Bom,  vi,  4 ;  iv.  24,  25 ;
1  Pet.  i.  21).  We  refer  the  relative  pronoun
to  the  immediately  antecedent  "  baptism,"
although  the  previous  eV  4  refers  to  "  CJhrist "
(ver.  11 :  comp.  Eph,  ii.  6)  and  some  good
interpreters  follow  the  rendering"  in  whom."
For  the  Christian's  being  raised  with  Christ
is  not  contrasted  with  his  circumcision  (ver.
H)— that  tiguru  has  been  dismissed— but
with  his  burial  in  baptism  (ver.  12  o);
so  Alford,  Ellicott,  Lightfoot,  Eevisers.
"  Hft'ing  been  buried  "  is  replaced  in  the
antithesis  by  the  more  assertive  "  ye  were
raised"  (comp.  vers.  13,  14;  oh.  i.  22,  26).
"  With  "  points  to  the  "  hlrn "  (Christ)  of
the  previous  clause  (comp.  Eph.  ii.  6 ;
Bom,  vi,  6).  Faith  is  the  instiumental
cause  of  that  which  baptism  sets  forth
(comp.  Gal.  iii.  26, 27),  and  has  for  its  object
(not  its  cause:  so  Bengel)  "the  working"
livejry^ia:  see  note,  ch.  i.  29 ;  also  Eph.  i,  20 ;
iii.  20)  "  of  God."  And  the  special  Divine
work  on  which  it  rests  is  "  tlie  resurrection
of  Christ "  (Bom.  iv.  24, 25 ;  x.  9 ;  1  Oor.  iv.
18—17) :  comp.  note  on  "  Firstborn  out  of


the  dead,"  oh.  i.  19.  Bising  frdm  the  bap-
tismal waters,  the  Cliristian  convert  decliires
the  faith  of  his  heart  in  that  supreme  act  of
God,  which  attests  and  makes  sure  all  thut
he  has  bestowed  upon  us  in  his  Son  (ch.  i.
12 — 14:  comp.  Bom.  i.  4;  also  1  Pet.  i.  21;
Acts  ii.  36;  xiii.  33,  38,  etc.).  Baptism
symbolizes  all  that  circumcision  did,  and
more.  It  expresses  more  fully  than  the
older  sacrament  our  parting  with  the  life  of
sin ;  and  also  that  of  which  oircum«ision
knew  nothing — the  union  of  the  man  with
the  dying  and  risen  Christ,  which  makes
him  "dead  unto  sin,  and  alive  unto  God."
How  needless,  then,  even  if  it  were  legiti-
mate, for  a  Cliristian  to  return  to  this  super-
seded rite  I  To  heighten  his  readers'  sense
of  the  reality  and  completeness  of  the  chringe
which  as  baptized  (i.e.  believing)  Christians
they  had  undergone,  he  describes  it  now
more  directly  as  matter  of  personal  ex-
perience.

Ver.  13. — And  you,  being  dead  by  reason
of  (or,  in)  your  trespasses  and  the  nnoircum-
cision  of  your  flesh,  he  made  you  alive
together  with  him,  having  forgiven  us  all
our  trespasses  (Eph.  ii.  1 — 5 ;  i.  7  ;  Bom.  v.
12—21 ;  vi.  23;  vii.  9—13,  24;  viii.  1,  2,  8,
10 ;  1  Cor.  XV.  .56 ;  John  v.  24 ;  vi.  51 ;
1  John  iii.  14 ;  Gen.  ii.  17).  (For  the  transi-
tion from  "  having  raised  "  (ver.  12)  to  this
verse,  comp.  Eph.  i.  20 — ii.  1 ;  also  ch.  i.
20,  21.)  Again  the  participle  gives  place  to
the  finite  verb  :  a  colon  is  a  sufficient  stop
at  the  end  of  ver.  12.  Death,  in  St.  Paul's
theology,  is  "  a  collective  expression  for  the
entire  judicial  consequences  of  sin "  (see
Cremer's  '  Lexicon,'  on  fliii/aTos  and  veKp<!s),
of  which  the  primary  spiritual  element  is
the  sundering  of  the  soul's  fellowship  with
God,  from  which  flow  all  other  evils  con-
tained in  it.  Life,  therefore,  begins  with
justification  (Bom,  v.  18).  "  Trespasses "
are  particular  acts  of  sin  (Eph.  i.  7  ;  ii.  1, 5 ;
Bom.  V.  15 — 20 ;  xi.  11) ;  •'  unoircumcision
of  the  flesh"  is  general  sinful  impurity  sf
nature.  The  false  teachers  probably  stig-
matized the  unoiroumcised  state  as  unholy.
The  apostle  adopts  the  expression,  but  refera
it  to  the  pre-Christian  life  of  his  readers
(see  vers.  11,  12),  when  their  Gentile  unoir-
cumcision was  a  true  type  of  their  moral
condition  (Bom.  ii.  25  ;  Eph.  ii.  11).  These
sinful  acts  and  this  sinful  condition  were
the  cause  of  their  former  state  of  death
(Bom.  V.  1 2).  The  Bevisers  rightly  restore
the  second  emphatio  "  you  " — "  you,  unoir-
oumcised Gentiles  "  (comp.  ch.  i.  21, 22, 27  ;
Eph.  i.  13;  ii.  11—18;  Bom.  iv.  9).  It  is
God  who  "  made  you  alive  "  as  he  "  raised
him  (Christ),"  (ver.  12);  the  second  act  being
the  consequence  and  counterpart  of  the  first,
tiud  faith  the  subjective  link  between  them.
XapliouM,  to  show  grace,  used  of  Divine  foj?>


OH.  n.  1-23*]


THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSTANS.


m


given  ess  only  in  this  and  the  Ephesian  Epistle
(ch.  iii.  13  J  Eph.  iv.  32 :  conip.  Luke  vii.
42,  43;  2  Cor,  ii.  7,  10;  xii  IH),  points  to
the  canse  or  principle  of  forgiveness  in  the
Divine  grace  (Eph.  ii.  4,  5 ;  Eom.  iii.  26 ;
V.  17).  In  "  having  forgiven  «»  "  tlie  writer
signiiicantly  passes  from  the  second  to  tlie
first  person :  so  in  Eph.  ii,  1 — 5  (comp.  Rom.
iii.  9,  30;  1  Tim.  i.  15).  The  thought  of
the  new  life  hestowed  on  the  Colossians  with
himself  in  their  individual  forgiveness  calls
to  his  mind  the  great  act  of  Divine  mercy
from  which  it  sprang  (the  connection  cor-
responds, in  reverse  order,  to  that  of  oh.  i.  20,
21 ;  2  Cor.  t.  19,  20),  and  he  continues—

Ver.  1 4. — Having  blotted  out  the  bond  (that
was)  against  us  with  (or,  written  in)  decrees,
which  was  opposed  to  us  (Eph.  ii.  14 — li; ;
Eom.  iii.  9—26;  vii.  7—14;  2  Cor.  v.  19;
Gal.  iii.  10—22;  1  Cor.  xv.  56;  Acts  xiii.
88,  39).  The  ancients  commonly  used  wax
tablets  in  writing,  and  the  flat  end  of  the
pointed  stylus  drawn  over  the  writing
smeared  it  out  (expunged)  and  so  cancelled  it
(comp.  Acts  iii.  19 ;  Ps.  li.  9 ;  Isa.  xliii.  25,
LXX).  "  God,"  not  "  Christ,"  is  the  sul)-
ject  of  this  verb,  which  stands  in  immediate
sequence  to  those  of  vers.  12, 13  (comp.  2  Cor.
V.  19).  It  is  the  receiver  rather  than  the
offerer  of  satisfaction  who  cancels  the  debt :
in  Eph.  ii.  15  (comp.  oh.  i.  22)  a  different
verb  is  used.  Xstpdjpcupov  ("  hand-wri  tttn  ; "
a  word  of  later  Greek,  only  here  in  the  New
Testament)  is  used  specially  of  an  account
of  debt,  a  bond  signed  by  the  debtor's  hand
(see  Meyer  and  Lightfoot).  This  bond  (with
its  decrees)  can  be  nothing  other  than  "  the
law  "  (Eph.  ii.  14—16 ;  Acts  xiii.  38,  39 ;
Eom.  iii.  20 ;  vii.  25 ;  Gal.  iii.  21,  22,  etc.) ;
not,  however,  the  ritual  law,  nor  even  the
Mosaic  Law  as  such  (as  Meyer  contends),
but  law  as  law,  the  Divine  rule  of  human
life  impressed  even  on  Gentile  hearts
(Eom.  ii,  14,  15),  to  which  man's  conscience
gives  its  consent  (Bum.  vii.  16,  22),  and  yet
which  becomes  by  his  disobedience  just  a
list  of  charges  against  him  (so  Neander  and
Lightfoot ;  see  the  latter  on  Gal.  ii.  19),
Exod.  xxiv.  3  and  Deut.  xxyii.  14 — 26,
indeed,  illustrate  this  wider  relation  of
Divine  law  to  the  human  conscience  gene-
rally. Tois  S6yii.aau/  is  dative  of  reference
either  to  koA'  thiHv  ("  against  us: "  qualifying
or  explanatory — <«  respect  of  its  decrees}  or
to  the  verbal  idea  contained  in  x^'Py^P"'!""'
("written  in,"  or  "with  decrees").  The
former  explanation  (that  of  Winer  and  Elli-
oott)  is  preferable.  The  Greek  Fathers
made  it  instrumental  dative  to  e^aKi(<j/a9,
understanding  by  these  Siiy/daTa  the  doctrines
{dogmas)  of  the  gospel  by  which  the  charges
of  the  Law  against  us  are  expunged.  But
this  puts  on  t6yfi.a  a  later  theological  sense
fonign  to  St,  Paul,  and  universally  rejected


by  modem  interpreters,  In  the  New  Te8f»<
ment  (comp.  Luke  ii.  1  ;  Acts  xvi.  4;
Heb.  xi.  23),  as  in  classical  Greek,  dogma  it
a  decree,  setting  forth  the  will  of  some
public  authority  (comp.  note  on  SoyfiaTl^a,
ver.  20).  The  added  clause,  "which  wag
opposed  to  us,"  afBrius  the  active  O[iposition,
as  "  against  us  "  the  essential  Ijostility  of  the
decrees  of  God's  law  to  our  sinful  naturo
(Rom.  iv.  15 ;  Gal.  iii.  10 :  comp.  Eom.  vii.
13,  14).  The  emphasis  with  which  St.  Paul
dwells  on  this  point  is  characteristic  of  the
author  of  Romans  and  Galatians.  'Ttts-
vdvTws  occurs  besiiles  only  in  Heb.  x.  27 ;
the  prefix  iirh  implies  close  and  persistent
opposition  (Lightfoot).  And  he  hath  taken
it  out  of  the  midst,  having  nailed  it  to  the
cross  (ch.  i.  20—22 ;  Eph.  ii.  18  ;  2  Cor.  v.
19;  Rom.  iii.  24—26;  v.  1,2;  Gal.  iii.  13;
Heb.  i.  3;  Joliu  i.  29;  1  John  iv.  10).  A
third  time  in  these  three  verses  (12 — 14)  we
note  the  transition  from  participle  to  co-ordi-
nate finite  verb;  and  here,  in  addition,  the
aorist  tense  passes  into  the  perfect  ("  hath
taken  "),  marking  the  finality  of  the  removal
of  the  Law's  condemning  power  (Rom.  viii.  1 ;
Acts  xiii.  39) :  comp.  the  opposite  transition
in  oh.  i.  26,  27.  The  moral  deliverance  of
ver.  11  is  traced  up  to  tliis  legal  release,  both
contained  in  our  completeness  in  Christ
(ver.  10).  The  subject  is  still  "God."
Cancelling  the  bond  which  he  held  against
us  in  his  Law,  God  has  for  ever  removed  the
ba/rrier  which  stood  between  mankind  and
himself  (2  Cor.  v.  19).  Christ's  place  in  this
work,  already  shown  in  oh.  i.  18 — 23  (in  its
relation  to  himself),  is  vividly  recalled  by
the  mention  of  the  cross.  And  the  abolition
of  the  Law's  condemnation  is  finally  set
forth  by  a  yet  bolder  metaphor — "having
nailed  it  to  the  cross."  The  nails  of  the
cross  in  piercing  Christ  pierced  the  legal
instrument  which  held  us  debtors,  and
nullified  it;  see  Gal.  iii.  13  (comp.  Gal.  ii.
19,  20);  Eom.  vii.  4 — 6.  UpoariKdaas
may  suggest  the  further  idea  of  nailing  up
the  cancelled  document,  by  way  of  publica-
tion. At  the  cross  all  may  read,  "There
is  now  no  condemnation"  (compare  the
"  making  a  show  "  of  ver.  15 ;  also  Eom,  iii.
25 ;  Gal.  iii.  1).  (For  vers.  11—14,  compare
concluding  remark  on  ch.  i.  14.)

Ver.  15.— Having  stripped  off  the  princi-
palities and  the  dominions  (eh.  i.  16 ;  ii.  10  :
Acts  vii.  38,  53 ;  Gal.  iii.  19  ;  Heb.  i.  5,  7,
14 ;  ii.  2,  5 ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  2 ;  Pa.  Ixviii.  17).
'AirfieSvffiinepos  has  been  rendered,  from  the
time  of  the  Latin  Vulgate, "  having  spoiled  "
(exspolians),  a  rendering  which  is  "  not  leas
a  violation  of  St.  Paul's  usage  (ch.  iii.  9)
than  of  grammatical  rule"  (Lightfoot;  so
Alford,  Ellicott,  Wordsworth,  Hofmann,
Eevisers).  It  is  precisely  the  same  participle
that  ve  flitd  in  oh,  iii,  9,  wd  tb«  writer  ow)


96


THE  EHSTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSlANS.


tea.  It.  1—28.


just  user!  the  noun  &wfKSv(ris  (ver  11)  in  s
eoiTeBiKiniliiip:  simse  (see  note  in  he.  ou  the
force  of  the  duuble  ooiupouiul).  He  emjiloys
coiiipouniU  of  biw  iu  Ihe  middle  voice  seven-
teen tiineu  elsewhere,  .end  always  in  the
gensu  of  "putting  off  [or,  'on']  from  one's
self;"  and  tliere  is  no  sure  instance  in
©reok  of  the  middle  verb  bearing  any  other
meaning.  Yet  such  critics  as  Meyer,  Eadie,
Klopper,  cling  to  the  rendering  of  the
Vulgate  and  our  Authorized  Version ;  and
not  without  reason,  as  we  shall  see.  The
Kevised  margin  follows  the  earlier  Latin
Fathers  and  some  ancient  versions,  supply-
ing "  his  body  "  as  object  of  the  participle,
understanding  "  Christ "  as  subject.  But
the  contc  xt  dops  not,  as  in  2  Cor.  v.  3,
Bugge.4  this  ellipsis,  and  it  is  arbitrary  to
make  the  participl-  itself  mean  "having
disembodied  himself."  Nor  has  the  writer
introduced  any  new  subject  since  ver.  12,
where  "  God  "  appears  as  agent  of  each  of  the
acts  of  salvation  set  forth  in  vers.  12 — 15.
Moreover,  "  the  principalities  and  the
dominions"  of  this  verse  must  surely  be
those  of  ver.  10  and  of  ch.  i  16  (compare  the
"  angels "  of  ver.  18).  We  understand  St.
Paul,  therefore,  to  say  "  that  God  [revealing
himself  in  Christ ;  '  in  him,'  15  6]  put  off
and  put  away  thoae  angelic  powers  through
whom  he  had  previously  shown  himself  to
men."  The  Old  Testament  associates  the
Kugels  with  the  creation  of  the  world  and
the  action  of  the  powers  of  nature  (Job
xxxviii.  7;  Ps.  civ.  4),  and  with  its  great
theophanies  generally  (Ps.  Ixviii.  7 ;  Cent,
xxxiii.  2 ;  2  Kings  vi.  17,  etc.) ;  and  its
hints  in  this  direction  were  emphasized  and
extended  by  the  Greek  translators  of  the
LXX.  Acts  vU.  38,  53  (St.  Stephen) ;  Gal.
iii.  19;  Heb.  ii.  2,  ascribe  to  them  a  special
agency  in  the  giving  of  the  Law.  Heb.  i.  and
ii.  show  how  large  a  place  the  doctrine  of
the  mediation  of  angels  filled  in  Jewish
thought  at  this  time,  and  how  it  tended  to
limit  the  mediatorship  of  Christ.  The
mystic  developments  of  Judaism  among  the
lOssenes  and  the  Ebioiiites  (Christian
Fissenes),  and  in  the  Cabbala,  are  full  of  this
belief.  And  it  is  a  corner-stone  of  the
philosophic  mysticism  of  Alexandria.  In
Fhilo  the  angels  are  the  "  Divine  powers,"
"  words,"  "  images  of  God,"  forming  the  court
and  entourage  of  the  invisible  King,  by
whose  means  he  created  and  maintains  the
material  world,  and  holds  converse  with  the
souls  of  men  (see  quotation,  ver.  10).  This
doctrine,  we  may  suppose,  was  a  chief
article  of  the  Colossian  heie-y.  Theodoret's
note  on  ver.  18  is  apposite  here :  "  They
who  defended  the  Law  taught  men  to
worship  angels,  Baying  that  the  Law  was
given  by  them.  This  mischief  continued
long  in  Fiirygia  and  Fisidia."     The  apostle


returns  to  the  point  from  which  he  started
in  ver.  10.  He  has  just  declared  that  God
has  CHiicelled  and  removed  the  Law  as  an
instrument  of  condemnation ;  and  now  adds
that  he  has  at  the  same  time  thrown  ofl
and  laid  aside  the  veil  of  angi  lie  mediation
under  which,  in  the  administration  of  tliat
Law,  he  had  withdrawn  himself.  Both
these  acts  take  place  "  in  Christ."  Both  are
necessary  to  that  "  access  to  the  Father  "
which,  in  the  apostle's  view,  is  the  special
prerogative  of  Christian  faith  (Eph.  ii.  18 ;
iii.  12  ;  Enm.  v.  2),  and  which  the  Colossian
error  doubly  b.irred,  by  its  ascetic  cere-
monialism and  by  its  angelic  mediation.
(See,  on  this  passage,  Alford ;  also  Peirce's
'  Paraphrase  and  Notes,'  2nd  edit.,  1729 ;
Robertson  Smith,  on  'Christ  and  the
Angels,'  Expositor,  second  series,  vol.  i.  138,
etc.;  A  Sabatier's  'L'Apotre  Paul,'  p.  220,
2nd  edit,  1881.)  We  are  compelled,  with
all  deference  to  its  high  authority,  to  reject
the  view  of  the  Greek  Fathers,  to  which
EUicott,  Lightfoot,  and  Wordsworth  have
returned,  according  to  which  "  Christ  in  his
at'  ming  death  [in  it ;  '  the  cross,'  ver.  15  6]
stripped  off  from  himself  the  Satanic  powers."
For  it  requires  us  to  bring  in,  without
grammatical  warrant,  "  somewhere  "  (Light-
foot),  "  Christ "  as  subject ;  it  puts  upon"  the
principalities  and  the  dominions"  a  sense
foreign  to  the  context,  and  that  cannot  be
justified  by  Eph.  vi.  12,  where  the  con-
nection is  wholly  different  and  the  hostile
sense  of  the  terms  is  most  explicitly  defined;
and  it  presents  an  idea  harsh  and  unfitting  in
itself,  -the  incongruity  of  which  such  illustra-
tions as  those  of  the  Nes%us  robe  and  Joseph's
garment  only  make  more  apparent.  It  is
one  thing  to  say  that  the  powers  of  evil
surrounded  Christ,  and  quite  another  thing
to  say  that  he  wore  them  as  we  have  worn
"  the  body  of  the  flesh  "  (ver.  11 ;  oh.  iii.  9).
He  made  a  show  (of  them)  openly,  having
led  them  in  triumph  in  Mm ;  or,  it  (Eph.
i.  21,  22;  Phil.  ii.  10;  1  Pet.  iii.  22;  Heb.  i:
5,6;  John  1.52;  Matt.  xxv.  31;  xxvi.  53;
Bev.  xix.  10 ;  xxii.  9).  In  this,  as  in  the  last
verse,  we  have  a  finite  verb  between  two  par-
ticiples, one  introductory  ("  having  stripped
off"),  the  other  explanatory.  AeiYjuariXm,  to
make  a  show  or  example,  occtirs  in  the  New
Testament  besides  only  in  Matt.  i.  17,
where  it  is  compounded  with  iropo-  (Ee-
vised  Text),  giving  it  a  sinister  meaning,
not  belonging  to  the  simple  verb.  With
the  angelic  "  principalities,"  etc.,  for  object,
the  verb  denotes,  not  a  shameful  exposure,
but  "  an  exhibition  of  them  in  their  true
character  and  position,"  such  as  forbids
tiiem  to  be  regardi'd  superstitiously  (ver.  18).
God  exhibited  the  uugelsas  the  subordinates
and  servants  of  his  Bon  (ver.  10 :  comp.
Luke  i.  26;    ii  10, 13;    Mark  i.  13;    Loks


ei.n.1-23.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOS8IAK8.


M


xxii.43.  Matt,  xxviii.  2,  etc.).  "Openly"
(eV  TTup^Tjirict :  literally,  in  freedom  of  speech,
a  favourite  word  of  St.  Paul's)  implies  the
absence  of  reserve  or  restraint,  rather  than
mere  publicity  (comp.  Eph.  vi.  19  ;  Phil.  i.
20).  @piaii$eia-a.s  ("having  triumphed;"
2  Cor.  ii.  14  only  other  instance  of  the  verb
in  the  New  Testament;  its  use  in  classical
Greek  confined  to  Latinist  writers,  referring,
historically,  to  the  Boman  triumph)  presents
a  formidable  difficulty  in  the  way  of  the
interpretation  of  the  verse  followed  so  far.
For  the  common  acoeijtation  of  the  word
"  triumph "  compels  us  to  think  of  the
"  principalities,"  etc.,  as  hostile  (Satanic) ;
and  this,  again,  as  Meyer  strongly  contends,
dictates  the  rendering  "  having  spoilid"  for
airfKSvtrd/iems.  So  we  are  brought  into
collision  with  two  fixed  points  of  our  former
exegesis.  If  we  are  bound  lexically  to
abide  by  the  reference  to  the  Roman
military  tiiumph,  then  the  angelic  princi-
palities must  be  supposedto  have  stood  in  a
quasi-hostile  position  to  "  the  kingdom  of
God  and  of  Christ,"  in  so  far  as  men  had
exaggerated  their  powers  and  exalted  them  at
Christ's  expense,  and  to  have  been  now  rob-
bed of  this  false  pre-eminence.  The  writer
however,  ventures  to  qiieBtion  whether,  on
philological  grounds,  a  better,  native  Greek
sense  cannot  be  found  for  this  verb.  The
noun  thriambos  ("  triumph  "),  on  which  it  is
based,  is  used,  indeed,  in  the  Latin  sense
as  early  as  Polybius,  a  writer  on  Roman
history  (160  B.C.).  But  it  is  extant  in  a
much  earlier  classical  fragment  as  synony-
mous with  dithyrambos,  denoting  "  a  festal
song ;  "  and  again  in  Plutarch,  contemporary
with  St.  Paul,  it  is  a  name  of  the  Greek
god  Dionysus,  in  whose  honour  such  songs
were  sung,  and  whose  worship  was  of  a
choral,  processional  character.  This  kind  of
triumph  was,  one  may  imagine,  familiar  to
the  eyes  of  St.  Paul  and  of  liis  readers,  while
the  spectacle  of  the  Roman  triumph  was
distant  and  foreign  (at  least  when  he  wrote
2  Corinthians).  We  suggest  that  the
apostle's  image  is  taken,  both  here  and  in
2  Cor.  ii.  14,  from  the  festal  procession  of  the
Greek  divinity,  who  leads  his  worshippers
along  as  witnesses  of  his  power  and
celebrants  of  his  glory.  Such  a  figure
fittingly  describes  the  relation  and  the
attitude  of  the  angels  to  the  Divine  presence
ia  Christ.  Let  this  suggestion,  however,  be
regarded  as  precarious'  or  fanciful,  the
general  exposition  of  the  verse  is  not  thereby
invalidated.  (For  further  elucidation,  see
the  Expositor,  first  series,  vol.  x.  pp.403— 42] ;
xi.  p.  78.  On  "triumph,"  in  2  Corinthians
see  Mr.  Waite's  Additional  note  in  '  Speaker's
Commentary.')  The  Revisers  omit  the
marginal  "in  himself"  of  the  Authorized
Version,  which  correctly,  a»  we  think,  refers


the  final  iv  abr^  to  Christ  (ver.  10),  though
incorrectly  implying  "Christ"  as  subject
of  the  verse.  It  was  not  only  "  in  the  cross  "
that  God  unveiled  himself,  dispensing  with
angelic  theophauics,  but  in  the  entire
person  and  work  of  his  Son  (ch.  i.  15  ;  2  (3or.
iv.  4;  John  i.  14,  18;  xiv.  9).  "Which
veil "  (for  here  we  may  apply  the  words  of
2  Cor.  iii.  14)  "is  done  away  in  Christ."
So  the  whole  passage  (vers.  10 — 15)  ends,
as  it  begins,  "  in  him  : "  "  We  are  complete
in  him" — in  our  conversion  from  sin  to
holiness  set  forth  in  baptism,  and  our
resurrection  from  death  to  life  experienced
in  forgiveness  (vers.  11 — 13);  and  in  the
removal  at  once  of  the  legal  bar  which
forbade  our  access  to  God  (ver.  14),  and  of
the  veil  of  inferior  and  partial  mediation
which  obscured  his  manifestation  to  us
(ver.  15).

Vers.  16— 23.— Section  VI.  The  Claims
or  THE  False  Teacher.

Ver.  16. — Do  not  let  any  one,  therefore,  be
judging  you  in  eating  or  in  drinking  (vers.
21—23;  1  Tim  iv.  1—5;  Rom.  xiv.  17;
Heb.  ix.  10 ;  xiii.  9 ;  Mark  vii.  14—19).
Tlie  new  teachers  dictated  to  the  Colossians
in  these  matters  from  the  philfisophical,
ascetic  point  of  view  (see  notes  on  "philo-
sophy," "  circumcision,"  vers.  8,  11),  con-
demning their  previous  liberty.  (For  the
adverse  sense  of  "judge,"  comp.  Rom.  xiv.
4,  10,  13.)  The  scruples  of  the  "weak
brethren  "  at  Rome  (Rom.  xiv.)  were  partly  of
an  ascetic  character,  but  are  not  ascribed  to
any  philosophic  views.  In  1  Cor.  viii.  8  and
X.  the  question  stands  on  a  different  footiiig,
beins;  connected  with  that  of  the  recognition
of  idolatry  (comp.  Acts  xv.  29).  In  Heb.  ix.
10  it  is  purely  a  point  of  Jewish  law.  In
one  form  or  other  it  was  sure  to  be  raised
wherever  Jewish  and  Gentile  Christians
were  in  social  intercourse.  Ver.  17  shows
that  such  restrictions  are  "  not  according  to
Christ"  (ver.  8),  belonging  to  the  system
which  he  has  superseded.  "Tbeiefore"
bases  this  warning  upon  the  reasoning  of
the  previous  context.  Tertullian  ('  Against
Marcion,'  v.  19)  supplies  the  link  con-
necting this  verse  with  vers.  10, 15, 18,  when
he  says,  "The  apostle  blames  those  who
alleged  visions  of  angels  as  their  authority
for  saying  that  men  must  abstain  from
meats."  The  abolishing  of  angel  mediation
(ver.  15)  robs  these  restrictions  Of  their
supposed  authority.  The  Essenes  found  in
the  Nazarite  life  and  the  rules  for  the
ministering  Jewish  priest  (Numb.  vi.  3 ;
Lev.  X.  8 — U;  Ezek.  xliv.  21)  their  ideal
of  holiness.  Philo  also  attached  a  high
moral  value  to  abstinence  from  flesh  and
wine,  and  regarded  the  Levitical  distinctions
of  meats  as  profoundly  symbolic.  Or  in
respect  of  feast,  or  new  moon,  or  Bahbatb.


92


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAW9.  [ch.  n.  1— Si


(Kom.  xiv.  5,  C, ;  Gal.  iv.  9,  10).  The  yearly
'east,  the  inonthly  new  moon,  and  the  weekly
sabbath  (1  Chron.  xxili.  31 ;  Jea.  i.  13,  14)
cover  the  whole  round  of  Jewish  sacred
eeasong.  These  the  Colosslan  Gentile
Christians,  disciples  of  St.  Paul  through
Epaphras,  had  not  hitherto  observed  (Gal.
iv.  9,  10).  Philosophic  Judaists  insisted  on
these  institutions,  giving  them  a  symbolical
and  ethical  Interpretation  (see  Philo, '  On
tlie  Number  Seven;'  also, '  On  the  Migration
of  Abraham,'  §  16,  where  he  warns  his
readers  lest,  "  because  the  feast  is  a  symbol
of  the  joy  of  the  soul  and  of  thanksgiving
towards  God,"  they  should  imagine  ttiey
Oduld  di>pense  with  it,  or  "  break  through
liny  establislieO  customs  which  divine  men
have  instituted  ").

Ver.  17. — Which  are  a  shadow  of  the
things  to  come,  but  the  body  is  of  Christ
(Gal.  iii.  23— 28;  iv.  4;  2  Cor.  iii.  11,  13;
Heb.  vii.  18,  19 ;  is.  11—14 ;  x.  1—4).  The
apostle's  opponents,  we  imagine,  taught  in
Platonic  fashion  that  these  things  were
shadows  of  ideal  truth  and  of  the  invisible
world  (comp.  Heb.  viii.  6),  forms  necessary
to  our  appreliension  of  spiritual  things.
With  St.  Paul,  they  shadow  forth  pro-
phetically the  concrete  facts  of  the  Christian
revelation,  and  therefore  are  displaced  by  its
advent.  The  singular  verb  (literally,  is)
quite  grammatically  combines  the  particu-
lars of  ver.  16  under  their  common  idea  of  a
foreshadowing  of  the  things  of  Christ;  and
the  present  tense  affirms  here  a  general  truth,
not  a  miro  historical  fact.  How  this  was
true  of  the  "  sabbath,"  e.g.,  appears  in  Heb.
iv.  1 — 11 ;  comp.  1  Cor.  v.  6 — 8;  John  xiX. 36,
for  the  Christian  import  of  the  Passover-
feast.  The  figurati  ve  antithesis  of  "  shadow  "
and  "  body  "  is  suiHciently  obvious ;  it  occurs
in  Pbilo  and  in  Josephus:  to  refer  to  ver.
19  and  oh.  i.  18  for  the  sense  of  body,  is  mis-
Ifading.  For"thethingstooome"(tliethings
of  Christ  and  of  the  new.  Christian  era,  now
commencing),  comp.  Bom.  iv.  24 ;  v.  14 ;  Gal.
iii.  23 ;  Heb.  ii.  5 ;  x.  1.  This  substance  of
the  new,  abiding  revelation  (2  Cor.  iii.  11)
is  "  Christ's,"  inasmuch  as  it  centres  in  and  is
pervaded  and  governed  by  Christ  (oh.  i.  18 ;
iii.  11 ;  Kom.  x.  4 ;  2  Cor.  iii.  14).  Nothing
is  said  here  to  discounlenance  positive
Christian  institutions,  or  the  observance  of
the  Lord's  day  in  particular,  unless  enforced
in  a  Judaistic  spirit.  The  apostle  is  pro-
tecting Gentile  Christians  from  the  re-
imposition  of  Jewish  institutions  as  such,
as  impatiring  their  faith  in  Christ  (comp.
Gal.  v.  2—9),  and  as,  in  the  case  of  the
Colofsians,  involving  a  deference  to  the
authority  of  angels  which  limited  his
sovereignty  and  sufficiency  (vers.  8 — 10, 18,
19).  This  verse  contains  in  germ  much  of
the  thought  of  the  Kpistle  to  the  Hebrews,


Ver.  18. — let  no  one  defraud  you  of  youl
prire  (ch.  t  5,  23;  iii.  15;  Phil.  iii.  14;
Gal.  V.  7;  1  Cor.  ix.  24—27  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  7,
8  ;  Jas.  i.  12 ;  1  Pet.  v.  4 ;  Rev.  ii.  10 ;  iiL
11).  These  eight  words  represent  but  three  >
in  the  Greek.  (On  KaraffpaBdm,  see  Meyer's
elaborate  note.)  'BpaPdw  is  used  again  in
ch.  iii.  15  (see  note),  meaning  primarily  "  to
act  as  Ppa0svs,"  arbiter  of  the  prize  in  the
public  games ;  &pafie1ov,  the  prize,  is  also
figuratively  used  in  Phil.  iii.  14,  and  liter-
ally in  1  Cor.  ix.  24,  and  is  synonymous
with  the  "  crown  "  of  other  passages.  Kwri,
gives  the  verb  a  hostile  sense ;  and  the
present  tense,  as  in  vers.  4, 8, 16, 20,  implies
a  continued  attempt.  Let  no  one  be  acting
the  umpire  against  you,  is  the  literal  sense.
The  errorist  condemns  tlie  Colossiau  Chris-
tian for  his  neglect  of  Jewish  observances
(ver.  16),  and  warns  him  that  in  his  present
state  he  will  miss  the  heavenly  prize,  "  the
hope  "  he  had  supposed  to  be  "  in  store  for
him  in  heaven  "  (ver.  5 :  comp.  notes  on  oh.
i.  5  and  iii.  15  ;  also  Eph.  i  13, 14).  Delight-
ing in  lowliness  rf  mind  and  worship  of  the
angels  (ver.  23;  Eev.  xix.  10;  xxii.  8,  9;
Judg.  xiii.  17,  18).  By  these  means  the  false
teacher  impressed  liis  disciples.  His  angel-
worship  commended  itself  as  the  mark  of  a
devout  and  humble  mind,  reverent  towards
the  unseen  powers  above  us,  and  made
purely  Christian  worship  seem  insufficient.
"  Delighting  in  "  is  the  rendering  of  e4xav
4v  given  by  Bengel,  Hofmann,  Lightfoot,
Klopper,  and  is  preferable  to  that  of  Meyer
and  EUicott,  who,  with  several  Greek  inter-
preters, supply  the  sense  of  the  previous
verb  "desiring(lodoso)in  lowlines8,"etc ;  and
to  that  followed  intheEeviserB'margin,which
puts  a  sort  of  adverbial  sense  on  $eKav — "  of
his  mere  will  by  humility,"  etc  This  latter
rendering  underlies  the  paraphrastic"  volun-
tary humility  "  of  the  A.V.,  and  agrees  with
the  common  interpretation  of  iBe^oepniTKela
in  ver.  23  (see  note).  &4\aiy  4r  is,  no  doubt,
a  marked  Hebraism,  and  St.  Paul's  language
is  "  singularly  free  from  Hebraisms  "  (com-
pare, however,  the  use  of  eiSfVai,  to  know,  in  1
Thess.  y.  12 ;  the  similar  fiSoKea  4v  is  well
established,  1  Cor.  x.  5 ;  2  Cor.  xii.  10 ;  2
Thess.  ii.  12).  'J'his  very  idiom  is  frequently
used  in  the  LXX,  and  occurs  in  the  '  Tes-
tament of  the  Twelve  Patriarchs,'  a  Chris-
tian writing  of  tlie  second  century.  The
apostle  may  surely  be  allowed  occasionally
to  have  used  a  Hebraistic  phrase,  especially
when  so  convenient  and  expressive  ai  this.
Westcott  and  Hort,  with  scrupulous
purism,  mark  the  reading  on  this  account  as
doubtful,  taireiva^poairti  ("lowliness  of
mind  '),  a  word,  perhaps,  compounded  by
St.  Paul  himself  (see  Trench's '  Synonyms '),
is  almost  confined  to  the  Epistles  of  this
group  (comp.  ver.  23 ;  ch.  iii,  12 ;  Eph.  iy.


CH.n.1— 23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa


2;  Phil.  ii.  3;  also  Acta  xT.  19 ;  1  Pet.  v.
5).  TJiis  quality  is  asciibed  ironically  to  the
false  teacher  (oonipAre  the  "  puffed  up  '  of
the  next  clause,  and  for  similar  irony  see  1
Cor.  viii,  1, 2 ;  Gal.  iv.  17).  eprjirKciais  "  out-
ward wor.-hip  "  or  "  devotion : "  comp.  note  on
ver.  23 ;  elsewhere  in  New  T(^stament  only  in
Acts  xxvi.  5  and  Jas.  i.  26,  27  (see  Tremli's
■'Synonyms')-  "Worship  of  the  angels"
is  that  paid  to  the  angels ;  not  "  oifered  by
them,"  as  Luther  and  Hofmann  interpret,
supposing  that  the  erroiists  pretended  to
imitate  the  worship  of  heaven.  '  Investigat-
ing (or,  dwelling  on)  the  things  which  he
hath  seen ' !  vainly — being  puifed  up  by  '  the
reason '  of  his  flesh  (2  Cor.  xii.  ] ,  7 ;  1  Cor.  viii.
1;  1  Tim.  vi.  3—5;  2  Pet.  ii.  1« ;  Jude  16).
Kor  €ij,^ttTevaiv,  "we  adopt  the  sense  which  it
bears  in  2  M.icc.  ii.  30;  in  I'liilo, 'On  the
Planting  of  Xnah,'  §  19.  and  in  patristic
and  later  Gr^ek  generally,  viz.  "to  search
into,"  "  examine,"  "  discuss  "  (see  Suicer's
'  Thesaurus ').  The  rendering  "  proceeding  "
or  "dwelling  on,"  though  near  the  ladical
sense  of  the  word  ("  to  step  on  "  or  "  in  "),
wants  lexical  support  The  same  may  be
said  of  the  rendering  "  inti  uding  into,"
which  suits  the  Received  reading,  "which
he  hath  not  seen."  Tha  "  not "  of  the  rela-
tive clause  is  wanting  in  nearly  all  our
oldest  and  best  witnesses,  and  is  cancelled
by  the  Eevisers,  with  Tre^ellcs,  Tisohen-
dorf,  Lightfoot,  Westcott  and  Hort,  etc.  Its
appearance  in  two  diff-  rent  forms  (oux  "id
fiij)  in  the  documents  that  present  it,  makes
it  still  more  certain  that  it  is  a  copyist's
insertion.  The  common  reading  gives,  after
all,  an  unsatisfactory  sense ;  it  is  not  likely
the  apostle  would  blame  the  errorist  simply
for  entering  into  things  beyond  his  sight
(comp.  2  Cor.  iv.  18;  v.  7).  Meyer,  after
Steiger  and  Huther,  gives  the  best  explana-
tion of  "  which  he  hath  seen,"  supposing
the  writer  to  allude  ironically  to  pretended
visions  of  angels  or  of  the  spiritual  world,  by
which  the  false  teacher  sought  to  impose  on
the  Colossians.  This  view  is  suggested  by
TertuUian  in  the  passage  cited  under  ver.
16.  Such  visions  would  be  suitable  for  the
purpose  of  the  errorist,  and  congenial  to  the
Phrygian  temperament,  with  its  tendency
to  mysticism  and  ecstasy  (see  Theodoret,
quilted  under  ver.  15,  who  also  says  that
angel-worship  was  specially  forbidden  by
the  Council  of  Laodicea,  a.d.  364).  If  the
false  teacher  were  accustomed  to  say  with
an  imposing  air,  "  I  lave  seen,  ah  t  I  have
leen!"  In  referring  to  his  revelations,  the
apostle's  allusion  would  be  obvious  and
telling.  The  language  of  2  Cor.  zii.  1
(R.V.)  sugL'Csts  a  similar  reliance  on  super-
natural visions  on  the  part  of  the  apostle's
earlier  opponents.  This  pre  teutioua  v  isionary
is,  however,  a  "  philosopher "  and  a  "  rea-


soner"  first  of  all  (vers.  4,  8).  Accordingly
he  investigates  what  he  has  seen;  inquires
into  the  import  of  his  visiims,  rationally
develops  their  principles,  and  deduces  their
consequences.  So  far,  the  apostle  continues
in  tlie  ironical  vein  in  which  the  first  words
of  the  verse  are  written,  setting  forth  the
pretensions  of  his  opponent  in  his  own  terras,
his  irony  "  restraining  itself  till,  after  the
word  in&aTsiiuv,  the  indignation  of  truth
breaks  forth  from  it "  (Steiger)  in  the  caustic
and  decisive  "  vainly."  Ei/c?  qualifies  the
foregoing  participle  (so  Origen,  apparently,
in  Cramei's  '  Catena,'  vol.  iv.  p.  69 ;  Steiger,
De  Wette,  Hoftnann,  Co;iybeare)  more  suit-
ably than  the  following.  Thus  it  signifies
"  idly,'  "  to  no  purpose."  as  everywhere  else
in  Sc.  Paul  (Bom.  xiii.  4 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  2  ;  Gal.
iii.  4 ;  iv.  11) ;  not  "  without  cause,"  as
joined  to  tfivinoiixivos  ("  puffed  up  "),  whose
force  it  could  only  weaken.  "  Vainly "
stigmatizes  the  futility,  "  puffed  up "  the
coneeit,  and  "  by  the  reason  of  his  flesh  "  the
low  and  sensuous  origin  of  these  vaunted
revelations  and  of  the  high-flown  theosophy
wliich  tliey  were  used  to  support.  (For  the
sarcastic  force  of "  puffed  up,"  comp.  1  Cor.
iv.  6, 19  ;  V.  2;  viii.  1 ;  xiii.  4).  The  "reaso  i"
(yovs)  is,  in  Greek  philosophy,  the  philoso-
phical faculty,  the  power  of  supersensible
intuition ;  and  in  Plato  and  Philo,  tlie  organ
of  the  higher,  mystical  knowledge  of  Divine
things  (see  Philo,  '  Who  is  Heir  of  Divine
Things  ? '  §§  13, 20,  and  •passim).  The  Colos-
sian  "  philosopher"  (ver.  8)  would,  we  may
imagine,  speak  of  himself  as  "  borne  aloft "
in  his  visions  "  by  heavenly  reason,"  "lifted,
high  in  angelical  communion,"  or  the  like.
Hence  the  apostle's  sarcasm,  "  Exalted  are
they?  say  ratlier,  inflated:  lifted  high  by
Divine  reason  1  nay,  but  swollen  high  by  the
reason  of  their  flesh."  Some  such  allusion
to  the  language  of  the  errorists  best  accounts
for  the  paradoxical  vovs  ttjs  aapK6s  (see
Lightfoot);  contrast  with  Eom.  vii.  25,  and
compare  the  disparaging  reference  to  Siaroia,
ch.  i.  21  (note).  Difficult  as  this  passage  is,
we  hesitate  to  follow  Lightfoot,  and  Westcott
and  Hort,  who  have  given  their  weighty  sanc-
tion to  the  perilous  remedy  of  conjectural
enumdalion ;  the  latter  editors  for  the  second
time  in  this  verse,  and  again  in  ver.  23.  The
line  of  interpretation  here  adopted  is  advo-
cated in  the  Expositor,  first  series,  vol.  li.  pp.
385—398.

Ver.  19.— And  not  holding  fast  the  Head
(vers.  6,  8;  ch.  i.  15—20;  Eph.  i.  20—23;
Phil.  ii.  9—11 ;  Bom.  ix.  5;  xiv.  9 ;  1  Cor.
viii.  6 ;  Bev.  xix.  16).  In  the  last  verse  the
errorist  was  judged  "  out  of  his  own  mouth,"
and  the  intrinsic  hoUowness  of  his  preten-
sions was  exposed.  Now  "  he  appears  before
the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,"  charged  with
high  treason  against  him,  the  Lord  alike  9t


94


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [ch.  n.  1— 23.


the  kingdoms  of  nature  and  of  grace.  So
the  apostle  falls  back  once  more  (comp.  ver.
10)  on  tlie  foundation  laid  down  in  oh.  i.
15 — 20,  on  which  his  whole  polemic  rests.
Both  in  creation  and  redemption,  the  philo-
sophic Judaists  assigned  to  the  angels  a  rSle
inconsistent  with  the  sovereign  mediatoiship
of  Christ  (see  notes  on  vers.  10  and  15).
Trom  whom  all  the  body,  through  its  joinings
and  bands  being  supplied  and  knit  together,
increaseth  with  the  increase  of  Ood  (ch.  i
18;  Eph.  i.  22,  23;  iv.  15, 16;  John  xv.  1  —
6  ;  1  Cor.  id.  6).  Disloyalty  to  "  the  head  "
works  destruction  to  "  the  body,"  which  in
this  case  "  proceeds  from  "  ("  grows  out  of,"
e'l  .  .  .  aS|€i)  its  Head,  while  it  depends  upon
him.  Gnosticism  from  the  beginn  ing  tended
to  disintegrate  the  Church,  by  the  caste-
feeling  (ch.  i.  28,  note ;  iii.  11)  and  the  sec-
tarian spirit  to  which  it  gave  birth  (ver.  8  ;
Acts  IX.  30).  Its  vague  and  subjective
doctrines  were  ready  to  assume  a  different
form  with  each  new  exponent.  Here  lies
the  connection  between  this  and  the  Ephe-
siau  letter,  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  fol-
lowing upon  and  growing  out  of  tliat  of  the
person  of  Christ,  each  being  threatened — the
latter  immediately,  the  former  more  remotely
— by  the  rise  of  the  new  JudsBO-CJjristiau
mystic  rationalism.  Colossians  asserts  the
"  thou  in  me  "  of  John  xvii.  23 ;  Ephesiang
the  corresponding  "  1  in  tliem ; "  and  both  the
consequent  "  tliey  made  perfect  in  one "
(comp.,  especially,  Eph.  iii.  14 — 21  and  iv.  7
—16  with  ch.  i,  15—20  and  ii.  9—15).  (On
"body,"  see  note, ch.  i.  18.)  'A(()al  signifies,  not
"joints  "  as  parts  of  the  bony  skeleton,but  in-
cludes all  points  of  contact  and  connection  in
the  body;  Latin  nexus,  junctura  (see  Light-
foot).  Bengel  and  Meyer,  following  Clirysos-
tom,  interpret  it  as  "  senses,"  or  "  nerves ;"  but
this  does  not  commend  itself  eitlier  lexically
or  contextually.  The  a-wSea-fiol  (comp.  ch.
iii.  14)  are  the  "ligaments,"  the  stronger
and  more  distinct  connections  that  give  the
bodily  framework  unity  and  solidity.  So,
by  the  organic  co-operation  of  the  whole
structure,  the  body  of  Christ  is  /urnUhed
with  it»  supplies,  enabled  to  receive  and  dis-
pense to  each  member  the  needed  susten-
ance ;  and  "  knit  together "  (ver.  2),  drawn
into  a  close  and  firm  unity.  "Supplied"
(comp.  2  Cor.  ix.  10  ;  Gal.  iii.  5)  indicates  a
sustenance  botli  required  and  due.  In  ch.
i.  6  we  read  of  the  increase  of  the  gospel,  in
ch.  i.  10  01  the  individual  believer,  and  now
of  the  Church  as  a  body  (Eph.  ii.  21 ;  iv.  16).
"  Tlie  increase  of  Goil  '  is  that  which  (iod
bestows  (1  Cor.  iii.  6),  as  it  proceeds  "  from
Christ "  (^f  ol :  ver.  10 ;  ch.  iii.  11 ;  John  i
16),  ra  whom  is  "  tlie  fulness  of  tlie  God-
head "  (ver.  9 :  oomp.  Eph.  i.  VS  and  iii.  17
— 19).  In  Eph.  iv.  16  the  same  idea  is
f  xpressed  in  almost  the  same  term?.   There,


however,  the  growth  appears  as  proper  to  the
body,  resulting  from  its  very  constitution ;
here,  as  a  bestowment  of  God,  dependent,
therefore,  upon  Christ,  and  ceasing  if  tlie
Church  ceases  to  hold  fast  to  him.

Vers.  20— 23.— The  apostle's  fourth  and
last  warning  is  directed  against  ascetic  rules
of  life.

Ver.  20. — If  ye  died  with  Christ  from  the
rudiments  of  the  world  (vers.  8,  10 — 13;
ch.  iii.  3;  Eom.  vi.  1—11 ;  vii.  1—6;  2  Cor.
V.  14 — 17)  "  Therefore"  is  struck  out  by
the  Revisers  on  the  best  autliority.  It
would  imply  a  logical  dependence  of  this
verse  upon  the  last,  which  does  not  exist.
This  warning,  like  those  of  vers.  16,  18,
looks  back  to  the  {arevious  section,  and
especially  to  vers.  8,  10,  12.  It  is  a  new
application  of  St.  Paul's  fundamental  prin-
ciple of  the  union  of  the  Chiistian  with
Christ  in  his  death  and  resurrection  (see
notes,  vers.  11,  12).  Accepting  the  death
of  Christ  as  supplying  the  means  of  his
redemption  (ch.  i.  14,  22),  and  the  law  of
his  future  life  (Phil.  iii.  10 ;  2  Cor.  v.  14,  15 ;
Gal.  ii.  20),  the  Cliristian  breaks  with  and
becomes  dead  (to  and)  from,  all  other,
former  religious  principles;  which  appear
to  him  now  but  childish,  tentative  gropings
after  and  preparations  for  what  is  given
him  in  Clirist  (oomp.  Gal.  ii.  19;  iii.  24;
iv.  2,  3;  Bom.  vii.  6).  On  "rudiments,"
see  note,  ver.  8.  There  these  "  rudiments
of  the  world  "  appear  as  general  ("philoso-
phical") principles  of  relijiion,  intrinsi-
cally false  and  empty ;  here  they  are  moral
rules  of  life,  mean  and  worthless  substitutes
for  "  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ
Jesus."  (For  the  Pauline  idiom, "  died  from
(so  as  to  be  separate,  or  free  from),"  comp.
Bom.  vii.  2, 6 ;  Acts  xiii.  39.)  Why,  as  (men)
living  in  (the)  world,  are  you  made  subject
to  decrees  (Gal.  iv.  9 ;  T.  1 ;  vi.  14 ;  2  Cur.
V.  17).  To  adopt  the  rules  of  the  new
teachers  ia  to  return  to  the  worldly,  pre-
Christian  type  of  religion  which  the  Christian
had  once  for  all  abandoned  (Gal.  iv.  9).
"  World  "  bears  the  emphasis  rather  than
"  living  "  ("  having  one's  principle  of  life  : "
comp.  1  Tim.  v,  6;  Luke  xii.  15).  Stand-
ing without  the  article,  it  signifies  "the
world  as  such,"  in  its  patural  character  and
attainments,  without  Christ  (ver.  8;  Eph.
ii.  12  ;  1  Cor.  i.  21).  AoyiiuTLCeaee  (the  verb
only  here  in  the  New  Testament)  is  passive
r.ither  tlian  middle  in  voice  (Winer,  p.  826 ;
see  Meyer  in  loe.);  literally,  why  are  you
being  dogmatized,  overridden  with  decrees  1
Compare "  spoil "  (ver.  8),  "judge "  (ver.  16),
for  the  domineering  spirit  of  the  false
teacher.  The  "dogmas"  or  "decrees"  of
ver.  1 4  (see  note)  are  those  of  the  Divine
Law  ;  these  are  of  human  imposition  (yers.
8,  22),  whio))  their  ^uthoifi,  howerct,  «^u>


cB.n.  1— 23.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa.


to  put  vipon  a  level  with  the  former.  In
each  case  the  decree  is  an  exteinal  enforce-
ment, not  au  inner  principle  of  life.

Yer.  21  gives  examples  nf  tlie  diecree*
which  the  Colossiaiis  are  blamed  for  regard-
ing -  and  in  this  respect  more  than  in  any
other  they  seem  to  have  yielded  to  the
demands  of  the  false  teacher.  'Do  not
handle,  nor  taste,  nor  touch '  (vers.  16,  23 ;
1  Cor.  vi.  12,  13;  viii.  8;  i.  25—27,  30;
Eom.  xiv.  14—17 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  3—5 ;  Titus
i.  15).  These  rules  form  part  of  a  pro-
hibitory regimen  by  which  sinful  tendencies
to  bodily  pleasure  were  to  be  repress^^d
(vcr.  23),  and  spiritual  truths  symbolically
enforced  (ver.  17 ;  see  note  on  "  circum-
cision," ver.  11):  comp.  Pliilo,  'On  Con-
cupiscence ; '  also  '  On  Victims,'  §  3.  ©175  s
the  last  of  the  three  verbs,  api^ears  to  be
the  strongest,  forbidding  the  slightest  con-
tact. °Ai|/))  is  better  rendered  "  handle "
(comp.  John  xx.  17) ;  by  itself  it  will
scarcely  bear  the  meaning  it  has  in  1  Cor.
vii.  1.  The  next  verse  seems  to  imply  that
•11  three  verbs  relate  to  matters  of  diet.
Ambrose  and  other  Latin  Fathers  of  ascetic
tendencies  put  these  prohibitions  into  the
mouth  of  St.  Paul  himself,  leversing  his
meaning.

Yer.  22  a  ii  the  apostle's  comment  on
these  rules,  in  the  firm  of  a  continuation  of
their  terms.  Do  not  touch — things  which  are
all  intended  to  perish  (literally, /or  corrup-
tion) in  theii  consumption  (Matt.  xv.  17;
Mark  vii.  19 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  13 ;  vui.  8 ;  1  Tim.
iv.  3 — 5),  which,  being  destroyed  as  they
are  used,  therefore  do  not  enter  into  the
soul's  life,  and  are  of  themselves  morally
indifferent ;  so  the  Greek  Fathers,  and  most
modem  interpreters.  This  is  the  position
which  Christ  himself  takes  in  regard  to
Jewish  distinctions  of  meats  (Mark  vii.
14—23,  R.V.).  We  note  the  same  style
ef  sarcastic  comment  on  the  language  of
the  falte  teachers  as  that  exhibited  in  ver.
18.  Augustine,  Calvin,  and  some  others
render,  "  which  (decrees)  tend  to  (spiritual)
destruction  in  their  use;"  but  diroxp^<r«
never  means  simply  "use,"  and  the  ante-
cedent "  decrees  "  is  awkwardly  supplied.
More  plausibly,  De  Wette  and  some  moderns
interpret,  "  things  which  tend  to  (spiritual)
destruction  in  their  abuse,"  putting  the
words  in  the  mouth,  of  the  false  teacher,
as  though  he  said,  "Abstain  frum  every-
thing the  use  of  which  may  be  fatal  to  the
sonl."  But  this  ascribes  to  the  errorist  an
argument  which  falls  short  of  his  principles
(see  note  on  "  hard  treatment  of  the  body,"
ver.  23) ;  and  to  whicli,  specious  as  it  is,  and
m  harmony  with  the  apostle's  own  teaching
(1  Cor.  vi.  12 ;  ix.  2t),  27),  he  makes  no
reply.  According  to  the  commandments  and
0aohin^3    of  men  (Xsa.  txix.  13,  L^X;  |


Matt.  XV.  9;  Mark  vii.  7;  ver.  8;  1  Cor.
i.  20;  ii.  5,  13);  the  only  passage  in  this
Epibtle  which  distinctly  alludes  to  the
language  of  the  Old  Testament.  But  the
words  are,  we  may  suppose,  primarily  a
reminiscence  of  the  language  of  Christ,
whO'  uses  them  in  connection  with  his
announcement  of  the  abolition  of  the  sacred
distinctions  of  meats  (comp.  Mark  vii.  1 — 23).
This  clause  points  out  the  method  after
which,  and  direction  in  which,  the  new
teachers  were  leading  their  disciples,  on  the
line  of  a  man-made  instead  of  a  God-given
jeligion.  "Commandments"  (or,  "injunc-
tions") include  the  prescriptions  of  ver.  21
and  all  others  like  them;  "teachings"
embrace  the  general  principles  and  doctrines
on  which  these  rules  were  based.  So  this
expression,  following  "rudiments  of  the
world  "  (ver.  20),  leads  us  back  by  a  rapid
generalization  fr(im  the  particulars  specifii  d
in  ver.  21  to  the  general  starting  point
given  in  ver.  8  (see  note),  and  prepares  us
for  the  brief  and  energetic  summary  of  the
whole  Oolossian  error  which  we  find  in —

Yer.  23. — Such  as  have  (literally,  are
(things)  having)  word  indeed  of  wisdom  (vers.
4,  8;  1  Cor.  ii.  1,  4,  13;  xii.  8).  The
antecedent  of  "such  as"  Is  "command-
ments and  teachings"  (Meyer,  Alfurd,
EUiontt),  not  "decrees"  (ver.  21).  For
ver.  22  supplies  the  immediate  antecedent,
and  the  wider  sense  thus  given  is  necessary
to  support  the  comprehensive  and  summary
import  of  ver.  23.  The  Greek  "are
having"  brings  into  view  the  nature  and
qualities  of  the  subject,  in  accordance  with
ariva,  such  as,  the  qualitative  relative  (comp,
fJTis,  ch.  iii.  5;  see  Moulton's  Winer,  pp.
209,  210 ;  also  Meyer  and  Ellioott,  on  the
grammaticsd  point).  A  certain  "word  of
wisdom "  was  ascribed  to  the  false  teachers
in  ver.  4  (note  the  play  upon  \6yos  in  St.
Paul's  Greek).  They  were  plausible  dealers
in  words,  and  had  the  jargon  of  philosophy
at  their  tongue's  end  (ver.  8 :  compare
note  on  ii/L^anvaiv,  ver.  18).  On  this  the
apostle  had  first  remarked  in  his  criticism
of  their  teaching,  and  to  this  he  first  adverts
in  his  final  resume.  "  Word  of  wisdom "
is  one  of  the  "  gifts  of  the  Spirit "  in  1  Cor.
xii.  8;  but  the  disparaging  niv,  indeed,
with  the  emphatic  position  of  Kiyov  throwing
aoipias  into  the  shade,  in  view  also  of  the
censures  already  passed  in  vers.  4,  8,  puts
a  condemnatory  sense  upon  the  phrase:
"  having  word  indeed  of  wisdom  " — "  that
and  nothing  more,  no  inner  truth,  no  pith
and  substanceof  wisdom'' (so  Chrysostomand
Qicumenius).  "Word  and  deed,"  "word
and  truth,"  form  a  standing  antithesis  (ch.
iii.  17;  Eom.  xv.  18;  1  Cor.  iv.  19,  20;
1  John  iii.  18,  etc.),  the  second  member
of  whivh  supplies  itself  if)  th^  wind;  aQ<|


96


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COT.OSSIANS.


[oh.  n.  1—23


the  military  ftiv  in  inch  a  connection  is  a
well-established  classical  idiom  (sec  Winer's
or  A.  Buttniiinn's  'Grammar;'  aUo  Meyer).
It  is  superfluous,  therefore,  as  well  as  con-
fusing to  the  order  of  thought,  to  seek  in
the  Biquel  for    the  missing    half   of   the
•ntithosis.      Other  renderings    of  \6yov —
"  show"  (English  A.V-  Bensel,  Ue  Wette),
"  ground  "  or  "  reason  "  (Vulgate,  Klopper),
"  reputation "     (Meyer,    Alford,     Ellicott,
Lightfoot) — are  partly  doubtful  or  excep-
tional in  point  of  usage,  and  paitly  over-
look the  pointed  reference  of  vers.  22,  23
to  the  language  of  vers.  4  and  8.    And  the
combination  of  kiyov  ^x""''''^  ^^^°  *  single
phrase   is  scarcely  justified   here  in   face
of  the   established   Pauline  association  of
"  word "    and    "  wisdom "   (cqmp.    1    Cor.
i.  17— ii.  16,  as  well  as  xii.  8).    Both  in  this
Epistle  and  in   1   Corinthians  the    writer
is  contending  against  forms  of  error  which
found  their  account  in  the  Greek  love  of
eloquence     and    of    dexterous    word-play.
While  the  first  part  of  the  predicate,  theie-
fore,  explains  the  intellectual  attractivenest  ol
the  OoloBsian  error,  the  clause  next  follow-
ing accounts  for  its  religious  fascination;
and  the  third  part  of  the  verse  strikes  at
the  root  of  its  ethical  and  practical  appli-
cations.     (Shown)  in   (or,  with)   devotion
to  (or,  delight  in)  worship  (or,  voluntary
worship)  and  lowliness  of  mind  (ver.   18).
The  preposition  "in"  brings  us  into  the
moral  and  religious  sphere  of  life  in  which
this  would-be  wisdom  of  doctrine  had  its
range    and    found    its    application.       The
prefix     fBeKo-  of    t'eeXoSpTjjKeia    ordinarily
connotes  "willingness"   rather  than  "wil-
fulness ;  '■  and  the  "  deligliting  in  worship  "
of  ver.  18  (see  note)  points  strongly  in  this
direction.    As  against  Ellicott  and  Light-
foot  on  the  etymological  point,  see  Hofmann,
pp.  102,  103.'   Only  so  far  as  the  worship  in
question  (see  note,  ver.  18,  on  "  worship  ")  is
evil,  can  the  having  a  will  to  worship  be
evil.    The  other  characteristics  of  the  error
marked  in  this  verie  seem  to  be  recf>mmen-
datioiiB,  and  "devotion  to  worship"  is  in
keeping    with    them.      This    disposition,
moreover,  has  an  air  of  "humility,"  which
iocs  not  belong  to  a  self-imposed,  arbitrary
varship.    There  is  a  love  of  worship  for
mere  worship's  sake  which  is  a  perversion
of  the  religious  instinct,  and  tends  to  multi-

51y  both  the  forms  and  objects  of  devotion,
'his  ipuriouB  religiousness  took  the  form,
in  the  Colossian  errorists,  of  worship  paid  to
the  angels.  On  this  particular  worship  tlie
a])ostle  passed  his  judgment  in  ver.  18,  and
now  point*  out  the  tendency  from  which
it  springs.  In  ver.  18  "  humility  "  precedes  j
here  it  follows  "  worship,"  by  way  of  tran-
■ition  from  the  religious  to  the  moral  aspect
of  tlie  new  teaching.    And  (or,  with)  ua-


sparing  treatment  of  (the)  body — not  in  any
honour  (as)  against  surfeiting  of  the  flesh
(vers.  16,  21,  22 ;  Phil.  iii.  19—21 ;  1  Tim.
iv.  3;  1  Cor.  vi.  13—20;  xii.  23—25;
1  Thess.  iv.  4).  The  "and"  linking  this
clause  to  the  last  under  the  goverument  of
"in,"  is  textually  doubtful;  Lightfoot
cancels  it;  'Westcott  and  Hort  give  the
omission  as  a  secondary  reading.  Mr.  Hort
regards  the  passage,  like  ver.  18,  as  hope-
lessly corrupt — a  verdict  which  we  would
fain  believe  is  too  despairing.  If  koI  be
struck  out,  then  a^EiScfa  must  be  attached,
somewhat  loosely,  to  the  principal  predicate
("  are  having  ")  as  an  instrumental  dative.
On  either  construction,  the  sense  appears
to  be  that  it  w:is  its  combination  of  ascetic
rigour  with  religious  devotion  that  g.ive  to
the  system  in  question  its  undoubted  charm,
and  furnished  an  adequate  field  for  the
eloquence  and  philosophical  skill  of  its
advocate.  'A(fiji5e/o,  unsparingness,  and
TtK-nafiovii,  surfeiting — both  found  only  here
in  the  New  Testament — and  along  with  them
"  body "  and  "  flesh,"  stand  opposed  to
each  other.  This  clause,  therefore,  contains
a  complete  sense,  and  we  must  not  look
outside  it  for  an  explanation  of  the  included
words,  "  not  in  any  honour."  As  we  have
seen,  the  first  clause  of  the  predicate
("having  word  indeed,"  etc.)  needs  no  suuh
complement.  The  clau.^e  "not ....  flesh"  is
a  comment  on  the  words,  "  unsparing  treat-
ment of  the  body."  On  this  topic  the
apostle  had  not  yet  expressed  his  mind
sufiiciently.  He  has  in  vers.  16,  20 — 22
denounced  certain  ascetic  rules  as  obsolete,
or  as  trifling  and  needleos ;  but  he  has  yet
to  expose  the  principle  and  tendency  from
whicli  they  sprang.  He  is  the  more  bound  to
be  explicit  on  this  subject  inasmuch  as  there
were  ascetic  leanings  in  his  own  teaching,
and  passages  in  his  earlier  Epistles  such  as
Eom.  viii.  13;  xiii.  14;  1  Cor.  vii.  1;  ix.  27,
which  the  "  philosophical "  party  might
mjt  uunaturully  wrest  to  their  own  pur-
poses. He  could  not  condemn  severity  to
the  body  absolutely,  and  in  every  sense.
The  Colossian  rigorism  he  does  condemn —
(1)  as  not  in  heaping  with  bodily  self-respect,
which  is  the  safeguard  of  Cliristian  purity  ;
and  (2)  as  not  in  reality  directed  against
sensual  indulgence,  the  prevention  of  which
is  the  proper  end  of  rules  of  abstinence.
These  two  objections  are  thrown  into  a
single  terse,  energetic  negative  claute,
obscure,  like  so  much  in  this  chapter,  from
its  brevity  and  want  of  connecting  particles.
In  1  Thess.  iv.  4  the  phrase,  "  iu  honour,"
occurs  in  a  similar  connection  :  "  That  each
one  of  you  know  how  to  gain  possession  of
his  own  vessel"  (i.e.  "to  become  master
of  his  body : "  see  Wordsworth  and  Alford
on  the  passage;  also  Meyer'*  reference  on


♦-H.  n.  1— 23.]         THE  EPTRTLTl!  TO  THE  OOLOSSTANS.


Bom.  l  24)  "In  Balictification  Rnd  hnnnnr"
(comp.  1  Cor.  vi.  13—20  for  the  i.postle's
teaching  respecting  the  dignity  of  the
human  body;  also  Phil.  iii.  19 — 21).  Tlie
contempt  of  Alexandrine  theosophists  for
physical  nature  was  fatal  to  morality,  under-
mining the  basis  on  which  rests  the  govern-
ment of  the  body  ns  the  "  vessel "  and
vesture  of  the  spiritual  life.  Their  principles
took  effect,  first,  in  a  morbid  and  unnatural
asceticism ;  then,  by  a  sure  reaction,  and
with  equal  consistency,  in  unrestrained
and  shocking  licence.  See,  for  the  latter
result,  the  Epistles  to  the  seven  Churches
of  Asia  (fiev.  ii.  and  iii.) ;  in  the  Pastoral
Epistles,  the  two  opposite  effects  are  both
Signalized.  The  rendering  "value"  given
by  LightfoOt  and  the  Revisers  seems  to  us
misleading ;  rtfiii  means  "  value  "  only  in
the  sense  of  "price,"  as  in  1  Cor.  vi.  20,
and  this  surely  is  not  their  meaning.
tlKTiiTfiavi)  has  been  taken  in  a  milder  sense
by  the  Greek  commentators,  Lutlier,  and
others:  "satisfaction"  " (legitimate)  grati-
fication." So  the  apostle  is  made  to  charge
the  false  teachers  with  "  not  honouring  the
body,  so  as  to  grant  the  flesh  its  due  gratifi-
cation." But  tills  rendeiing  confounds  the
"body"  and  the  "flesh,"  here  contrasted,
and  gives  vATitr/iOvii  a  meaning  without
lexical  warrant  (see  Meyer  and  Lightfoot).
And  the  sentiment  it  expresses  errs  on
the  anti-ascetic  side,  and  comes  into  collision
with  Bom.  xiii.  14  and  Gal.  v.  16.  n\riiriiovli,
in  the  LXX  and  in  Phllo,  as  in  earlier
Greek,  denotes  "physical  repletion,"  and
is  associated  with  drunkenness  and  sensual
excess  gener.illy.  Hence  we  cannot  admit
the  interpretation  of  Meyer,  Alford,  BUicott,
who  make  the  "flesh"  here  the  sinful
principle  generally,  and  understand  "sur-
feiting" figuratively,  supposing  the  apostle
to  mean  that  the  ascetic  rules  in  question,
"while  they  dishonour  the  body,  tend  to
gratify  the  carnal  mind."  Tliis  gives  an
idea  true  in  itselif,  and  agreeing  with  the
sense  of  "flesh"  in  vers.  11,  18,  but  out
of  place  here,  while  it  strains  the  meaning
of  irXtiffiiovl)  (see  Liglitfoot's  exhaustive
argument).  The  preposition  irpbs  does  not
help  Us,  meaning  "  lor"  or  "against,"  accord-
ing to  its  connection.  We  combine  Light-
foot's  interpretation  of  *pbs  irMi&iiov^v  rris
cafieis  with  Wordsworth's  and  Alford's  of
eiit  4¥  TiMV  Ti"'-    The  saying  of  Phil.  iii.  19


("whose  god  is  thoir  'iHly,  and  their  glory
iu  their  shame")  contains  the  same  oppo-
sition of  "  honour  "  to  "  fleshly  indulgence  "
as  that  supposed  here,  possibly  suggested
by  the  phrase,  "  surfeiting  of  dishonour  "
^wKniTiioy^  arifittts),  of  the  LXX  in  Hab.
ii.  16.  Here,  then,  the  apostle  lays  hold
of  the  root-principle  of  the  false  teachers'
whole  scheme  of  morality,  its  hostility  to  the
body  as  a  material  orrjnmsm.  Such  a  treat-
ment, he  declares,  dishonours  the  body,
while  it  fails,  and  lor  this  very  reason,  to
prevent  that /eedt'nf;  of  ihejlesh,  the  foster-
ing of  sensual  appetency  and  habit,  in
which  lies  our  real  peril  and  dishonour  in
regard  to  this  vessel  of  our  earthly  life.

Here  we  have  a  suitable  starting-point  for
the  exhortations  of  the  next  chapter,  where
the  apostle,  in  vers.  1 — 4,  shows  the  true
path  of  deliverance  from  sensual  sin,  and
in  vera.  5 — 7  sets  forth  the  Christian
asceticism — "unsparing  treatment"  of  fh»
flesh  indeed  1  The  line  of  teaching  adopted
by  the  errorists  may  be  illustrated  by
Philo's  doctrine  in  his  third  book  of  the
•Allegories  of  the  Sacred  Law,'  §  22:
" '  God  saw  that  Er  was  wicked ; '  for  he
knows  that  this  leathern  burden  of  ours,  the
body — for  Er,  being  interpreted,  is  leathern
— is  evil  and  ahvays  plutting  against  the
soul;  and  it  is  ever  Under  the  power  of
death,  indeed  actually  dead  [comp.  Rom.
viii.  10].  Yet  this  all  do  not  see,  but  only
God,  and  those  he  loves.  For  when  the
mind  [yoCs:  comp.  note,  ver.  18]  becomes
engaged  in  sublime  contemplations  and  is
initiiited  into  the  mysteries  of  the  Lord
[note,  ch.  i.  26],  it  judges  the  body  to  be  evil
and  hostile;"  ag.iin  ('On  the  Chan^je  of
Names,'  §  4) :  "  Pale  and  wasted,  and  reduced
to  skeletons  as  it  were,  are  the  men  devoted
to  instruction,  having  transferred  to  the
powers  of  the  soul  their  bodily  vigour  also,
BO  that  they  have  become,  as  we  might  say,
dissolved  into  a  single  form  of  being,  that
of  pure  soul  made  bodiless  by  force  of
thought  [Stavoia;  see  ch.  i.  21,  note].  In
them  the  earthly  is  destroyed  and  over-
whelmed, when  reason  [vuiJt :  ver.  18],
pervading  them  wholly,  has  set  its  choice
on  being  well-pleasing  to  God."  The  writer
has  attempted  an  elucidation  of  tl.'s  verse
in  the  Expositor,  first  series,  voL  xii.  pp.
289—303.


H0M1LETIC3.

Vers.  1 — 7. — Sect.  4.  The  apostle's  concern  for  the  Cohnsian  Church,  Already  the
apostle  has  breathed  out  his  "  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  Gud  "  lor  these  Colossians
(oh.  i.  9 — 12),  "  uTiknown  by  face  "  to  him  (vers.  1,  5),  and  yet  so  dear  bt cause  of  their
faith  and  love  (ch.  i.  4,  8 ;  ii.  6, 11—13 ;  ill.  1—3,  9,  10,  15),  and  the  loyalty  they
have  hitherto  maintained  (ver.  6),  and  the  objects  of  so  much  anxiety  on  account  of

COLOSSIANS.  H


•e  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa  [ch.  n.  1— 2&

the  insidious  and  deadly  nature  of  the  assault  hems;  made  upon  their  faith,  of  whose  real
character  they  seem  to  have  heen  little  aware.  We  expect,  therefore,  in  this  passage
a  recurrence  of  the  strain  of  thought  pursued  in  the  prayer  of  the  first  chapter.  We
find  a  like  prominence  given  to  knowledge,  the  chief  desideratum  of  this  Church,  and  to
the  need  of  a  Cliristianly  instructed  understanding  as  a  safeguard  against  the  suhtleties
and  plausibilities  of  error.  At  the  same  time,  the  view  now  presented  of  this  object  has
gained  gnatly  in  fulness  and  depth  by  the  development  of  the  apostle's  argument  in  the
intervening  paragraphs  of  his  letter.  The  teaching  of  this  section  we  may  summarize
in  the  words  of  'A  Pet.  iii.  18,  as  setting  forth  the  nature  and  the  elements  of —

I.  Growth  in  'ihe  gkacb  and  knowledge  of  oue  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.
(Vers.  2,  3,  6,  7.)  1.  St.  Paul  has  spoken  of  the  Church  as  "  the  body  of  Christ"  (ch.  i.
18,  24),  and  so  he  must  needs  desire  that  its  members  may  be  knit  together  in  love
(ver.  19 ;  Eph.  iv.  16 ;  1  Cor.  i.  10).  Without  such  union  the  Church  is  no  longer
a  hody,  and  its  members,  broken  and  scattered,  become  an  easy  prey  to  error.  The
salvaticn  of  individual  souls  is  but  half  the  work  of  Christ.  "He  loved  the  Church,
and  gave  himself  for  her  "  (Eph.  v.  25 ;  Acts  xx.  28).  He  seeks  to  build  the  redeemed,
regenerated  units  of  mankind  as  "  living  stones  "  into  "  a  holy  temple  "  (Eph.  ii.  20 — 22;
1  Cor.  iii.  16, 17) ;  to  integrate  them  into  the  "  one  body  "  of  which  he  is  the  Head  and
his  Spirit  is  the  Soul  (Eph.  iv.  3 — 6) :  comp.  sect.  2,  II.  4  (homiletics).  Of  this  union,
love  is  the  bond  (ch.  iii.  14 ;  Eph.  iv.  2 ;  .John  xiii.  34,  35).  In  all  true  and  lasting
union  amongst  men  some  sympathetic  affection  must  exist,  either  as  a  basis  for  the
fellowship  or  as  generated  by  it.  Mere  identity  of  beliefs  or  of  interests  will  never  hold
men  for  long  together.  The  heart  must  Jove  or  hate,  must  be  attracted  or  repelled,  in
some  degree,  by  every  personality  around  it.  And  the  union  of  souls  in  Christ,  being
the  most  deep  and  spiritual  of  any,  must  be  thoroughly  peiTaded  and  determined  by
love.  Moreover,  the  growth  of  Christian  knowledge  and  the  perfecting  of  personal
character  depend  mnch  more  largely  than  we  are  apt  to  suppose,  in  this  age  of
exaggerated  individualism  and  selfish  culture-seeking,  on  the  soundness  and  complete-
ness of  our  Church  life,  of  our  Christian  social  life.  To  St.  Paul's  mind  the  "  perfect
man"  and  the  perfect  Church — the  perfection  of  the  part  and  of  the  whole— are
leciprocally  dependent,  and  all  but  identical  (Eph.  iv.  11 — 16).  2.  But  love  without
knowledge,  heat  without  light,  will  not  suffice.  As  "faith,  being  alone,  is  dead  "  (Jas.
ii.  17),  so  love  in  like  com.ition  is  blind  and  easily  falls  into  error.  "  I  pray  that  your
liive  may  abound  yet  more  and  more  in  knowledge  and  all  discernment "  (Phil.  1.  9).
The  apostle  declared  that  "God  willed  to  make  known  to  his  saints  the  riches  of  the
glory  of  his  mystery  "  (cb.  1.  27) ;  accordingly  he  desires  for  thum  "  all  riches  of  the
full  assurance  of  the  understanding,"  "unto  the  knowledge  of  the'  mystery  "  (ver.  2).
(1)  The  former  is  the  subjective  counterpart  of  the  latter.  The  understanding  that  is
enlightened  and  informed  in  the  truth  belonging  to  the  revelation  of  God  in  Christ,  that
ranges  freely,  yet  reverently,  through  "  the  breadth,  and  length,  and  height,  and  depth  "
of  this  mystery,  and  learns  to  comprehend  it  (Eph.  iii.  18),  is  itself  enriched,  assured,  and
satisfied  thereby.  (2)  The  object  which  the  mind  contemplates,  into  which  it  seeks  to
penetrate  ever  more  deeply,  is  Christ,  the  mystery  of  Ood.  "  To  know  him  "  is  its
supreme  asijiration  (Phil.  iii.  10),  in  which  intellectual  inquiry  is  guided  by  spiritual
sympathy  and  inspired  by  love  (Pfiil.  iii.  7 ;  John  xiv.  21).  To  know  him  as  an  historical
Person  is  something;  this  knowledge  supplies  the  material  and  the  basis  for  all  other
knowledge  of  Christ  (Acts  x.  36 — 43).  To  know  him  as  a  living,  present  Saviour  is
the  essential  knowledge,  the  one  thing  needful  (Phil.  iii.  8 — 11) ;  it  is  to  "  gain  Christ,
and  be  found  in  him."  But  it  is  yet  moie  tJ'^sa  this  to  know  him  as  the  mystery  of  Ood
— to  discover  his  secret  indwelling  In  nature  and  in  history;  to  understand  how  "to
him  give  all  the  propliets  witness ; "  to  hear  the  footfall  of "  the  coming  One"  echoing
along  the  silent  chambers  and  winding  corridors  of  the  ages  past  (oh.  i.  21)  ;  to  find  in
him  the  centre  of  all  life  and  law,  uniting  God  and  the  world,  eternity  and  time  (ch.  i.
15 — 17);  to  behold  in  "  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world,"  at  the
same  time  "  the  outbeaming  of  the  Father's  glory,  the  very  Image  of  his  sulDstance,
through  whom  also  he  made  the  worlds,  and  who  upholds  all  things  by  the  word  of  his
power"  (Heb.  i.  2,  3),  the  "  Pirbtborn  of  all  creation,"  the  "  Heir  of  all  things."  Here
is  knowledge  indeed,  and  for  him  who  is  grounded  in  it,  speculative  theories  of  nature
and  of  God  and  the  mystic  dreams  of  theosophy  will  have  hut  little  charm.     Thii


cH.  iLl— 23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  »9

mystery  of  Ood  surpasses  and  includes  all  others ;  for  Christ,  in  nature  and  in  grace,
iu  history  and  personal  experience,  "is  all  and  in  all."  In  view  of  this  Mystery,  no
wonder  that  the  apostle  says  that  we  are  "  heing  renewed  unto  knowledge  "  (ch.  iii.  10).
We  can  conceive  no  object  worthier  of  the  pursuit  of  the  loftiest  and  greatest  minds
than  "  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  "  (Phil.  iii.  8 ;  Eph.  iii,
9—11;  1  Pet.  i.  12).  By  it  "the  heart,"  the  whole  "inward  man"  (Eph.  iii.  16),  is
"  stablished  "  (ver.  7)  and  "  encouraged  "  (ver.  2)  by  the  "  comfort  of  love  "  (Phil.  ii.
1)  and  "the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge"  (ver.  3)  that  are  "in  Christ."  3.
Love  and  knowledge  must  bear  fruit  in  practical  obedience.  Christ  Jesus  was  received
by  the  Colossians  as  "  the  Lord  "  (ver.  6 ;  ch.  iii.  24 ;  i v.  1).  He  is  a  Master  to  be  obeyed
(Bom.  xiv.  9 ;  John  xiii.  13 ;  xiv.  15),  as  well  as  a  Mystery  to  be  known  and  a  Saviour
to  be  loved.  In  him  we  must  walk.  The  whole  conduct  of  life  must  be  governed  by
his  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  14 ;  Gal.  v.  25)  and  directed  toward  his  ends  (Phil.  i.  20,  21 ;
2  Cor.  V.  15).  He  "in  all  things"  claims  to  be  " pre-emineut " ^ch.  i.  18;  1  Cor.  xv.
25  ;  2  Cor.  x.  5).  Every  desire,  affection,  pursuit,  of  the  Christian  must  "  acknowledge
him  to  be  the  Lord."  Py  such  true  obedience  the  soul  grows  in  sti'ength  and  security,
and  is  ever  being  muio  completely  "builded  up  in  him"  (ver.  7:  comp.  ch.  i.  10).  4.
And  the  root  of  this  life  of  advancing  knowledge  and  obedient  love  is  faith.  By  this
the  soul  is  first  "rooted  in  him"  (vers.  5, 12;  ch.  i.  3,  23;  Phil.  iii.  9;  Eph.  ii.  8;
Bom.  v.  1,  2,  etc.).  Prom  this  root  springs  love  (Gral.  v.  6),  obediunce  (Kom.  vi. ;  viii.
3,  4),  satisfying  knowledge  (Eph.  iii.  17 — 19),  every  good  woid  and  work  (1  Thess.  i.  3 ;
2  Thess.  i.  11 ;  ii.  16,  17).  If  this  fails,  everything  fails  (Gal.  iii.  1 — 5).  Whatever
strengthens,  comforts,  and  upbuilds  the  Christian,  does  so  by  ministering  to  his  faith.  A
growing  knowledge,  a  quickened  love,  a  more  steadfast  obedience,  enable  his  faith  to
strike  deeper  root — stdblish  him  in  his  faith  (ver.  7).  In  this  world  he  never  ceases  to
"  walk  by  faith  "  (2  Cor.  iv.  18;  v.  7);  and  his  abounding  in  it  is  the  greatest  gain
which  the  furthest  advancement  in  the  life  of  God  can  bring  him.  Yet  faith,  again,
has  its  outward  instrument  and  condition.  It  "comes  by  he'aring,  and  hearing  by  the
word  of  God"  (Bom.  x.  17).  The  Colossians  are  to  be  "stablislied  in  their  faith,"
"  even  as  they  were  taiight "  (ver.  7 :  comp.  ch.  i.  5,  7).  To  that  instruction  they  owe
all  they  possess  in  Christ,  even  their  own  selves  (Philem.  19).  5.  And  he  who  abounds
in  faith  will  abound  in  thanksgiving  also.  The  more  strongly  the  Christiau  believes  in
the  Son  of  God  and  enters  into  the  mysteries  of  his  kingdom,  the  more  joyfully  and
constantly  will  he  offer  his  tribute  of  praise.  This,  too,  is  a  fruit  of  laith — "  the  fruit
of  the  lips "  (Heb.  xiii.  15 ;  Hos.  xiv.  2),  the  only  fruit  of  all  his  mercies  which  we
can  directly  render  to  the  great  Giver.  Of  such  thanksgiving,  called  forth  by  the
contemplation  of  the  "  mystery  of  God "  in  Christ,  St.  Paul's  own  act  of  praise  in
Eph.  i.  .3 — 14  is  a  noble  example  (comp.  Bom.  xi.  3d — 36 ;  xvi.  25 — 27 ;  1  Tim.  i.
12—17 ;  1  Pet.  i.  3—5 ;  Bev.  i.  5—7 ;  Matt.  xi.  2.i— 28.  See  sect.  1,  IIL  2,  homiletics).
II.  A  DANGBB  AND  A  SAFEOUARD.  (Vcrs.  4,  5.)  1.  There  was  one  thing  that
specially  endangered  Christian  life  and  the  well-being  of  the  Church  at  Colossge.  It  was
the  charm  of  perverted  eloquence  (ver.  4).  A  clever  tongue  and  a  popular  style  are  gifts
by  no  means  incompatible  with  the  faithful  and  spiritual  preaching  of  Christ;  but  they
have  their  peculiar  dangers  for  their  possessor,  and  for  the  Church  in  which  they  are
exercised.  St.  Paul  appears  to  have  admired  gifts  of  this  kind  in  Apollos,  but  he  felt
that  a  plainer  and  severer  method  became  himself,  in  which  the  sheer  might  and
majesty  of  the  truth  should  stand  forth  without  adornment  of  rhetoric  or  drapery  of
graceful  diction  that  might  distract  attention  from  the  all-important  theme  of  his
address  (1  Cor.  ii.  1 — 5).  The  possession  of  such  powers  made  the  men  whom  he  is
denouncing  at  Colossje  so  formidable.  Perhaps  their  very  gifts  had  proved  a  snare  to
them ;  and  there  are  indications  in  St.  Paul's  description  of  them  (vers.  8,  16,  18,  23 :
cump.  Acts  XX.  29,  30)  of  the  arrogance  and  self-seeking  spirit,  and  the  intellectual  dis-
honesty, into  which  men  of  popular  powers  are  liable  to  fall.  2.  On  the  other  hand,
tiiere  was  one  specially  hopeful  feature  in  the  state  of  this  Church — the  good  order  which
it  had  mainfaiued  (ver.  5);  contrast  with  1  Cor.  i.  11,  12;  xi.  2 — 18;  xiv.  40.  So
far,  these  "deceitful  workers"  had  not  succeeded  in  disturbing  the  Church's  nnitv  or
stirring  up  insubordination  against  its  officers.  In  every  organized  body  it  is  a  first
condition  of  strength  and  safety  that  its  members  should  "  obey  them  that  have  the
rule "  (Hcb,  xi>i.  17)^  should  "  all  of  them  be  subject  one  to  another "  (Eph.  v.  21 ;


100  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  00L0SSIAN3.  [CB.  n.  1— 23,

1  Vet,  v.  6),  each  la  hU  place  and  rank  keeping  step  and  time  with  the  movement  of
the  whole.

Vers.  8'^15.->-Seot.  6.  T!ie  Ohrittlan's  completeneit  in  Christ.  I.  A  false  philo-
sophy OP  BBLiGioN.  (Vers.  4, 8, 11, 16—23.)  "  Not  according  to  Christ "  (ver.  8)  is  the
fiital  Beutence  Which  the  apostle  pronounces  upon  the  system  of  doctrine  that  was  finding
entrance  at  Oolossae.  However  plausible  in  argument  (ver.  4)  or  lofty  in  its  intellectual
pretensions  (vers.  8,  23),  however  skilfully  it  may  avail  itself  of  the  venerable  rites  of
ancient  faith  or  of  the  popular  predilections  and  tendencies  of  the  day  (vers.  11, 16, 18),
and  whatever  the  appartnt  sanctity  and  austerity  of  its  professors  (vers.  18,  20-— >23),
the  religious  system  which  sets  him  aside  and  professes  to  lead  men  into  cummunloti
with  God  and  to  the  moral  perfection  of  their  nature  otherwise  than  "  in  him,"  must
after  all  be,  at  th»  heart  of  It,  "  a  vain  deceit."  For  he  is  "  tlie  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the
Life,"  the  Lord  and  Life  of  nature  and  the  Light  of  men  (ch.  i.  15 — 17 ;  John  i.  3,  4),
the  "Beginning"  of  the  "new  heavens  and  the  new  earth  wherein  drtelleth  righteous-
ness ; "  he  is  simply  "  all  things  and  in  all "  to  the  Church  of  God.  All  true  philosophy,
though  standing  on  natural  grounds  and  drawing  its  premisses  from  natural  experience
and  intuition,  yet,  rightly  understood,  must  needs  harmonize  with  the  Christian  faith,
and  will  be  "  according  to  Christ."  For  no  two  truths,  however  differently  grounded
or  expressed,  can  really  be  contradictory.  And  the  facts  on  which  philosophy  rest*,
ihe  mental  and  material  constitution  of  things  concerning  which  it  theorizes,  "  were
created"  and  "consist  in  liim"  (ch.  i.  16,  17).  "In  Christ"  must  lie,  therefore,  the
ultimate  rationale  of  the  finite  universe.  The  Colossiau  error  presented  itself  as
philoi-ophy,  advanced  on  rational  grounds,  and  claiming  the  attention  of  men  of  thought
and  culture  within  the  Church.  It  inculcated  the  religious  traditions  of  the  Jew  under
the  forms  and  methods  of  the  Greek  intellect,  seeking  to  reanimate  both  by  the  aid  of
the  new  spiritual  fervour  and  lofty  moral  aspirations  of  the  (Jhristian  faith.  There
was  nothing  in  itself  blameworthy  in  such  an  attempt.  Endeavours  must  be  con-
tinually made,  though  they  can  never  be  final,  to  harmonize  the  current  philo.sophy  of
the  age  with  the  Divine  revelation  as  received  in  the  Church.  St.  Paul  birasolf  makes
large  contributions  in  this  direction.  But  those  who  take  this  work  in  hand  should
understand  both  sidus  of  the  question.  This  the  Colossian  errorists  failed  to  do.  They
tried  to  fit  Christ  into  some  place  in  their  preconceived  philosophy,  instead  of  allowing
themselves  to  be  led,  as  St.  Paul  would  have  taught  them  (ch.  i.  15^20),  through
Chri.st  to  a  deeper  and  more  sound  philosophy.  Hence  their  teachina;,  put  forward  as
Christian  truth  and  claiming  to  be  the  Christian  theory  of  life,  is  condemned  as
"  philosophy  and  empty  deceit."  1.  It  was  according  to  the  tradition  of  men.  It  could
claim  only  human  authority  for  its  principles.  They  were  not  found  in  Christ's  doc-
trine, and  had  received  no  authentication  from  his  lips  (Gal.  i.  11,  12),  no  Di\lhe
attestation  or  proof  of  their  being  "  from  heaven  "  (Matt.  xxi.  25,  26  ;  Heb.  i.  4).  And
any  scheme  of  religion,  whether  calling  itself  "  pliilosophy "  or  not,  that  is  in  this
position,  stands  self-condemned.  "  The  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God  "  (1  Cor. !.  21).
What  he  is,  how  he  is  disposed  towards  the  children  of  men,  it  is  for  him  to  say.
They  know  full  well  that  they  have  lost  his  favour  and  defaced  his  image  in  their
souls ;  but  how  their  recovery  is  possible  is  to  them  "  past  finding  out."  And  therefore,
to  fix  and  measure  the  nature  of  God  and  the  relations  lie  may  assume  to  us,  "  accord-
ing to  the  tradition  of  men,"  istlie  height  of  ignorance  and  presumption.  But  Christ
Is "  the  laithful  Witness,"  "  the  Word  who  was  in  the  beginning  with  God  "  (ReT.  1,  5 ;
John  i.  2) ;  and  an  authentic  voice  from  heaven  declares,  "  This  is  my  Son,  my  chosen  :
hear  ye  him"  (Luke  ix.  35;  John  i.  18)  2.  And  such  systems,  leaving  the  clear  and
firm  ground  of  obedience  to  the  aiipremacy  of  Curist,  are  compelled  to  fall  back,  in
some  form  or  other,  on  the  rudiments  of  the  world.  Their  advocates  discover  that  the
influence  of  human  names  and  the  force  of  general  reasoning  do  not  command  the
deference  of  the  conscience  or  stir  the  spiritual  emotions,  are  indeed  without  that
"power  of  God"  (1  Cor.  i.  24,  26;  1  Thesa.  i.  5)  which  attends  the  word  of  Christ.
They  return,  thereloie,  to  the  dead  forms  of  old  religions,  putting,  as  they  supi  ose,  a  new
mcauing  into  them.  They  are  at  once  "advanced,"  and  reaetionaiy.  They  dress  up
the  newest  rationalism  in  the  cast-off  garments  of  faith's  childhood.  They  comUne
H  puerile  ritualism,  borrowing  its  forms  and  practices  from  the  mere  rudiments  of  en


(M.n.1— 23.J         THE  EPISTLt!  TO  TaE  COLOSRlANS.  101

age  of  sensuous  "  feeling  after  God,"  with  the  most  bare  and  abstract,  the  most  arid  and
joyless,  oonce|)Uons  of  his  nature,  or  of  a  nature  that  is  their  substitute  lor  liiiii.  TIjb
combination  of "  philosophy"  and  "circumcision"  (vers.  8, 11),  of  eloquent  and  subtle
reasonings  with  minute  and  arbitrary  rules  as  to  "eating  and  drmkin;;,"  and  the
physical  culture  of  the  soul  (vers.  4,  16,  20—23),  is  after  all  not  unnatural ;  and  is  apt
to  repeat  itself,  to  a  ^renter  or  less  extent,  in  every  attempt  at  religion  that  is  not
essentially  spiiitual,  and  that  departs  from  the  "one  foundation,  which  is  Jesus  Christ"
(1  Cor.  iii.  11).  3.  We  must  also  mark  the  arrogant  and  overhearing  temper  of  the  new
teachers  at  Colossse,  their  exclusiveness  and  their  endeavour  to  form  a  [lersonal  pai  ty
within  the  Church.  They  are  "  men  speaking  perverse  things,  to  draw  away  the  dis-
ciples after  them"  (Acts  xx.  30).  They  would  make  simple  Christians  their  booty
(ver.  8).  They  set  up  to  judge  their  brethren  in  matters  of  diet  and  outward  observance
(ver.  16).  Tliey  assume,  in  this  character  of  judges  in  the  Church,  to  deny  to  Christian
men,  walking  in  faith  and  love  (ch.  i.  4)  and  having  Christ's  peace  within  their  hearts
(ch.  iii.  15),  "  the  prize  of  their  calling  "  (ver.  18),  because  they  will  not  accept  their
notions  and  practices.  They  issue  their  dterees,  "  Touch  not,  tuste  not,"  etc.,  as  if  they
were  the  very  law  of  God  (vers.  22,  14).  They  are  "  humble  "  before  the  powers  of  the
invisible  world,  and  zealous  to  offer  them  a  worship  which  they  repudiate  and  abhor
(ver.  15  ;  Rev.  xix.  10 ;  xxii.  9) ;  but  rob  Christ  of  his  honour  (vers.  18, 19,  28),  and  are
proud  and  self-willed  towards  their  brethren  "  whom  they  have  seen."  They  heap  upon
the  body  invented  and  misdirected  severities  (ver.  23),  while  they  are  governed  by  "  the
mind  of  the  flesh  "  (ver.  18).  They  aggrandize  themselves,  while  they  destroy  the  Chui  ch
of  God  (ver.  19).

11.  The  complete  Chkist  oue  completeness.  (Vers.  9 — 13.)  For  the  ChrUHan
everything  depends  on  what  he  thinks  of  Christ  and  makes  him  to  he.  Christ's  glory
is  his  security.  His  greatness  and  the  greatness  of  our  interest  in  him  are  commen-
suriite.  For  "  he  gave  himself  iox  us  "  (Gal.  ii.  20).  Our  salvation  is  not  merely  a  work  vf
Christ,  a  something  wrought  out  for  us,  and  (exteinally)  conferred  upon  us;  it  is  "  Christ
in  us"  (ch.  i.  2;  Eph.  iii.  17;  Gal.  i.  16;  John  xiv.  20;  xvii.  26j.  Aiid  St.  Paul
virtually  says,  "  In  robbing  Christ  of  his  glory,  your  new  teachers  are  robbing  you  of
your  saltation.  By  so  much  as  his  position  is  lowered,  his  fulness  diminished,  by  so
much  is  your  spiritual  life  imperilled  and  impaired.  Whatever  is  taken  away  from
the  completeness  of  his  Person  and  the  sufficiency  of  his  mediation,  is  taken  away  at
the  same  time  from  your  assurance  of  pardon  (ver.  13 ;  ch.  i.  14)  and  your  moiivea  lor
holiness  (ch.  iii.  1,  2),  from  the  ground  of  your  faith  (vers.  6,  7),  and  the  certainty  of
your  heavenly  prize  (ver.  18 ;  ch.  i.  23 ;  iii.  15).  Whatever  touches  his  person  touches
the  centre  and  vital  spring  of  your  life  in  God,  the  anchor  of  your  immortal  hopes,  and
the  foundation  on  which  rests  the  whole  fabric  of  the  Church  "  (ver.  19 ;  Eph.  ii.
20 — 22 ;  Matt.  xvi.  15 — 18).  1.  (1)  In  him  dwells  all  the  fulness  qf  the  Godhead.  Then
he  is  not  a  partial,  or  an  approximate,  or  temporary  manifestation  of  God — like  previous
theophanies — a  mere  phase  of  the  Infinite.  He  does  not  rank  and  share  with  angels
and  the  various  orders  of  created  being  in  mirroring  by  scattered,  broken  rays  the  glory
of  God.  As  the  Son,  he  stands  at  an  infinite  distance  from,  and  holds  an  absolute  supre-
macy over,  all  creation  (ch.  i.  15 ;  Heb.  i.  2 — 4 ;  iii.  6).  God  is  what  he  shows  him-
self to  be  in  Christ,  and  no  other.  There,  if  we  could  but  behold  and  receive  it,  is  "  all
tne  fulness  of  the  Divine  nature."  In  him  we  know  the  only  true,  the  real,  veritable
Ood  (John  xvii.  3).  At  last  we  grasp  the  substance  of  truth  and  no  longer  chase  its
shadows  (ver.  17).  Here  is  nothing  transient,  to  be  displaced  by  further  evolution :  this
fulness  dwells  in  him;  we  reach  finality,  truth  absolute,  determinate;  and  he  who
knows  and  has  Christ  may  say,  "  This  is  the  true  God  and  eternal  life  "  (1  John  v.  20).
(2)  And  this  fulness  duiellt  in  !iim  bodily.  For  the  Divine  Word  "  became  flesh,"  and
in  a  human  body  "  made  his  tabiTuacle  amongst  us  "  (John  i.  14).  He  was  "  born  of  a
woman,  born  under  the  law"  (Gal.  iv.  4),  suffered  our  bodily  ills  and  temptations,
wrought  with  human  hands,  looked  through  human  eyes,  and  spoke  in  the  language
of  men ;  sat  as  a  friendly  gueat  at  our  tables,  and  stood  as  a  mourner  by  our  gravesides ;
died  a  human  death,  "  in  the  body  of  his  flesh  "  (ch.  i.  22),  by  the  hands  of  men,  and
was  laid  in  an  earthly  grave;  he  rose,  "the  same  Jesus,"  in  that  same  body,  and
ascended  into  heaven  (ch.  i.  18, 19 ;  iii.  1—4),  "  far  above  all  principality  and  power  "
(v«.  10 ;  Eph  i,  20 — 23),  where  he  sits  a  radiant  body,  "  appearing  in  the  presenc*  of


102  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANS.  [cfi.  ii.  1— 23

God  tor  us  "  (Heb.  ix.  24),  and  whom  one  day  we  shall  see  (oh.  iii.  1 — 4 ;  Phil.  iii.  90,
21;  1  Pet.  i.  8,  9;  1  John  iii.  2;  Acts  i.  11) — "the  Man  Christ  Ji-sns,"  "  who  is  ove'
all,  God  blessed  for  ever"  (Rom.  ix.  5).  This  was  the  vision  that  dying  Stephen  beheld
in  the  presence  of  Saul  of  Tarsus  (Acts  vii.  55 — 60),  which  ere  long  appean  d  to  himself
(Acts  ix.  3 — H)  and  was  henceforth  evermore  before  his  eyes.  A  nd  since  he  has  assume'!  it,
Christ's  humanity  is  also  peimanent.  The  fulnessof  the  Godhead  still  dwells  in  him  hodily.
He  will  not  cease  to  be  man  any  more  than  he  can  cease  to  be  God.  His  relationship  to
his  human  brethren,  and  the  nmembrance  of  his  earthly  sorrows,  of  "the  wounds  that
he  received  in  the  house  of  his  friends,"  are  too  precious  to  him  for  that.  He  is  stili
"  the  Lamb,  in  the  midst  of  the  throne,"  who  is  "  the  Shepherd  "  of  his  heavenly  flock
(Rev.  vii.  17),  the  "Firstborn  out  of  the  dead"  among  the  "many  brethren"  that  have
eternal  life  in  him  (ch.  i.  18;  Bom.  viii.  29).  And  heaven  for  us  is  "to  be  where  he
is,"  "  to  see  him  as  he  is"  (ch.  iii.  4;  Phil.  i.  23 ;  2  Cor.  v.  8 ;  John  xii.  26 ;  xvii.  24 ;
1  J  ohn  iii.  2) — "  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,"  "  the  Lord  of  glory  " !  "All  the  fulness  of  the
Godhead,  in  bodily  form!" — a  mystery  compared  with  which  the  roniradictions  that
so  often  baffle  and  vex  us  are  trifles  indeed;  and  yet  an  indubitable  fact,  that  astonishes
heaven  (Epli.  iii.  10;  1  Pet.  i.  12)  and  glorifies  the  earth,  and  that  fills  struggling,
sinful  mortals  with  a  sense  of  Divine  sympathy,  an  assurance  of  forgiveness  and  help
that  make  all  things  possible.  2.  But  Christ's  fulness  does  not  simjily  "  dwell  in  him,"
terminating  in  himself;  it  is  an  active,  outflowinff  fulness,  that  seeks  to  maize  us  in
turn  complete  in  him,  (ver.  10;  Eph.  i.  23;  iii.  19;  iv.  8 — 13;  John  i.  14,  16;  xvii.
22,  23,  26).  The  Judaizers  of  Colossae,  as  we  understand  their  position,  were  urc;ing
on  their  Gentile  disciples  that  they  should  complete  their  imperfect  Christian  state  by
circumcision  and  the  adoption  of  various  ritual  observances  (including  worsliip  of  the
angels  along  with  Christ)  and  bodily  austerities  (vers.  16 — 23).  These  requirements
they  enforced  by  philosophical  reasoning,  under  considerations  of  the  symbolic  meaning
of  ancient  rites  and  the  beneficial  effect  upon  the  soul  of  the  regimen  prescribed  as
cleansing  and  elevating  to  its  proper  level  man's  spiritual  nature.  St.  Paul  acknow-
ledges by  implication  that,  to  a  certain  extent  (but  see  ver.  23  6),  the  aim  of  this  teach-
ing is  right ;  but  the  means  it  inculcates  he  utterly  disallows,  being  "  not  according
to  Christ."  The  whole  tendeiioy  of  the  system  was  to  draw  away  attention  and  trust
from  Christ.  Other  objections,  such  as  misjht  easily  present  themselves,  he  does  not  care
to  argue.  (1)  In  him  ye  were  circumcised.  "  The  inward  reality  of  which  this  rite
was  the  imperfect  and  prophetic  symbol,  the  consecration  of  the  present  life  to  God,
the  put'ing  off  of  the  old  sinful  nature,  the  body  of  the  flesh,  has  already  taken  place  in
you.  This  is  the  circumcision  of  Christ,  the  change  from  sin  to  holiness,  from  mora;
filthiness  to  purity ;  and  you  know  that  you  have  passed  through  it,  if  you  are  in  him
(1  Cor.  vi.  11 ;  Gal.  iii.  27 ;  v.  24 ;  Bom.  xiii.  14).  Do  not  grasp  at  the  shadow  when
you  have  the  substance.  Be  content  to  believe  that  in  this,  the  '  one  thing  needful,'
you  are  complete  in  him."  (2)  Prom  this  point  the  apostle  goes  a  step  further  bad?,
exactly  on  the  line  of  his  previous  teaching  in  Rom.  vi.,  respecting  the  connection  of
sanctificatiori  with  justification,  when  he  adds,  " having  betn  buried  with  him  in  your
baptism,  wherein  also  ye  were  raised  with  him."  For  a  state  of  sinfulness  is  a  state  ot
death.  The  sitmer  lies  immediately  under  the  wrath  of  God  (ch.  1.  21;  iii.  6;  Eph.  ii.
3;  Bom.  v.  10);  and  that  anger,  with  the  sense  of  alienation  it  brings  and  the  shadow
of  condemnation  it  casts  upon  the  conscience,  is  virtually  death,  is  the  death  of  death
(comp.  Rom.  vii.  24,  25  and  viii.  1,  2).  Tliere  is  no  cleansing  of  the  soul  of  a  dead
sinner  till  this  sentence  is  repealed,  and  "  the  love  of  God'"  is  again  "  shed  abroad  in  his
heart"  (Rom.  v.  5).  Christ  gives  life  that  he  may  give  purity  (ch.  i.  21,  22 ;  Bom.  vi.
13 ;  Titus  ii.  14 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  24:)— purity  with  life.  And  life  comes  through  his  resur-
rection ;  by  the  same  law,  the  same  power,  which  "  raised  Jesus  our  Lord  from  the
dead,"  are  our  souls  also  raised  from  their  death  of  sin.  The  operation  in  both  cases  is
equally  supernatural  and  Divine.  The  first  event  is  the  warrant  and  the  pledge  of  the
second.  The  return  of  our  Surety  and  Champion  from  the  grave  assures  us  that  his
sacrifice  is  accepted  and  his  victory  complete  (ch.  i.  18 ;  Bom.  iv.  25 ;  Acts  ii.  32 — 36 ;
xiii.  34 — 39 ;  John  xx.  19,  20).  On  this  fact  our  faith  in  him  as  Lord  and  Saviour  rests
(Bom.  iv.  24;  vi.  7 — 11;  x.  9;  2  Cor.  iv.  14);  it  is  a  "faith  in  the  working  of  God
who  raised  him  from  the  dead."  Through  this  faith  we  are  justified— /t/r^'mreess  becomes
ours  (ver.  13 ;  ch.  L  14 ;  Bom.  t.  1) ;  and  in  this  consciousness  of  pardon  sinful  man  first


OH.  n.  1—23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN3.  lOJ

comes  to  know  the  life  of  God  (Eph.  ii.  1 — 5 ;  Rom.  vi.  7 — 11) ;  ho  :k  re'-nnriltii,  and  a
new  existence  of  peace  and  purity  is  born  within  him  (2  Cor.  v.  17 — 21),  to  culminate  in
his  fin.il  presentation  perfect  in  Christ  (ch.  i.  21, 22,  28).  (3)  Of  this  pass!  ng  from  death
to  life,  not  circumcision,  but  baptism,  is  the  appointed  and  proper  Christian  symbol.
Theiein  the  believer  is  " buried  with  Christ "  in  his  grave  (ver.  12 ;  Rom.  vi.  3,  5) ;  Ids
old  self,  his  former  condemned  existence,  is  put  off  and  washed  away  for  ever.  He
emerges  from  the  cleansing  stream,  "  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus."  All  this  baptism
sets  forth  and  sets  forward,  so  far  as  the  picturing  and  outward  acting  of  the  matter
may.  And  being  the  authoritative  public  sign  of  the  grace  of  a  new  life,  it  seals  that
life  on  the  con.sciousness  and  memory  of  the  believing  and  understanding  recipient,  and
binds  its  obligations  upon  him  before  God  and  man;  so  that  henceforth  he  can  only
"  reckon  himself  to  be  dead  unto  sin,  but  living  unto  God  in  Chri.st  Jesus  "  (l^om.  vi.  11).
III.  The  BAB  REMOVED :  THE  VEIL  LIFTED.  (Vcrs.  14, 15.)  What  the  individual
Christian  now  realizes  for  himself  in  Christ — his  new  life  in  God  and  the  cleansing  and
sanctifying  of  his  nature — is  but  the  personal  appropiiation  of  that  which  was  revealed
to  the  whole  world  and  addresses  itself  to  the  wants  of  human  nature  everywhere.  It
meets  the  conditions  brought  about  by  God's  previous  dealings  with  mankind  (ch.  i.  23,
26—28;  Eom.  i.  2—5;  xvi.  25—27;  Acts  xiv.  15—17;  xvii.  26—31;  Heb.  i.  1,  2).
In  two  respects  the  apostle  signalizes  the  earlier  relations  of  men  to  God  as  imperfect :
two  hindrances  there  were  to  that  "access  to  the  Father"  now  secured  (Eph.  ii.  18;
Eom.  T.  2;  Heb.  vii.  19;  x.  19 — 22) — ^hindrances  congruoas  in  nature  and  effect,  felt  in  the
quick  and  instructed  religious  consciousness  of  Judaism  more  keenly  than  elsewhere—
that  are  "  taken  out  of  the  way  "  in  Christ.  There  was  the  law  with  its  condemning
voice  for  the  conscience,  and  the  angelic  mediation  with  its  terrors  and  its  mysteries  for
the  heart  and  understanding.  The  first  guilty  pair  "  hid  themselves  from  the  presence
of  the  Lord  among  the  trees  of  the  garden"  (Gen.  iii.  8);  and  a  sinful,  weak-hearted
people,  chosen  to  be  brought  near  unto  him,  said,  "  Let  not  God  speak  with  us  lest  we
die"  (Exod.  xx.  19).  And  God  in  mercy  and  in  justice  heard  their  prayer.  He  veiled
himself  behind  his  laws  and  his  providence,  behind  the  forms  of  nature,  and  the  oracles
of  prophecy,  and  the  progress  of  history,  and  the  flashing  forth  of  his  glory  in  the
angels  of  his  presence,  until  Law,  the  TraiSayayos, "  ordained  through  angels,"  should  have
done  its  work,  "and  the  fulness  of  the  times  should  be  come"  (Gal.  iii.  19 — 24;  Bora.
V.  20).  1.  Till  then  it  was  increasingly  felt  that  the  law.with  its  decrees  was  against
us.  It  "  wrought  wrath"  (Rom.  iv.  15).  It  brought  us  "  under  a  curse"  (Gal.  iii.  10).
It  stirred  up  and  brought  to  its  crisis  in  an  agony  of  self-despair  the  conflict  between
the  better  nature  and  the  worse  in  man  (Rum.  vii.  7 — 25).  It  invoked  death  with  its
anticipatory  terrors  as  the  seal  to  its  authority  and  the  witness  to  our  guilt  (Rom.  v.
12 — 14,  21 ;  vii.  24 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  56).  The  list  of  its  commandments  is  but  a  catalogue
of  our  offences,  a  tale  of  debts,  not  one  of  which  we  are  prepared  to  meet,  and  yet
which  must  be  discharged  "  to  the  uttermost  farthing."  In  Christ's  cross,  God  has,  at
a  stroke,  wiped  out  the  whole  bill  of  our  offences.  He  has  removed  it  from  between  us
and  himself,  and  nailed  it,  with  Christ's  body,  to  the  crofs,  where  he  bids  us  read,
"  There  is  now  no  condemnation  to  them  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Eom.  viii.  1 ;  iii.
26).  This  the  apostle  had  taught  already,  and  it  is  the  glory  of  his  earlier  Epistles,
addressed  to  Churches  infested  with  Pharisaic  Judaism  and  its  teaching  of  salvation
by  works  of  law,  to  have  established  this  truth  in  the  understanding  and  the  faith  of
the  Church  for  all  time.  2.  But  the  philosophic  Judaism  with  which  he  has  now  to
deal  requires  him  to  insist  more  strongly  on  the  immediate  revelation  of  Ood  himself  to
the  world  that  is  made  in  Christ.  Now  that  One  has  been  "  manifested  at  the  end
of  the  ages  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself"  (Heb.  ix.  26 ;  Isa.  lix.  2),  it  is
possible  to  behold  God  by  a  nearer  vision.  With  the  revelation  of  his  pardoning
meicy  and  sin-avenging  justice  in  Christ,  "  the  Son  of  his  love  "  (Eph.  ii.  4 ;  Rom.  iii.
26),  he  makes  known  his  inmost  name  and  nature.  To  Israel,  in  comparison  with  other
nations,  "  God  was  nigh  "  (Deut.  iv.  7 ;  Lev.  xx.  26) ;  and  yet  even  Israel  complains,
"  Verily  thou  art  a  Gud  that  hidest  thyself"  (Isa.  xlv.  15).  He  "came  with  ten  thou-
sand of  his  holy  ones,  and  from  his  right  hand  went  a  fiery  law  for  them  "  (Deut.  xxxiii.
2);  and  "the  earth  shook,  the  heavens  also  dropped  at  the  presence  of  God"  (Ps.
Ixviii.  8),  "  He  made  the  clouds  his  chariot ; "  his  "  way  was  in  the  sea,  and  his  path  in
the  great  waters,  and  his  footsteps  were  not  known"  (Ps.  Ixxvii.  19,  20).    The  mystia


104  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  lou.n.l~i&

veil  that  screened  his  presence  was  as  splendid  as  the  law  hy  which  he  ruled  the  con-
sciences of  men  was  sleru  and  terrible.  But  in  Christ,  lie  "  laid  his  glory  by."  God
appiared  in  the  Babe  of  Bethlehem,  in  the  Man  of  soirows,  in  Christ  crucified,  as  (he
Father  of  the  children  of  men.  He  bids  all  his  angels  worship  and  wait  upon  the
lowly  form  of  the  Son  of  man,  and  the  elements  of  nature  (more  closely  linked  with
the  angelic  powers,  peihaps,  than  we  can  imagine)  are  made  to  do  his  bidding,  "that
all  may  honour  the  Son,  even  as  they  honour  the  Father  "  (John  v.  23).  "  They  shall
call  his  name  Immanuel,  Ood  with  us"  (Matt.  i.  23).  None  had  "seen  God  at  any
time;"  the  angels  that  had  been  his  ministers,  the  glories  of  the  created  world  in
which  he  robed  himself  (Ps.  cii.  26 ;  civ.  2),  these  could  not  utter  his  Name :  "  the  only-
begotten  Son  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,  the  Word  made  flesh,  he  declared
him  "  (John  i.  14, 18).  "  The  veil  is  done  away  in  Chi  ist."  But "  the  same  veil,"  which*
in  St.  Paul's  day  hung  between  the  Jewish  mind  and  the  true  knowledge  of  God,
"remaineth  unlifted"  for  those  who  will  not  behold  "the  glory  of  God  in  the  face  of
Jesus  Christ "  (2  Uor.  iii.  14 ;  iv.  3 — 6).  God  at  once  "  reconciled  the  world  unto  him-
6i.lf "  and  unveiled  himself  to  the  world  in  him.    This  is  the  sum  of  these  two  verses,

Vir.".  16 — 23. — Sect.  6.  The  claims  of  the  false  teacher.  The  Colossian  error  is  the
earliest  Christian  heresy,  undcrsianding  the  word  in  its  stricter  sense  as  denoting  a  move-
ment in  the  direction  ot  error,  originating  within  the  Church  itself.  It  first  answers  to  the
terms  of  St.  Pj,u1's  prediction  in  Ads  xx.  29 — 31.  The  powerful  Judaizing  reaction  with
which  St.  Paul  and  the  Gentile  Church  had  previously  to  struggle,  and  which  drew
from  him  the  Galatian  and  Homan  Epistles,  was  negative  and  retrograde  in  its  character,
originating  from  without  rather  than  from  within  the  Church,  and  stimulated  by  the
increasing  violence  and  desperation  of  Jewish  national  feeling.  But  here  we  discern  the
rise  of  a  heterodox  school  of  thought  within  Christianity  itself.  At  this  point,  first  of  all,
were  those  elements  of  error  introduced,  those  seeds  of  division  sown,  which  ripened
into  the  wild  and  disastrous  Gnostic  apostasy  of  the  second  century ;  and  that  may  be
said  to  have  persisted  to  the  present  day.  For  our  inveterate  and  multiplied  ecclesi-
astical divisions  and  our  deeply  rooted  doctrinal  differences,  with  the  animosities  and
prejudices  that  attend  them,  show  too  plainly  that  the  rents  which  then  began  to  open
in  the  Church's  unity  are  far  from  being  closed.  Accordingly,  the  Colossian  error
presents  heresy  in  its  germinal  form.  It  cout.iins  and  combines  in  itself  the  root-
principles  and  incipient  forms  of  those  errors  which  have  most  widely  prevailed  in  after
ages.  It  unites  evil  tendencies  wliich  afterwards  parted  asunder  and  became  opposed
to  each  other,  which  seem  indeed  to  be  radically  inconsistent.  But  this  was  an  age  of
eclecticism  and  amalgamation.  Moreover,  there  is  a  latent  contradiction  inherent  in
falsehood  and  error.  It  must  needs  be  inconsistent  and  witnesses  against  itself.  Its
principles,  when  carried  forward  and  pushed  to  their  issues  in  logic  and  practice,
become  mutually  destructive ;  and  the  s^  stem  built  upon  them  and  the  party  which
has  e.spoused  them  of  themselves  break  up  into  contending  fragments.  Hence  the
shifting  phases  and  combinations  of  religious  error — Protean,  many-headed — under
which  the  same  elements  constantly  reappear,  identical  in  essence,  incessantly  varying
in  form.  "  The  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus "  is  alone  self-consistent,  harmonious,  and
enduring.  But  who  will  assure  himself  that  he  has  in  all  things,  so  far  as  he  might,
truly  ascertained  and  followed  it?

Tjie  first  heresy.  We  have  distinguished  in  the  Colossian  heresy  four  elements  of
error,  which  may  be  roughly  designatea  under  the  iMimes  of  rationalism,  ceremonialism,
tiiysticism,  and  asceticism.  They  are  the  heresies,  respectively,  of  the  intellect,  of  the
religious  instinct,  of  the  spiritual  consciousness,  and  of  the  moral  will, — aberrations,
each  of  them,  of  functions  belonging  to  the  highest  and  divinest  part  of  man's  nature.
1.  The  false  teachers  are  evidently  rationalists.  It  is  this  characteristic  which'  the
apostle  first  expressly  specifies  (vers.  8,  23),  and  to  which  ihe  whole  tenor  of  the
Epistle  bears  witness  (see,  especially,  oh.  i.  9,  28  ;  ii.  2 — 4;  iii.  IC,  16 ;  and  compaie
the  introductory  remarks  in  our  homiletics,  sect.  2, 1,  and  sect.  5,  I.).  They  construed
Christianity  in  terms  of  their  preconceived  philosophic  theory.  They  were  philosophers
first,  and  Christians  afterwards,  or  only  Christians  so  far  as  their  philosophy  permitted.
Christ  was  not  the  centre  of  their  thoughts,  the  Master  of  their  intellect  and  heart
(oh.  ii,  19 ;  iii.  11) ;  but  they  made  an  idol  of  their  intellectual  system,  and  he  must


OB.  n.  1—23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSI  ANS.  lOfi

perforce  be  mride  to  pay  homage  to  it  and  fit  himself  into  soma  limited  and  vacai.t
space  where  it  might  be  aUe  to  make  room  for  him!     Not  in  Cbrist,  it  appears,  but  in
themselves  and  in  "  the  tradition  of  men,"  were  "  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  know-
ledge," out  of  which  the  Cliristian  teaching,  in  its  uncultured  crudeiiess  and  poverty  of
thought,  must  have  its  errors  corrected  and  its  deficiencies  supplied  1     But  the  philosophy
of  thtse  Colossian  iWuniinaii  was  clearly  wrong  in  its  views  both  of  the  world  and  of
human  Jiature ;  and  no  one  would  be  found  now  to  advocate  it.     Their  attempts  to
recast  and  rationalize  Christianity  proved  an  utter  failure,  and  bore  fruit  in  the  next
age  only  in  immorality  and  schism.     Their  wisdom  was  but  a  "wisdom  of  words"
(vers.  2,  3) ;  they  were  "  ever  learning  and  never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the
truth  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  7).    Every  system  of  philosophy,  every  sehemo  of  human  life,
which  attempts  to  patronize  and  to  pervert  to  its  own  purposes  the  Christian  teaching,
has,  we  may  be  sure,  a  like  doom  awaiting  it.     St.  Paul  does  not  seek  to  check  the
rationalistic  movement  at  Colosste  by  mere  repression,  by  discourii;;ing  intellectual
inquiry.    On  the  contrary,  he  impresses  on  his  readers  again  and  a^ain  the  necessity
of  a  better  understanding,  a  deeper  knowledge  of  "  the  mysiery  of  God  "  (oh.  i.  6,  9, 10,
25 — 28;  ii.  1 — 4;  iii.  10,  16).     It  was  their  slight  and  imperfect  Christian  education
which  laid  them  open  to  the  attacks  of  sophistry  and  a  shallow  philosophy.     The
letter  is  one  that  appeals  to  and  stimulates  Christian  thought  in  an  exiraordiuary
degree,  and  is  itself  a  theological  discipline.     The  spurious  and  plausible  gnoHs,  "  the
knowledge  falsely  so  called"  (1  Tim.  vi.  20),  which  was  fascinating  the  Colossians,
could  be   cast    out   only   by   the    epignosis,  the  advanced   and   perfect  knowledge
(compare  homiletics,  sects.  1,  IIL  and  4, 1.,  II.).    What  Lord  Bacon  said  of  atheism  may
apply  with  equal  truth  to  heresy :    "  A  little  philosophy  inolineth   men's  mind  to
atheism;  but  depth  in  philosophy  bringeth  men's  minds  about  to  religion."    2.  With
their  philosophical,  a  priori  interpretation  of  Christianity,  the  false  teachers  of  Colossas
combined  o  love  of  c  remonialism  and  a  devotion  to  the  exte7nals  of  worship.     Here  we
note  the  Jewish  element  in  their  training,  while  their  Gieek  sympathies  and  habits  of
tliought  betray  themselves  in  their  fundamental  philosophic  bias.     The  motive  of  their
religiousness  was,  however,  radically  different-  from  that  of  the  tradidonal  Jewish
legalism,  and  St.  Paul  deals  with  it  in  quite  another  method  from  that  which  he  follows
inGalatians.    The  "  philosophers  "  of  Colossse  valued  Jewish  ritual  for  its  expressive-
ness and  symbolic  truth,  and  practised  it  as  a  means  of  spiritual  self-culture  rather
than  in  mere  obedience  to  law.     Hence  they  insisted  much  on  the  sacred  seasons  and
feasts,  on  the  distinctions  of  meats  (vers.  16,  17),  on  circumcision  (ver.  11),  and  studied
greatly  the  art  of  worship  (vers.  18,  23) ;  while,  like  the  Esseties,  they  attached  little
importance  to  the  sacrificial  system  of  Judaism.     So,  at  least,  we  should  infer  from
the  apostle's  silence  on  these  latter  topics,  as  contrasted  with  the  leading  part  they
play  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews.     Their  system  was  Jewish  in  its  materials,  but
wholly  different  from  the  Jewish  in  spirit  and  tendency.     IBut  their  piety  was  wanting
in  spiritual  depth  and  reality,  or  they  could  scarcely  have  failed  to  recognize  in  Christ
"  the  Image  of  God  "  (oh.  i.  15),  and  the  "  new  and  living  way  "  to  the  Father.     God
was  to  them  so  far  off  that  they  would  not  seek  to  approach  him  directly  in  the  Peisoc
of  his  Son,  but  supposed  a  whole  hierarchy  of  mediators  necessary,  to  make  worship
possible.     He  was,  in  their  view,  a  great  abstract  Infinitude,  no  "  living  Father,"  no
listening,  answering  Presence.    Their  religion  was  an  elaborate  artifice,  beneficial  chiefly
in  its  reaction  on  themselves  ;  and  their  God  was  shrouded,  like  an  Oriental  monarch,
behind  a  multitude  of  vague  and  fugitive  mediators,  whom  practically  they  worshipped
instead  of  him.    A  like  result  ensues  wherever  the  idea  of  a  personal  God  is  obscured
and  weakened  in  the  minds  of  men,  whether  by  philosophical  reflection  making  him
a  formula,  or  by  superstitious  ignorance  treating  him  as  a  fetish.    For  true  worship  is
the  converse — ''  in  spirit  ancj  in  truth  "  (John  iv.  23,  24),  of  the  human  children  with
their  living  Father  in  heaven.    And  this  cannot  well  be  maintained  where  an  ornate
ceremonialism  overpowers  the  senses  and  fills  the  imagination  with  its  external  pomp;
or  where  the  living  God  "in  whom  we  live,"  and  Christ  the  "  one  Mediator  "  (1  Tim.
ii.  5),  are  so  distant  from  the  realizations  of  faith,  that  angels,  or  departed  saints,  or
the  blessed  virgin-mother,  or  earthly  priests  and  confessors,  are  thrust  in  to  fill  the
void,  and  are  made  in  reality  to  intercept  the  soul's  reverence  and  devotion.    There
may  be  a  sincere  "  zeal  for  worship  "  in  the  anxious  study  of  ecclesiastical  dress  and


106  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [ch.  it  1— M

decoration,  and  under  the  sensuous  impvessiveness  of  a  splendid  and  elaborate  ritualism.
But  this  is  nut  what  "  the  Father  seeketh  "  (John  iv.  23,  24:),aud  such  aids  to  devotion
often  hiuder  his  childreu  from  seeking  him.  Our  worship  must,  indeed,  have  its  forms ;
and  order  and  propriety  (1  Cor.  xiv.  40)  must  be  studied  in  their  regulation,  and  in
all  the  appointments  of  the  house  of  God.  And  men  of  varying  temperament  and
mental  habit  are  aided  by  a  greater  or  less  degree,  and  by  different  kinds,  of  outward
expression  in  their  worship.  But  when  the  form  is  cultivated  for  its  own  sake,  and
the  sensuous  and  the  artistic  predominate  over  and  displace  the  spiritual,  the  end  of
worship  itself  is  frustrated,  and  the  service  that  professes  to  be  rendered  to  the  Most
High  becomes  a  mockery  to  him,  and  a  blind  to  his  worshippers  that  effectually  hides
him  from  them.  Yet  this  tendency  has  often  a  strong  attraction  for  devout  and  humble
spirits,  "delighting  in  humility  "  (vers.  18,  23)  ;  who  love  to  worship,  and  readily  bow
before  any  superior  influence,  but  are  not  so  anxious  to  "  worship  what  they  hnow"
(John  iv.  22).  A  multiplying  of  the  objects  of  worship  (ver.  18)  very  commonly
attends  the  excessive  elaboration  of  its  forms ;  for  both  are  due  to  the  same  cause,  and
are  the  manifestations  of  a  religion  weak  in  spiritual  faith  in  God.  The  dissatisfaction
and  emptiness  of  soul  which  ensue  on  seeking  God  thus,  lead  to  our  making  still  more
cumbrous  and  exacting  the  forms  of  devotion,  and  to  our  resorting  to  new  mediators
and  new  methods  of  approach  to  him,  till  Cl)ristian  worship  sinks  into  a  round  of  ritual
performance  and  semi-idolatry,  and  becomes  an  imposture  in  itself  and  an  aversion  to
thoughtful,  truth -seeking  men.  8.  There  was,  in  the  third  place,  a  strong  vein  of  false
mysticism  in  the  Colossian  heresy.  This  element,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  is  more
difficult  to  distinguish  and  to  delineate  than  those  already  set  forth.  The  mysticism
of  Greece  was  chiefly  derived  and  fed  from  Oriental  sources.  Pythagoras,  in  tl)e  latter
half  of  the  sixth  century  B.C.,  founded  a  school  of  mystical  and  ascetic  philosophy,
whose  principles  were  largely  adopted  in  the  comprehensive  system  of  Plato.  The
Pythagorean  and  Platonic  mysticism  was  at  this  time  greatly  in  vogue,  especially  in
Asia  Minor  and  in  Egypt,  where  it  found  a  conseuial  soil.  The  Alexandrine  school  of
Philu  imported  its  principles  into  Judaism.  Tlie  Neo-Platonism,  in  wliich,  in  the  fourth
and  fifth  centuries  a.d.,  pagan  pliilosophy  made  a  last  splendid  strugi;le  for  existence,
and  which  has  left  deep  marks  of  its  influence  on  the  develoiiment  of  Christian  thought,
was  a  revival  of  Greek  mysticism  in  a  more  intense  and  religious  form.  The  Montanism
of  the  second  century,  a  product  of  the  same  Phrygian  soil  on  which  the  Colossian
heresy  sprang  up,  attested  the  persistence  of  the  mysiic  tendency  within  the  Church.
Its  later  manifestations,  as  allied  no»v  with  pantheistic  rationalism,  now  with  devout
ceremonialism,  now  with  rigid  asceticism,  we  cannot  endeavour  here  to  follow.  There
has  always  been  in  the  Church  a  mystical  school,  side  by  side  with  the  rationalistic,
and  the  ritualistic  or  sacerdotal.  And,  within  certain  limits,  the  mystic  principle  has
its  righte,  and  must  be  recognized  as  essential  to  spiritual  religion.  To  mysticism,  the
spiiitual  consciousness  of  the  individual  is  the  source  and  the  test  of  truth.  God  is  to
be  reached  by  intuition.  Meditative  contemplation,  aided  by  suitable  iidtiatory  and
disciplinaiy  symbolic  rites,  is  the  way  of  salvation,  whose  goal  is  absorption  in  the
Divine  nature.  Such  was  the  teaching  of  ancient  mystics  generally  ;  and  the  esoteric
doctrines  introduced  at  Colossae  were,  doubtless,  of  the  same  stamp.  That  God,  indeed,
reveals  himself  by  his  Spirit  to  the  individual  consciousness,  is  the  teaching  of  St.  Paul,
and,  as  we  believe,  of  the  whole  Bible  (R'm.  viii.  16  ;  Gal.  i.  16  ;  Ps.  cxxxix.,  etc.).
But  when  the  inner  consciousness,  the  spiritual  reason,  is  regarded  as  in  itself  the
primary  source  of  revelation,  then  error  begins  and  hallucination  supervenes.  The
mind  turns  itself  in  upon  its  own  self-generated  phantasies,  instead  of  fixing  its  gaze  on
the  historical  revelation  of  God  and  seeking  to  comprehend  and  mirror  its  glory  (2  Cor.
iii.  18 ;  iv.  6 ;  Eom.  i.  20 ;  Ps.  xix.,  etc.).  The  Colossian  errorist,  walking  in  the  light
of  his  self-coufldent,  self-contemiilating  reason,  saw  visions  of  angels  as  he  imagineil,
and  heard  messages  and  teachings  that  were  but  the  echo  of  his  owii  speculations.
With  these  deceived  and  deceiving  subjective  ruiaginings  the  apostle  confronts  the
•ctual  historic  Person  and  work  of  Christ,  as  the  supreme  Object  of  contemplation  and
of  trust  (ch.  i.  13—15,  21,  22,  27—29 ;  ii.  6,  7 ;  iii.  11,  15—17).  Only  through
"belief  of  the  truth  "  come  the  testifying  and  sanctifying  visitations  of  "the  Spirit  of
the  truth"  (2  Thess.  ii.  9—14  ;  Eph.  i.  13,  14;  Acts  ii.  38  ;  xix.  1—7).  The  objective
reyelation  of  God  to  the  soul  and  the  subjective  attestation  and  experieuse  vf  its  powei


OH.  11.1—23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  107

are  reciprocally  linked  together,  and  advance  pari  passu.  Compare  the  teaching  ol
Christ  in  promising  the  Holy  Spirit  to  his  disciples  (John  xiv.  15 — 24).  The  doctiine
of  the  Holy  Spirit  was  indirectly  hut  vitally  affected  by  the  Colossian  error  ;  and  this
topic,  though  not  brought  forvpard  in  this  Epistle,  is  prominent  in  the  Ephesian  letter,
which  is  in  many  respects  a  complement  to  this  and,  in  our  beliel,  is  "  the  letter"  to  be
sent  "from  Laodicea"  for  the  perusal  of  the  Colossian  Church  (oh.  iv.  16).  "  Christ
the  Mystery  of  God,"  "Christ  in  you  the  hope  of  glory," — this  is  the  apostle's
mysticism,  the  true  mystery  that  is  to  expel  the  false,  unhallowed  mysteries,  that  seek
by  self-directed  intuitions  and  self-invented  lustrations  and  incantations  to  penetrate
the  secrets  of  the  spiritual  world  and  to  enter  into  union  with  the  Infinite.  4.  In  the
sphere  of  morals  and  practical  life,  the  Colossian  errorists  inculcated  a  strict  asceticism.
This  part  of  their  system  is  consistent  with  each  of  the  other  three,  though  it  pro-
ceeded rather  from  its  philosophical  and  mystical  than  from  its  Judaistio  and  cere-
monial constituent  factor.  In  the  early  Christian  ages,  asceticism  was  frequently
associated  with  theoretic  rationalism;  in  later  times,  it  has  been  more  frequently  the
ally  of  a  sacerdotal  type  of  Christianity.  Asceticism  was  a  thing  foreign  to  Jurlaism.
It  was  a  religion  too  healthy  and  practical  for  that.  Ps.  cxxviii.  expresses  what  has
always  been  the  true  religious  feeling  of  Israel  in  regard  to  the  bles^in;is  of  this  life.
The  Pharisaic  yoke  was  indeed  "  grievous  to  be  borne,"  and  pressed  on  the  externals
of  life  with  the  weight  of  a  slavery;  but,  after  all,  it  concerned  matters  which  habit
makes  comparatively  easy,  and  its  spirit  was  that  of  a  formal  legalism,  aiming  at
precisioii  in  the  performance  of  all  external  acts,  and  by  no  means  valuing  hard  treat-
ment of  the  tody  in  itself.  But  the  latter  was  the  distinguishing  feature  of  the  new
Colossian  ethics,  as  of  the  ethics  of  Eastern  mysticism  and  of  Chiistian  monachism,
and,  in  some  sort,  of  Puiitanism  too.  (1)  Asceticism  is  the  perversion  of  a  true  and  noble
impulse.  In  it  the  maxim,  Gorruptio  optimi pessima,  has  its  saddest  illustration.  How
natural  it  is  for  an  earnest  soul,  striving  after  purity  and  fellowship  with  God,  to  fall
into  a  hatred  of  the  body  and  the  material  world!  How  all  but  irresistible  must  this
tendency  have  been  in  the  midst  of  the  reeking  impurities  and  the  social  dissolution
of  the  pagan  and  barbarian  worlds  I  (2)  Moreover,  the  very  nature  of  religions  language,
with  its  necessities  of  figurative  expression,  lends  itself  to  misconstruction  of  scri[jtural
truth  in  this  direction.  Witness  the  interpretations  still  prevalent  of  St.  Paul's  own
terminology.  It  is  difficult,  both  in  thought  and  in  practice,  to  distinguish  always
between  the  lody,  which  Christ  raised,  which  becomes  the  temple  of  his  Spirit,  whose
members  are  to  be  instruments  of  righteousness,  which  is  the  symbol  of  the  Church
the  bride  of  Christ,  which  nature  itself  teaches  every  man  to  nourish  and  to  cherish
(1  Cor.  vi.  12—20;  Eom.  vi.  12—14;  viii.  11;  Eph.  v.  22—30),  and  the  flesh,  which
has  to  be  stripped  off,  to  be  put  to  death,  to  be  crucified  with  its  affections  and  lusts,
by  all  who  are  "  of  Christ  Jesus  "  (ch.  ii.  11 ;  iii.  5 ;  Gal.  v.  24).  (3)  With  the  Colossian
errorist,  as  in  the  Alexandrine  theosophy,  the  body  was  the  source  of  sin,  the  prison  in
which  the  soul  is  shut  up  and  severed  from  God.  To  break  the  chains  of  sense,  to  cast
off  the  burden  of  the  flesh  and  become  pure  spirit,  and  thus  to  rise  towards  God, — this
was  the  aspiration  of  the  ancient  mystics.  Matter  and  spirit  were  the  two  opposite
poles  of  being ;  and  the  distinction  between  moral  good  and  evil,  for  them,  merged  itself
in  this.  They  declared  indiscriminate  war  against  the  physical  life  and  natural
enjoyment  as  itself  sinful  or  tending  to  sin.  Their  conception  of  lioliness  it  was,  of
course,  impossible  absolutely  to  realize ;  but  he  would  approximate  to  it  the  most
nearly  who  maintained  himself  in  as  feeble  and  impoverished  a  bodily  condition  as  was
consistent  with  active  thought.  (4)  Such  doctrine  was,  we  may  be  sure,  more  often
preached  than  practised.  But  it  took  effect,  within  a  little  time,  in  the  denunciation  vf
marriage  (1  'I  im.  iv.  3 ;  Heb.  xiii.  4),  as  among  the  Jewish  Essenes,  with  the  dis-
honouring of  the  family  life  and  the  weakening  of  social  bonds  which  necessarily  ensue.
To  this  source  we  trace  that  false  ideal  of  Christian  purity  which,  before  many  centuries,
became  prevalent  in  the  Church  Catholic,  and  the  rise  of  the  gigantic  and  baleful
institution  of  monasticism  and  the  celibate  priesthood,  which,  by  withdrawing  from  the
world  the  most  powerful  elements  of  Christian  character  and  influence,  and  by  the
immorality  and  social  disorganization  -which  it  engendered,  has  blighted  the  Church's
history  and  delayed  indefinitely  the  conversion  of  mankind  to  the  faith  of  Christ.  (5)  Let
U8  listen  to  our  heavenly  Intercessor,  who  asks  the  Father, "  Not  that  thou  shouldest


108  THE  EPI8TI,E  TO  THE  COLOSSlANS.  Ton.  n.  1— 2»

take  them  out  of  the  world,  hut  that  thou  shouldest  keep  them  from  its  evil ! "  who
bills  his  disciples  he  "  the  salt  of  the  earth,"  "  the  liglit  of  the  world  "  (John  xvii.  15 ;
Matt.  V.  13,  14).  Let  us  have  faith  in  the  power  of  his  Spirit,  wlio  can  so  sanctify  our
mortalhody  that  "sin  shall  not  reign  in  it"  (Roin.  vi.  12  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  19,  20);  and  can
so  hallow  the  temperate  and  grateful  use  of  tiie  natural  blessings  God  bestows  upon  us
(1  Tim.  iv.  3 — 5 ;  ch.  iii.  21,  22)  that,  "  whether  we  eat  or  drink  or  whatsoever  we
do,"  we  shall  "do  all  to  the  glory  of  God"  (1  Cor.  x.  31 ;  ch.  iii.  17).  Let  us  hear
St.  Paul,  while  he  .teaches  us  to  "  make  not  provision  for  the  flesh  to  fulfil  its  lusts"
(Rom,  xiii.  14),  y<  t  to  "abide  with  God,"  each  in  that  secular  state  "  wherein  he  was
called"  (1  Cor.  vii.  24).  (6)  Gud's  Law  regulates,  does  not  suppress,  the  natural  life.
The  home,  the  field,  the  mart,  the  senate,  all  that  belongs  to  the  natural  fabric  and
constitution  of  human  life,  is  his  creation,  the  arena  for  the  exercise  of  his  superintend-
ing providence,  and  the  field  of  probation  in  which  he  trains  bis  children  for  their
spiritual  manhood.  He  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  not  of  the  indi-
vidual soul  alone,  but  of  human  society  in  its  widest  sense,  including  business  and
politics,  art  and  science,  all  the  public  interests  and  constituent  elements  of  collective
Luman  life,  which  are  to  find  their  sanctiHcatiun,  that  is,  their  perfection  and  their
unity,  as  they  are  penetrated  and  ruled  by  "  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  life  in  Christ
Jesus."  So  "  the  kingdom  of  the  world  "  shall  "  become  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and
of  his  Christ"  (Rev.  xi.  15).  (7)  The  Gospel  puts  high  iionour  on  the  human  body.  The
fact  that  Christ  was  "  born  of  a  woman  "  redeems  its  birth  fiom  dishonour  and  contempt.
The  Incarnation  is  fatal  to  all  theosophy  based  on  the  hostility  of  the  material  to  the
spiritual,  and  to  the  false  s]iiritiialisiu  which  would  seek  God  by  fleeing  from  the  body.
Christ  has  incorporated  our  flesh  with  his  own  Divinity,  and  in  the  body  of  his  flesh
(ch.  i.  22)  he  redeemed  us,  and  reconciled  the  world  to  God.  To  the  meanest  human
person  there  belongs  an  unspeakable  dignity  and  saoredness  as  partaking  of  that  "  blood
and  flesh  "  in  which  he  shared  (Hfb.  ii.  14),  and  through  which  he  "  poured  out  his
soul  unto  death  "  (Isa.  liii.  12).  Christ's  work  will  be  completed  and  "  the  travail  of  his
soul  satisfied"  only  by  "the  redemption  of  our  body,"  which  will  consummate  our
"adoption  "and  will  bring  with  it  the  deliverance  of  "the  creiition  itself"  from  "the
bondage  of  corruption  "  (Kom.  viii.  18— ?5).  For  this  end,  we  still  "  wait  for  a  Saviour,
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  descending  from  heaven  (Piiil.  iii.  20,  21).  So  waiting,  we
shall  keep  pure  and  clean  this  "  earthly  house  of  our  tabernacle  "  (2  Cor.  v.  1 ;  1  John
iii.  3).  Nothing  that  belongs  to  it  can  we  "  call  common  or  unclean  "  (Acts  x.  15),
"body  of  humiliation"  though  it  is  (Phil.  iii.  21).  We  occupy  it  for  Christ  our
Master.  It  is  the  "temple  of  the  Holy  Spirit" — the  Spirit  of  delicate  purity,  the
Spirit  of  order  and  of  beauty,  the  Spirit  of  health  and  unity,  whose  "  communion  "
is  the  Church's  breath  of  life,  and  the  secret,  pervasive  atmosphere  and  inspiration
that  brings  all  that  is  pure  and  healthful  into  the  society  of  men.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Vers.  \—Z.— Nature  and  objects  of  the  apostle's  struggle  on  behalf  of  the  saints.  "  For
I  would  have  you  know  how  great  a  struggle  I  have  for  you  and  for  them  at  Laudioea,
and  for  as  many'as  have  not  seen  my  face  in  the  flesh."  His  object  is  to  justify  his
urgency  in  writing  to  a  people  whom  he  had  nut  known  personally.    >

I.  The  apostle's  confmot.  It  marks :  1.  His  intense  anxiety  on  their  account.
"  Fears  within  as  well  as  fightings  without."  2.  His  anxious  labours  in  defending  tha
liinplicity  of  the  gospel  against  the  corrupting  devices  of  false  teachers.  3.  JJis  striving
in  prayer  for  the  saints.  (Ch.  iv.  12.)  Ministers  who  "  please  not  men,  but  Gud,"  have
often  a  great  "  fight  of  affliction  "  on  behalf  of  their  flocks,  especially  when  they  have
to  encounter  men  who  "  resist  the  truth  "  and  "  withstand  the  words  "  of  faithful  men
and  "do  much  evil "(2  Tim.  iii.  8;  iv.  14,15).  The  JudEeo-Gnostics  had  inspired
him  with  a  deep  concern  for  the  religious  integrity  of  the  Culossians,  the  Laodiceans,
»nd,  perhaps,  the  Christians  of  Hierapolis,  who  all  dwelt  in  the  valley  of  the  Lycus.
What  a  blessing  to  them  that  they  had  the  prayers  and  the  labours  of  an  apostle  who
had  never  seen  one  of  them  in  the  flesh  I

ll<  The  object  of  the  ArosTLE'e  conflict,   "  That  their  hearts  may  be  comforted,


oa.it  1—28.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  109

they  being  knit  together  in  love,  and  unto  all  riches  of  the  full  assurance  of  under-
standing, that  they  may  know  the  Mystery  of  God,  even  Christ,  in  whom  are  all  the
treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledu;e  hidden."  He  thus  indicates  how  the  threatened
danger  was  to  be  averted.  Their  hearts  were  to  be  comforted  and  strengthened  so  that
they  might  stand  fast  in  the  faith.  1.  The  manner  in  which  the  comfort  wat  to  reach
them.  "They  being  knit  together  in  love."  (1)  Love  is  itself  "the  bond  of  perfeotness"
(ch.  iii.  14),  The  want  of  love  often  breaks  unity.  It  is  by  love  "  we  keep  the  unity
of  the  Spirit  in  the  bond  of  peace"  (Eph.  iv.  3).  (2)  It  seeks  a  fuller  fellowsliip  with
the  saints  in  the  gospel  (Phil.  i.  6  ;  ii.  1).  (3)  It  le:\ds  to  a  union  of  judgment  to  the
"exclusion  of  everything  like  "contention  and  vain-glory  "  (Phil.  ii.  2,  4).  Love  is  "  to
abound  in  knowledge  and  all  judgment,"  and  is  thus  able  to  "  discern  things  that  are
more  excellent  "  (Phil.  i.  9, 10).  It  is  thus  a  protection  against  error  and  Seduction.
This  love  always  springs  out  of  "a  pure  heart"  (1  Tim.  i.  5).  2.  The  end  of  the  con-
solation and  the  object  of  the  union  in  love.  "  And  unto  all  riches  of  the  full  assurance
of  understanding,  that  they  may  know  the  Mystery  of  God,  even  Christ,  in  whom  are  all
the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge."  (1)  Love  gives  insight  to  the  understanding,
'i'herefore  the  apostle  prays  that  the  Philippians'  "  love  may  abound  in  knowledge  and
all  judgment"  (Phil.  i.  9),  and  that  the  Bphesians  may  be  "rooted  and  grounded  in
love,"  so  that  they  may  know  that  love  "  which  pasSeth  knowledge  "  (Eph.  iii.  17—19).
As  we  grow  in  grace  we  grow  in  knowledge.  The  two  growths  go  on  together  helping
and  developing  each  other.  There  is  a  necessity  that  the  saints  should  Beek,  not  merely
knowledge,  but  "  a  full  assurance  of  intelligence  "  respecting,  not  alone  the  doctrines  of
the  gospel,  but  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  The  knowledge  of  a  pergonal
Saviour  is  Christianity  in  its  essence.  (2)  The  mystery  for  the  Christian  Understand-
ing that  solves  the  problem  of  humanity  is  "Christ,  in  whom  are  all  the  treasures  of
wisdom  and  knowledge  hidden."  It  is  not  Christ,  but  Christ  containing  these  treasures.
Above,  it  was  "  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory  "  (ch.  i.  27) ;  here  it  is  Christ  with  these
precious  treasures,  (a)  The  knowledge  of  Christ  is  the  first  and  the  last  thing  iu
religion.  The  apostle  counted  all  things  but  loss  for  "  the  excellency  "  of  ihis  know-
ledge (Phil.  iii.  8).  Ettrnal  life  is  involved  in  it  (John  xvii.  3 ;  Isa.  liii.  11).  It  is
the  knowledge  of  him  which  leads  to  great  boldness  and  sincerity.  "  Nevertheless  I
am  not  ashamed :  for  I  know  whom  I  have  believed  "  (2  Tim.  i.  12).  (6)  Access  to
Christ  gives  access  to  all  his  treasures.  The  treasures  of  the  Gnostics  were  hid  from
all  but  the  initiated;  the  treasures  hid  in  Christ  are  made  accessible  to  all,  so  that  we
can  know  "  the  heavenly  things  "  which  he  alone  knows  "  who  is  in  heaven  "(John  iii.
12, 13).  It  is  thus  he  reveals  to  us  ihe  Father,  brings  life  and  immortality  to  light,
and  enriches  the  Church  with  "  the  revelation  of  Jesus  Christ "  (Rev.  i.  1).  The
treasures  are  twofolil.  (o)  Wisdom.  There  is  "a  word  of  wisdom  "as  well  as  "a  word  of
knowledge"  given  by  the  Holy  Spirit  (1  Cor.  xii.  8).  Wisdom  reasons  about  the
relations  of  things,  and  applies  to  actions  as  well  as  doctrines.  Christ  is  made  to  Us
"  Wisdom  "  (1  Cor.  i.  30).  The  wisdom  that  is  "  from  above  "  has  mdny  noble  qualities
(Jas.  iii.  17),  essentially  moral  in  tlieir  nature.  What  but  ignorance  of  Christ  leads
men  to  listen  to  deceivers?  (;8)  Knowledge.  This  is  more  restricted  than  wisdom  apply-
ing to  the  apprehension  of  truths.  "  Though  I  understand  all  mysteries  and  ell  know-
ledge "  (1  Cor.  Xiii.  2).  This  was  the  very  word  that  the  Gnostics  took  as  their  watch-
word, but  the  apostle  here  significantly  makes  it  secondary  to  wisdom.  It  is  a  right
thing  for  belierera  to  sound  forth  the  praises  of  Christ's  wisdom  and  knowledge^ — ^T.  C.

Vers.  4,  5.— A  warning  against  deceivers.  "  This  I  say,  that  no  one  may  delude  you
with  persuasiveness  of  speech."  It  is  necessary  to  say  this  which  he  has  just  said  con-
cerning the  great  "  mystery  of  God,"  because  there  is  danger  of  deception.

I.  Thb  mbthods  of  deception.  1.  One  method  is  to  rrason  men  into  error,  ai  t)t«
word  here  signifies.  Gnosticism  was  essentially  rationalistic  in  its  method,  gossamer-
like  in  its  webs  of  speculation,  and  full  of  intellectual  pride.  The  subtle  seducer  is
often  more  dangerous  than  the  persecutor.  2.  Another  is  to  use  persuaeivenets  of  speech
in  the  application  of  this  reasoning.  They  use  "  fair  speeches  and  flattering  words  to
deceive  the  hearts  of  the  simple"  (Bum.  xvi.  18).  The  arguments  were  Cklse  and
sophistical,  but  they  were  made  to  appear  true  through  arts  of  rhetoric.

II.  How  TO  MEKT  SUCH  abTs  OP  DECEPTION.     1.  It  is  the  duty  cf  ininiittrt  to  Warn


no  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  [ch.  ii.  1— 23

their  people  against  them.  How  often  did  the  apostle  say,  " Be  not  deceived ; "  "Be
not  carried  about  witli  every  wind  of  doctrine,  by  the  sleight  of  men,  and  cunning
craftiness,  whereby  they  lie  in  wait  to  deceive"  (Eph.  iv.  14)  !  Ministers  are  thus  tc
"  take  heed  to  the  flock  of  God,  over  which  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  them  bishops*
(Acts  XX.  ?8).  2.  We  must  "try  the  spirits"  ourselves  (1  John  iv.  1),  and  try  them,
above  all  tilings,  by  the  standard  of  God's  Word  (Isa.  viii.  20).  3.  We  must  retain
the  knowledge  and  faith  of  Jesus  Christ  as  the  treasure-house  of  all  wis'/om  and  know-
ledge. The  knowledge  of  his  excellency  is  a  preservative  against  seducing  s|)irits.  4.
We  must  live,  under  the  constant  power  of  the  Word,  which  is  "  able  to  huild  us  up."
(Acts  XX.  32.)  5.  We  must  walk  purely  in  the  fear  of  Qod.  For  "  if  any  man  will  do
his  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine  "  (John  vii.  17).

III.  The  eeason  fob  this  warning  against  deception.  "For  though  I  be
absent  in  the  iiesh,  yet  am  I  with  you  in  the  spirit,  joying  and  beholding  your  order,
and  the  steadfastness  of  your  faith  in  Christ."  He  was  anxious  lest  such  a  solid  fruit
of  orthodoxy  should  be  broken  down  by  the  arts  of  plausible  teachers.  1.  True  lone
rejoices  in  the  work  of  grace  wherever  it  is  discerned.  The  apostle  heard  from  Epaphias
good  tidings  of  Colossian  faithfulness  and  firmness,  and  was  glad,  as  Barnabas  was  glad
at  Antioch  when  he  saw  "  the  grace  of  God"  (Acts  xi.  23).  The  Apostle  John  like-
wise says,  "I  rejoiced  greatly  that  I  found  of  thy  children  walking  in  truth"  (2  John
4).  "  A  holy  mind  can  rejoice  in  the  good  things  of  those  he  warneth  and  reproveth."
2.  Order  and  steadfastness  are  signs  of  soundness  in  the  faith.  These  words  have
military  associations  which  may  have  been  suggested  by  the  presence  of  the  Prastorian
soldiers  with  the  apostle  (Phil.  i.  13).  (1)  Order  marks  the  outward  relation  of
Church  fellowship.  The  Oolossians  did  not  break  rank  or"  walk  disorderly."  We  are
to  "  walk  by  rule  "  (Gal.  vi.  16)  ;  "  to  guide  our  feet  into  tlie  ways  of  peace  "  (Luke  i.
79);  and  generally  to  " order  our  affairs  with  discretion"  (Ps.  cxii.  5).  As  God  is  "a
God  of  order,"  we  are  to  do  all  things  "  discreetly  and  in  order  "  (1  Cor.  xiv.  40).  (2)
Steadfastness  of  faith  marked  their  state  as  inwardly  considered,  (a)  This  must  always
be  our  principle  of  resistance  to  the  devil;  "Whom  resist,  steadfast  in  the  faith"
(1  Pet.  v.  9).  (6)  It  is  necessary  to  our  success  in  prayer,  for  we  are  to  pray  "  in  faith,
without  wavering "  (Jas.  i.  6).  (c)  It  is  the  means  of  our  greater  victory  over  the
world  (1  John  v.  4).  (d)  It  is,  above  all,  our  surest  protection  against  errorists  (Jude
3).  (e)  It  causes  good  men  to  rejoice.  "  Now  we  live  if  ye  stand  fast  in  the  Lord  "
(1  Thess.  ii.  8).— T.  0.

Vers.  6,  7. — The  principle  of  a  consistent  Christian  walk.  "As  ye  received  Christ
Jesus  the  Lord,  so  walk  ye  in  him."

I.  The  reception  or  Christ  is  the  substance  of  Christianity.  1.  This  includes
the  reception  of  Mm  doctrinally,  as  the  historical  Person  Jesus,  and  the  acce;tance  of
him  as  Lord.     The  false  teachers  misrepresented  his  true  character  in  these  respects.

2.  But  it  expressly  points  to  a  believing  reception  of  himself  as  at  once  the  sum  and  sub-
stance of  all  teaching  and  the  foundation  of  all  hope  for  man.  Those  who  thus  receive
him  (1)  become  sons  of  God  (John  i.  11, 12);  (2)  receive  the  promise  of  an  eternal
inheritance  (Heb.  ix.  15),  are  co-heirs  with  himself  (Rom.  viii.  17) ;  (3)  receive  the  very
Spirit  of  Christ  (Rom.  viii.  9) ;  (4)  receive  rest  for  the  soul  (Matt.  xi.  28) ;  (5)  possess
security  tiiat  he  will  save  to  the  uttermost  (Heb.  vii.  25).

II.  The  walk  must  coeebspond  to  the  spiritual  reception.  "  So  walk  ye  in
him."  This  implies :  1.  That  we  are  carefully  to  guard  the  true  doctrine  of  Christ's
person.  One  apostle  rejoiced  to  bear  that  his  children  "  walked  in  truth  "  (;;  John  4).
There  were  men  who  "walked  not  after  the  traditions  which  they  received  of  the
apostle"  (2  Thess.  iii.  6).  Let  us  give  earnest  heed  to  what  has  been  "received  of
the  Lord  "  and  is  delivered  "  to  his  apostles  "  (1  Cor.  xi.  23).  Let  us  not  "  lose  what
we  have  wrought"  (2  John  9).  2.  That  lae  are  to  walk  in  all  holy  obedience  to  Chris''s
commands.     "  Ye  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do  whatsoever  I  command  you  "  (John  xv.  14).

3.  But  the  passage  essentially  means  that  we  are  to  walk  in  Christ  as  the  sphere  or
element  in  which  our  life  is  to  find  development.  We  are  to  walk  in  him  as  the  Way,
the  Truth,  and  the  Life,  and  our  life  is  to  be  the  life  of  faith  in  the  Snn  of  God  (Gul.  ii.
20).  All  our  streiiglh,  guidance,  motives,  are  to  be  found  ia  him.  "  His  grace  will  b«
sufficient  for  us,"  as  he  "  dwells  in  our  hearts  by  fait^-."


OH.  II.  1—23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa  111

III.  The  coNniTiiiNs  of  a  hot.y  wat.r  in  CfinisT.  "Having  been  rooted  and  bein^
built  up  in  liim,  and  beirin  rsiiiliiilied  in  wmi-  laith,  even  as  ye  were  fciiicrht,  aboumliiig
therein  with  tluinlisaivi  .;.  'I'lere  is  h.  rr  ;iu  X|irptisivf  varietv  of  met^plior.  1.
The  believer  must  he  linaly  routed  in  Ckii  t.  Tiiii-  is  il'iii'  imce  for  all  in  rei^eneraiion.
It  is  a  past  act.  'i'lie  iree  mav  shako  iii  iis  to  must  l>ianrhes,  but  its  roots  are  firm
because  they  j;rasp  tlie  soliil  earth.  Su  t'e  finiiiK-iS  ul'  believers  is  du  ■  to  Christ  (Jolin
X.  28,  'ZQ),  and  his  .sap'  mal<es  tliem  friiitrul  i  Julin  xv.  5).  The  believer  is  to  "cant
forth  his  roots  as  Lebanon,"  and  thus  he  will  "grow  up  unto  him  in  all  things."  2.
He  mtist  be  built  upon  Christ  ax  the  Foundal ion.  (1)  'I'here  is  no  other  foiindatiim
(1  Cor.  iii.  11).  As  the  fouudatiun  upholds  the  h  use,  so  is  the  believer  upheld  by
Christ  (Matt.  xvi.  18).  (2)  Tue  buildini;  is  progressive — "being  built  up  in  him"
(1  Cor.  iii.  9 — 15).  The  beliuver  is  to  receive  "' the  strengthen  ng  of  his  faith"  in
Christ.  Thus  ihe  bndy  of  Christ  "maketh  increase  of  itself  in  love."  3.  He  must  be
established  in  faith.  "  Establislied  m  your  faiih,  even  as  ye  were  lau-jht."  (1)  Faith
is  thr  great  means  of  giving  stabdity  to  lifi'.  "It  is  a  good  thing  that  the  heart  be
established  with  lirace"  (Heb.  xiii.  9).  (?)  Faith  itself  needs  stab, lity.  The  Gnostics
exalted  knowledae  above  faith,  but  faith  hold^  tlie  key  ol  the  soul's  position.  "There-
fore be  not  faithless,  but  beli'  ving;"  "  L  ird,  increase  our  faith."  The  strong  faith  of
Abraham  ave  hiui  the  stability  that  marked  his  singularly  consistent  and  holy  career.
(3)  Faith  must  have  constant  reference  to  its  grounds  in  the  Word — "  even  as  ye  were
taught."  The  Colossians  were  not  to  follow  the  false  teachers,  but  Epaphras,  their
teacher.  4.  There  must  be  an  abounding  faith  mingled  with  thanksgiving.  "  Abound-
ing therein  with  thanksgiving."  (1)  We  cannot  trust  G  d  too  much.  We  ought,
therefore,  to  pray  contiuually,  "Lord,  increase  our  faith."  We  ought  also  to  add  to
our  faith  every  other  Christian  trrace  (2  Pet.  i.  5).  (2)  Our  faith  must  overflow  with
thanksgiving.  We  must  be  sensi  hie  of  our  mercies  and  privileges,  and  thus  we  shall  get
the  comfort  and  benefit  of  them  by  "giving  of  thanks." — T.  C.

Ver.  8. — A  warning  against  speculative  deceivers.  "  Take  heed  lest  there  shall  be
any  one  that  maketh  spoil  of  you  through  his  philosophy  and  vain  deceit,  after  the
tradition  of  men,  alter  the  rudiments  of  the  world,  and  not  after  Christ."     Mark —  •

I.  The  nature  of  thb  philosophy  herb  condemned.  It  is  philosophy  inse-
parably connected  with  "vain  deceit."  There  is  a  philosophy  which  is  highly  ser-
viceable to  religion,  as  it  is  the  noblest  exercise  of  our  rational  faculties;  but  there  is
a  philosophy  prejudicial  to  religion,  because  it  sets  up  the  wisdom  of  man  in  opposition
to  the  wisilom  of  God.  1.  The  apostle  refers  to  the  Judceo  Gnostics  who  regarded
Christianity  mainly  as  a  philosophy — that  is,  as  a  search  after  speculative  truth,  and
not  as  a  n  velation  of  Christ  and  a  life  of  faith  and  love  in  him.  The  apostle  claims
fur  the  gospel  that  it  is  thus  "  the  wisdom  of  God."  2.  He  refers  to  the  speculative
result  of  such  a  philosophy.  It  tends  to  "  vain  deceit ;  "  it  is  hollow,  sophistical,  disap-
pointing, misleadig.  It  is  the  "science  fulsely  so  called"  which  "puffs  up"  and
cannot  edify.     If  always  tends  to  undermine  man's  faith  in  the  Word  of  God.

II.  The  origin  of  this  philosophy.  "  After  the  tradition  of  men."  It  had  ite
source  in  mere  human  speculation,  and  could  not  appeal  to  inspired  books.  Our  Lord
condeirmed  the  Pharisaic  attachment  to  traditions  (Matt.  xv.  2,  3,  6 ;  Mark  vii.  8,
9).  'i'his  later  mystical  tendency  was  strong  in  its  traditions,  which  it  reserved  for  the
exclusive  use  of  the  initiated.

III.  The  suiijECT-MATTEB  OF  THIS  PHILOSOPHY.  "After  the  rudiments  of  the
world."  This  seems  to  point  to  ritualistic  observances  worthy  only  of  children,  but
not  adapted  to  grown  men.  They  belonged  "  to  the  world  " — to  the  sphere  of  external
and  visible  things.     These  rudiments  were  "beggarly  elements,"  done  away  in  Christ.

IV.  Its  NEGATIVE  woRTHLEssNESs.  "  And  not  after  Christ."  1.  It  had  not  Christ
fur  its  Author;  for  it  loUowed  "the  tradition  of  men."  2.  It  had  not  Christ  for  iis
Siibfct ;  for  it  dis|ilace<l  him  to  make  way  for  rituali-^tic  ordinances  aud  angelic  medi-
itors.  No  p'  iliisiipliy  is  worth,\  of  the  name  that  cannot  find  a  place  for  him  who  ia
■  he  h  fullest  Wisdom  (1  Cor.  1.  :^)0).

V.  The  dangers  of  this  piiilosophy.  "Take  heed  lest  there  shall  be  any  ona
that  maketh  spoil  of  you."  It  would  have  an  enslaving  effect,  partly  by  its  ritualistic
drudgeries  and  partly  by  its  false  teaching.    There  are  worse  losses  than  the  losg  o(


112  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oh.  u.  1—28.

property  or  even  children.  This  false  philosophy  would  involTe :  1.  The  lost  of  Chris-
tian lib  rty.  (Gal.  v.  1.)  2.  The  loss  of  much  of  the  good  seed  sown  in  Christian
hearts.  (Mutt.  xiii.  19.)  3.  The  loss  of  what  Christians  had  wrought.  (2  John  10.)
4.  The  loss  of  first  love.  (Cev.  iL  1.)  5.  The  loss  of  the  joys  of  salvation.  (Fs,  li.  12.)
— T.  0.

Vers.  9,  Id.— Christ  the  Fulness  of  the  Godhead,  and  our  relationship  to  Mm,  **  For
in  him  dwellcth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily ;  and  in  him  ye  are  made  full,
who  is  tlte  Head  of  all  pvincipallty  and  power."  The  apostle  is  here  condemning  one
of  the  false  principles  that  undeilay  the  teaching  of  the  Gnostics — the  substitution  of
angelic  mediators  for  Clirist.

I.  Christ's  true  Deity  and  TRtrB  humakity.  1.  He  is  no  mere  emanation  from
the  supreme  Ood,  hut  "all  the  fulness  of  the  dodheud."  All  the  infinite  perfections  of
the  essential  being  of  God  are  in  him.  The  Gnostics  taught  that  tho  fulness  of  the
Godhead  was  distributed  among  many  spiritual  agencies.  The  apostle  teaches  that  it
is  in  Christ  as  the  eternal  Word.  "  The  Word  was  with  God,  and  was  God."  2.  This
fulness  "  dwells "  in  him  now  and  for  ever.  It  is  a  blessedly  abiding  fact.  It  is  a  per-
manent indwelling.  3.  7i!  (iiweZZs  "  ioii^;"  that  is,  with  a  bodily  manifestation.  The
false  teachers,  imasining  that  matter  was  essentially  evil,  could  not  brook  the  thought
of  the  Divine  Redeemer  linking  himself  for  ever  with  a  human  body,  and  they,  after
Docetic  theory,  either  denied  the  reality  cf  his  body  or  its  inseparable  connection  with
him  for  ever.  But  "  the  Word  was  made  flesh  "  (John  i.  14),  aud  "  The  spirit  which
confesseth  not  that  Jesus  Christ  is  come  in  the  flush, ...  is  the  spirit  of  antichrist"
(1  John  iv.  3).

II.  Gnu  RELATiOKSHiP  TO  THE  FULNESS  OF  Christ.  "And  in  him  ye  are  made
full,  who  is  the  Head  of  all  princii>ality  and  power."  1.  Christian  Ife  is  union  with
Christ.  (1)  We  can  oblain  nothing  from  Christ  till  we  are  in  Christ  (1  John  v.  20).
"  In  him  we  have  life  "  (1  John  v.  11),  as  in  him  we  are  chosen  (Eph.  i.  4).  (2)  We
cannot,  therefore,  look  for  life  from  subordinate  mediators.  2.  Christian  Ife  is  the  enjoy-
ment of  his  fulness.  (1)  Therefore  nothing  is  to  be  looked  for  from  angelic  mediators.
"  Out  of  his  fulness  have  we  all  received,  and  grace  for  grace  "  (John  i.  16).  His  fulness
is  not  finite,  but  infinite.  There  can  never,  therefore,  be  lack  of  supply.  (2)  It  oujrbt
to  be  our  prayer  to  receive  more  largely  of  this  fulness.  The  a|Ostle  prayed  for  the
Ephesians  that  they  mi^ht  be  "filled  up  to  all  the  fulness  of  God,"  and  "grow  unto
the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness  of  Christ"  (En'.,  iii.  19;  iv.  13).  (3)  To
share  in  this  fulness  is  no  privilege  of  an  esoteric  few,  but  i.,  ih;it  of  all  who  are  united
to  Christ  by  faith.

III.  The  bxplanatiok  of  this  belatiokship  of  Christ's  fulness  to  ouk  fulness.
"  Who  is  the  Head  of  all  principality  and  power."  He  is  more  than  Soveieisn  over  the
powers.  He  is  the  Source  of  their  life  and  activity.  This  headship  over  angels  is
asserted  elsewhere  (Hcb.  i.  1 — 14).  Anpels  are  not,  therefore,  media'ors  for  man,  dis-
placing "  the  one  Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  "  (1  Tim.  ii.  5).
They  are  but  fellow-servants  under  the  same  Head  (Ilev.  xxii.  8,  9).  Therefore  we  do
not  seek  our  fulness  in  them,  but  in  our  Head. — ^T.  C.

Ver.  11. — !I%e  true  circumcision.  The  Colossians  did  not  need  the  rite  of  circumcision
to  make  them  complete,  for  they  had  received  the  spiritual  circumcision,  of  which  the
rite  was  only  a  type.  "In  whom  ye  wore  also  circumcised  with  a  circumcision  not
made  with  hands,  in  the  putting  off  the  body  of  the  flesh,  in  the  circumcision  of
Christ."  The  apostle  censures  the  ritualistic  ideas  of  the  false  teachers  by  showing
what  is  the  nature  and  effect  of  the  true  circumcision.

I.  Its  nature.  It  is  not  external,  but  internal,  wrought  by  the  Spirit  and  not  by
the  hands  of  men.  It  is  "  of  the  heart  in  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the  letter  "  (Rom.  ii.  29).
It  is  "the  circumcision  of  the  heart,"  so  often  spuken  of  even  in  Old  Testament  times
(Deut.  X.  16 ;  xxx.  6  ;  Ezek.  xliv.  7  ;  Acts  vii.  51),  which  ought  to  have  accompanied
the  external  rite.  The  Colossians,  as  Gentiles,  were  circumcised  in  this  spiritual  seoaa
on  the  day  of  their  conversion.

II.  Its  extent.  "  In  the  putting  off  the  body  of  the  flesh ; "  not  in  the  mere  cutting
off  of  a  part  of  the  body,  as  in  the  external  rite  of  Judaism.    This  language  marks  the


eH.li.  1—23.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  113

completeness  of  the  spiritual  changd  and  Its  6ifeotS  upon  both  body  and  soul.  1.  The
lody  of  flesh  is  more  than  the  mere  6(;%,, which  is  not  "put  off,"  for  it  is  not  evil,  but
becomes  "  the  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  16;  vi.  19),  It  is  the  body  in
its  flesliliness,  regarded  as  the  seat  of  the  lusts  which  war  against  the  soul  and  bring
forth  fruit  unto  death.  The  expression  is  similar  to  "  the  old  man  which  is  corrupt "
(Eph.  iv.  22),  "tlie  body  of  sin"  (Rom.  vi.  6),  and  "  sinful  flesh,"  or,  literally,  "  the
flesh  of  sin  "  (Rom.  viii.  3).  The  spiritual  Circumcision  implies,  tiot  the  mere  putting
off  of  one  form  of  sin,  but  the  putting  off  the  whole  of  the  power  of  the  flash.  2.  The
putting  off  of  the  hody  of  flesh  itnpliet  deliverance  from  the  dominion  of  sin — dying  to
sin  as  a  controlhng  ami  regulating  power,  so  that  the  boiiy,  hitherto  "  the  instru-
ment of  unrighteousness,"  becomes  "  an  instrument  of  righteousness  unto  God "
(Rom.  vi.  13).

III.  Ws  Author.  " In  the  Giroumcision  of  Christ ;"  that  is,  the  ciroumcisioti  wrought
by  Chiisi  through  his  Spirit.  Its  Author  is  not  Moses  or  Abraham,  but  Christ  himself,
by  virtue  of  our  union  with  hito.  The  furnlation  of  Christ  in  the  soul  as  the  Author  of
a  new  Spiritual  life  is  "  the  circumcision  of  Christ)  "  it  is  the  new  birth,  which,  under
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  casts  off  the  power  of  corruption.  It  is  wrought  by  the
Lord  tlie  Spirit  (2  Cor.  iii.  18),  and  is  the  result  of  Christ  dwelling  in  us  by  faith  (Gal.
ii.  20;  Epli.  ii.  5^-8).  This  is  the  true  circumcision, "  Whose  praise  is  not  of  man,  but
of  God."— T.  0.

Ver.  12.— -The  import  of  Christian  baptism.  Circumcision  has  passed  away,  some-
thing has  come  in  its  place  in  Christian  times.  The  two  ordinances  of  circumcision  and
baptism  have  &  correlative  significance.  "  Having  been  buried  with  him  in  baptism,
wherein  ye  were  also  raised  with  him  through  faith  in  the  working  of  GoJ,  who  raised
him  from  the  dead."

I.  The  import  and  i)BslaN  of  bapMsm.  It  solemnly  attests  that  fellowship
with  Christ  iu  his  death  and  resurrection  on  which  all  personal  interest  in  the  blessiugs
of  his  Salvation  depends.  "  Baptism  is  the  grave  of  the  old  man  and  the  birth  of  the
new."  The  whole  process  of  sipiritual  renovation-^the  death  of  the  corruption  of  nature
and  the  rise  to  newness  of  life — is  practically  represented  and  sealed  in  baptism.  We
are  identified  with  Christ:  1.  In  his  death,  "Buried  with  him  in  baptism"  unto
deatli.  Our  baptism  unites  us  to  him,  so  that  we  died  with  him.  We  are  "  planted
in  the  likeness  of  death ; "  but  here  the  apostle  asserts  a  participation  iu  his  death.
2,  In  his  burial.  After  "  he  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the  Scriptures  "  (1  Cor,  xv.  3),
"  he  descended  into  the  lower  parts  of  the  earth  "  (Kph.  iv.  9).  So  "  we  are  buried  with
him,"  shut  off  from  the  kingdom  of  Batan,  as  the  dead  in  their  graves  are  shut  oft"  Irom
the  living  world ;  and  thus  we  have  with  hini  severed  our  connection  with  the  old  world
of  sin.  3.  In  his  resurrection.  For  "  we  rose  with  him,"  that  we  migiit  henceforth
"  wallc  in  newness  of  life."  We  must  share  in  his  death,  that  we  may  share  in  his  life.
Justification  is  in  order  to  SanctificatioU.  Union  with  Christ  in  the  one  carries  with  it
participation  in  the  other.

II.  The  instrument  through  Which  wb  Bnjot  the  blessings  signified  in
BAPTISM.  "  Through  faith  in  the  working  of  God,  who  raised  him  from  the  dead."
This  shows  how  the  outward  is  based  on  the  inward,  and  how  it  derives  from  it  what-
ever vitality  it  possesses.  Faith  appropriates  the  act  of  God's  mighty  power  in  Christ
when  he  raised  him  from  the  dead,  as  an  act  that  imparts  its  tiriue  to  all  who  in  faith
realize  it.  The  physical  power  in  raising  Christ  is  the  guarantee  and  assurance  of  the
spiritual  power  which  is  exerted  in  us  in  regeneration.  Faith  is  necessary  to  the  effect  of
baptism  as  it  is  to  salvation,  "  If  thou  bulievest  in  thy  heart  that  God  raised  him  from
the  dead,  thou  shalt  be  saved"  (Rom.  x.  9).  It  is  by  faith  we  obtain  the  benefits  of  tlie
spiritual  resurrection  and  come  to  "know  the  power  of  his  resurrection."  The  grace  is
received  through  faith.  In  New  Testament  times  faith  preceded  baptism — a  proof  that
baptism  is  not  regeneration.  The  earliest  cases  were  naturally  those  of  adult  baptism,
in  which  there  was  a  profession  of  faith  in  Christ.

III.  The  pledge  of  the  spiritual  resurbection.  "The  working  of  God,  who
raised  him  from  the  dead."  This  power  to  us  is  made  possible  and  actual  by  his
resurrection;  for  "in  that  he  liveth,  he  liveth  unto  God."  His  resurrection  involvis
both  our  bodily  and  our  spiritual  resurrection, — T.  C,

Q01.IJSSJAN8.  I


114  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSI ANS.  [ch.  n.  1— 23.

Vers.  13 — 15. — The  atonement  andits  blessed  results.  "And  you,  being  dead  through
your  iris|iasses  and  the  uiicirfumcisioii  of  your  flesh,  you,  I  say,  did  he  quicken
tos<f.ther  uitli  him,  having  fnrjjiven  us  all  our  trespasses."  These  words  add  no  new
thoughts  til  the  passage,  but  are  a  more  detailed  explanation  of  the  matters  involved  in
the  work  of  Christ  in  the  soul.

I.  Consider  the  personal  quickening  out  or  a  state  of  death  and  defilement.
1.  The  condition  of  all  men  hy  nature — spiritual  death.  This  death  is  viewed  in  two
aspects.  (1)  In  relation  to  definite  apts  of  transgression,  as  showing  the  power  of  sin  and
the  fruit  of  an  evil  nature.  (2)  In  relation  to  the  root  of  the  evil — "  the  uncircumcision
of  yuur  flesh ; "  your  unsanctified,  fleshly  nature  marked  by  alienation  from  God  (see
liumilttioal  hints  on  Bph.  ii.  1).  2.  Tht  quickening  energy  of  Ood.  "  You  did  he
quicken  together  with  him."  Spiritual  death  is  put  away  by  the  quickening  energy
of  God,  which  flowed  into  your  hearts  out  of  the  risen  life  of  Christ.  You  are
be  ought  up  with  him  objectively  in  his  resurrection,  subjectively  in  his  application  of
the  power  of  his  resurrection  (see  homiletical  hints  on  Eph.  ii.  1).

II.  Consider  the  gkound  and  condition  op  this  quickening.  The  pardon  of
sin.  "  Having  forgiven  us  all  our  trespasses."  Thus  spiritual  life  is  connected  with
pardon,  and  presupiioses  pardon.  The  sins  of  men  must  be  pardoned  belore  lil'e  could
properly  enter.  Our  Lord  could  not  have  been  quickened  till  we,  for  whom  he  died,
were  potentially  discharged  (Eom.  iv.  25).  So,  indeed,  the  quickening  presupposes  at
once  [.anion,  the  blotting  out  of  the  handwriting,  and  the  victory  over  Satan.

III.  Coksideb  the  indispensable  accompaniment  of  this  pardon.  The  removal  ol
the  condemning  power  of  the  Law.  "  Having  blotted  out  the  handwriting  in  ordinances
that  was  against  us,  which  was  contrary  to  us,  and  took  it  out  of  the  way,  nailing  it  to
his  cross."  1.  The  nature  and  effects  of  this  handwriting  in  ordinances.  (1)  It  is
not  the  mere  ceremonial  law,  though  its  ritual  observalices  were  symbols  of  deserved
punishment  or  an  acknowledgment  of  guilt.  We  cannot  limit  it  to  this  law,  though
the  outward  observances  of  ver.  20  were  specially  in  view ;  for  the  apostle  is  not  here
distinguishing  between  Jews  and  Gentiles.  (2)  It  is  the  whole  Law,  moral  and
ceremonial — "  the  Law  of  commandments  contained  in  ordinances  " — which  fastens  upon
us  the  charge  of  guilt,  and  is  the  great  barrier  against  forgiveness.  It  was  immediately
against  the  Jews,  mediately  against  the  Gentiles.  It  is  the  Law,  in  the  full  compass  ol'
its  requirements.  (3),  The  hostility  of  this  Law  to  us.  It  was  "against  us;  it  was
contrary  to  us."  (o)  Not  that  the  Law  was  in  itself  offensive,  for  it  was  "  holy  and  just
and  good  "  (Rom.  vii.  12) ;  but  (V)  because  our  inability  to  fuUil  it  or  satisfy  its  righteous
demands  exposed  us  to  the  penalty  attached  to  an  undischarged  obligation.  It  was,  in
a  word,  a  bill  of  indictment  against  us.  2.  The  blotting  out  of  the  handwriting  It
was  blotted  out,  so  far  as  it  was  an  accusing  witness  against  us,  by  Christ  wiping  it
out,  taking  it  "out  of  the  way,  and  nailing  it  to  his  cross."  It  was  nut  done  by  an
arbitrary  abolition  of  the  Law ;  moral  obligations  cannot  be  removed  in  this  manner ;
but  by  the  just  satisfaction  which  Christ  rendered  by  his  "  obedience  unto  death."  It
was  nailed  to  his  cross,  and  thus  its  condemnatory  power  was  brou^^ht  to  an  end.
Strictly  speaking,  there  was  nothing  but  Christ's  body  nailed  to  the  cross ;  but,  as  he
was  made  sin,  taking  the  very  place  of  sin,  "bearing  our  sins  in  his  own  bo.iy  on  the
tree,"  the  handwritinjr,  with  the  curse  involved  in  it,  was  identified  with  him,  and
thus  God  condemned  sin  in  Christ's  flesh  (Rom.  viii.  3).  Christ  exchanged  places  with
us,  and  thus  was  cancelled  the  bill  of  indictment  which  involved  us  in  guilt  and
eondenination.

IV.  Consider  the  relation  of  thb  atonement  to  ths  Victory  over  Satan.
"  Having  put  off  from  himself  the  jirincipalities  and  the  powers,  he  made  a  show  of
them  openly,  triumphing  over  them  in  it."  It  was  the  cross  that  gave  the  victory
over  the  principalities  and  powers  of  darkness,  because  sin  was  the  ground  of  their
dominion  over  man  and  the  secret  of  their  strength.  But  no  sooner  had  Christ  died  and
extinguished  the  guilt  lying  on  us,  than  the  ground  of  their  successful  agobcy  waa
undermined,  and,  instead  of  being  at  liberty  to  ravage  and  destroy,  their  weapon*
of  warfare  peri.shed.  Christ  on  the  cross,  as  the  word  signifies,  reft  from  him  and
from  his  people  -those  powers  of  darkness  who  could  afllict  humanity  by  pressing  home
the  consequences  of  their  sin.  He  cast  them  off  like  baffled  foes  (John  xii.  81),
QlAde  such  a  8how  of  them  openly  as  4nge}s,  if  uot  men,  could  probably  apprehend.


CH.  II.  1—23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN3.  115

He  made  the  cross  a  scene  of  triumph .  to  the  irretrievable  niin  of  Satan's  kingdom.
— T.  C.

Vers.  16, 17. — Condemnation  of  ritualistic  observances  and  ascetic  severities.  The
apostle  draws  a  practical  inference  from  the  view  he  had  just  given  of  the  work  of
Christ.  "  Let  no  man  therefore  judge  you  in  meat,  or  in  drink,  or  in  respect  of  a  feast
day,  or  of  a  new  moon,  or  of  a  sabbath  day  :  which  things  are  a  shadow  of  the  things  to
come ;  but  the  body  is  Christ's."

I.  The  pbohibition.  It  is  twofold,  respecting  first  the  distinction  of  meats  and
drinks,  and  then  the  observance  of  times.  1.  2'Ae  distinction  of  meats  and  drinks.
(1)  This  distinction  was  made  in  the  Mosaic  Law  as  to  things  clean  and  unclean.
There  was  no  prohibition  as  to  drinks,  except  in  regard  to  Nazarites  and  priests
during  their  ministration  (Lev.  x.  9  ;  Numb.  vi.  3).  It  is  probable  that  the  Colossian
errorists,  like  the  Essenes,  forbade  wine  and  animal  food  altogether;  for  they  imposed
a  rigorous  asceticism  upon  their  disciples.  (2)  The  distinction  is  abolished  hy  th*
gospel,  (a)  Our  Lord  hinted  at  the  approaching  abolition  (Mark  vii.  14,  19).  (i)
There  was  a  formal  annulment  of  the  distinction  in  Peter's  vision  (Acts  x.  11,  etc.),  where
the  distinction  between  those  within  and  those  without  the  covenant  was  ^being  done
away,  (c)  The  abolition  is  implied  in  Heb.  ii.  10,  where  the  rule  as  "  to  meats  and*
drinks  "  is  said  to  have  been  "  imposed  until  the  time  of  reformation."  (d)  It  is  also
implied  in  the  action  of  the  Council  of  Jerusalem,  and  in  the  language  of  Peter  respect-
ing "  the  yoke  which  neither  we  nor  our  fathers  were  able  to  bear  "  (Acts  xv.  10).
(3)  The  attitude  of  Christians  towards  this  distinction.  "  Let  no  man  .  .  .  judge  you  in
respect  of  "  them,  (a)  Christians  are  not  justified  now  in  making  such  a  distinction  or
in  imposing  it  upon  others.  Thus  the  Roman  Catholics  are  condemned  for  their  dis-
tinction of  meats  :  "Commanding  to  abstain  from  meats,  which  God  hath  created  to  be
received  with  thanksgiving  "  (1  Tim.  iv.  3).  It  is  not  "  that  which  goeth  into  the
mouth  that  defileth  the  man  "  (Matt.  xv.  2,  11).  (6)  Christians  in  apostolic  times  had
a  liberty  in  these  matters  which  they  were  to  exercise  for  edification,  (a)  It  was  allow-
able for  a  believer  neither  "  to  eat  fiesh  "  nor  to  drink  wine  "  so  long  as  the  world
standeth  "  (1  Cor.  viii.  13).  (0)  It  was  allowable  in  the  transition  state  of  the  Church,
while  it  consisted  of  two  diverse  elements — Jews  and  Gentiles — foi'  liberty  to  be
exercised  in  these  matters,  with  a  due  regard  to  the  rights  of  conscience  (Rom.  xiv.  2).
(c)  But  we  in  our  different  circumstances  must  resist  any  attempt  to  impose  upon  us  a
distinction  of  meats.  "  Let  no  man  . . .  judge  you  in  meat,  or  in  drink."  It  is  not  in
man's  power  to  make  that  a  sin  which  God  has  not  forbidden.  "  It  is  a  very  small  thing
that  I  should  be  judged  of  you  or  of  man's  judgment "  (1  Cor.  iv.  3).  "  Why  dost  thou
judge  thy  brother  ? "  (Rom.  xiv.  3, 10).  Besides,  we  must  remember  the  spiritual
nature  of  Christianity :  "  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  eating  and  drinking,  but  righteous-
ness, peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost"  (Rom.  xiv.  17).  We  must  "stand  fast  in  the
liberty  wherewith  Christ  hath  made  his  people  free  "  (Gal.  v.  1).  2.  The  olservance
of  times  and  seasons.  "  Or  in  respect  of  a  feast  day,  or  of  a  new  moon,  or  of  a  sabbath
day."  The  apostle  said  to  the  Galatians,  "  Ye  observe  days,  and  months,  and  times,
and  years"  (Gal.  iv.  10).  (1)  There  was  a  provisional  and  temporary  discretion
allowed  likewise  in  the  matter  of  days.  "One  man  estcemeth  one  day  above  another:
another  esteemeth  every  day  alike.  Let  every  man  be  fully  persuaded  in  his  own  mind  "
(Rom.  xiv.  5,  6).  The  apostle  leaves  the  matter  of  days  an  open  question.  (2)  Yet
no  man  was  to  be  taken  to  task  for  refusing  to  observe  them.  The  times  were  entirely
Jewi  sh.  (o)  The  "  feast  day  "  referred  to  the  annual  festivals,  like  Pentecost  and  Passover.
(6)  The  "  new  moon  "  referred  to  the  monthly  festival,  (c)  The  "  sabbath  day"  referred
to  the  Jewish  sabbath,  which  was  always  observed  on  the  Saturday.  "  But  does  the
apostle  not  seem  to  strike  at  the  obligation  of  maintaining  the  obseTvance  of  one  day
in  seven  for  the  worship  of  God,  and  sunder  the  connection  that  exists  between  the
Jewish  sabbath  and  the  Christian  Sunday  ?  "  We  answer  that :  (o)  The  observance  of
the  Lord's  day  never  came  into  question  in  apostolic  times.  It  was  universally  observed
from  the  beginning  both  by  Jews  and  Gentiles.  It  cannot,  therefore,  be  affected  by
anything  said  as  to  "  days  "  in  Rom.  xiv.  1—6  or  in  this  passage.  (/8)  The  devotion  o(
a  seventh  part  of  our  time  to  God  rests  on  considerations  as  old  as  creation,  for  the
sabbath  was  made  for  man  even  before  4n  enterc4  th?  wor}d.    (y)  The  st^bbath  of  the


T!8  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  00L0SSIAN8.  [ch.  n.  1— 2a

Jews  was  typical,  and  therefore  was  abolished  in  Christ,  and  therefore,  as  well  as  for
other  reasons,  the  Lord'?  day,  which  took  its  place  from  the  bejjinniag  of  the  gosiiel
dispensation,  was  changed  from  the  last  to  the  first  day  of  the  week.  The  sabbath  day
was  so  long  and  so  deeply  associated  with  the  stated  feasts,  the  sabbatical  year,  and  the
jubilee  year  of  Judaism,  ttiat  it  partook  of  their  typical  character,  and  thus  passed
away  with  the  other  institutions  of  Judaism.  But  this  was  not  the  original  aspect  of
the  sabbath,  which  had  nothing  in  it  typical  of  redemption,  for  it  began  while  there
was  no  sin  and  no  need  of  salvation.  Thus,  just  as  baptism  is  the  Lord's  circumcisioa
according  to  ver.  11,  the  Lord's  day  is  the  sabbath  of  Christian  times.

II.  The  kbason  for  thb  pbohibition.  "  Which  things  are  a  shadow  of  the  things  to
come ;  but  the  body  is  Christ's."  They  were  useful  as  shadows  before  the  Substance
came,  but  after  it  they  were  useless.  1.  The  shadow.  The  word  implies :  (1)  Tlie
dimness,  the  unsubstantiality  of  these  Jewish  ordinances  or  institutions.  The  light  they
projected  forward  into  Christian  times  was  obscure.  (2)  Their  temporary  nature.
The  sliadow  disappears  when  the  substance  is  come.  2,  The  substance.  "  The  h(;dy  is
Christ's ;"  that  is,  belongs  to  Christ.  The  reality  is  verified  in  Christ  and  the  benefits
of  the  new  dispensation.  The  blessings  they  prefigured  are  to  be  realized  by  union
with  Christ.— T.  0.

Vers.  18,  19. — A  warning  against  angel-worship.  The  apostle  now  notices  the
theological  error  of  the  false  teachers,  which  was  the  interposition  of  angelic  me(iiators
between  God  and  man.  "  Let  no  man  rob  you  of  your  piize  by  a  voluntary  humility
and  worshipping  of  angels,  dwelling  in  the  things  he  hath  seen,  vainly  puffed  up  by  his
fleshly  mind."

I.  Akqel-wobship  is  olbarlt  cokdemnbd.  1.  The  angel  whom  John  would  have
worshipped)  said,  "  See  thou  do  it  not,  for  I  am  thy  fellow-servant .  .  .  worship  God  "
(Rev.  xxii.  9).  2.  Ood  will  not  share  his  rights  with  another.  "I  the  Lord  thy  God
am  a  jealous  God."  'J"he  first  commandment  forbids  all  other  worship.  3.  ITiere  is
hut  one  mediator  between  Qod  and  men,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  (1  Tim.  ii.  5,  6).  Papists
say  that  the,  apostle  merely  condemns  such  worship  of  angels  as  excludes  Christ,  but
the  condemnation  is  most  absolute  and  simple.  Besides,  Christ  is  declared  to  be  the
one  single  and  only  way  to  the  Father,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  angelic  mediators,  "  No
man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  by  me ; "  "  If  ye  shall  ask  anything  in  my  Name,
I  will  do  it "  (John  xiv.  6, 14).  "  We  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices,  acceptable  to  God,
by  Jesus  Christ"  (1  Pet.  ii.  5).  4.  The  worship  of  angels  implies  an  omniscience  on
their  part  which  belongs  only  to  Ood.  God  only  knows  the  hearts  of  men  (2  Ohron.
vi.  30).  6.  Our  Lord's  superiority  to  all  angels,  as  asserted  in  Heb.  i.  and  ii.,  implies  the
same  coiidemnatioti ;  for  they  are  merely  "ministeiing  spirits,  sent  to  minister  to  the
heirs  of  salvation."

II.  The  motive  oe  this  aNgel- worship.  '*  A  voluntary  humility."  The  idea  of  the
false  teachers,  like  that  of  modern  Papists,  was  that  God  was  so  high  and  inaccessible
thut  he  could  only  be  approached  through  the  mediation  of  inferior  beings.  It  was
remembered  that  the  Law  was  given  "  by  the  ministration  of  angels  "  (Acts  vii.  53),
and  that  angels  exercised  a  certain  tutelary  guardianship  (Dan.  x.  10—21),  But  it
was,  after  all,  a  mere  parade  of  humility  to  approach  God  through  the  mediation  of  such
inferior  creatures.  It  implied,  besides,  a  serious  misrepresentation  of  the  fitness  of  the
one  Mediator,  of  whom  it  was  said,  "  It  behoved  him  to  be  made  like  to  his  brethren,
that  he  might  be  a  merciful  and  faithful  High  Priest  in  things  pertaining  to  God  "
(Heb.  ii.  17).  He  surely  can  sympathize  with  us  even  more  closely  than  angels,  for
he  shared  our  human  nature.  It  was,  therefore,  a  false  and  perverted  humiltty  that
sought  the  intercession  of  angels.

III.  The  spirit  that  shaped  this  doctrine  of  angel-wokship,  "  Dwelling  in  iha
things  he  hath  seen,  vainly  puffed  up  by  his  fleshly  mind."  1.  The  false  teachers
claimed  to  have  visions  of  the  heavenly  World  and  a  knowledge  of  angels  which  they
could  not  posiibly  possess.  They  claimed  to  know  the  secrets  of  a  region  which  they
had  never  seen.  2.  2'hey  were  filled  with  great  self-conceit,  notwithstanding  their
parade  of  excessive  humility.  "Vainly  puff>d  np  by  his  fleshly  mind."  The  Gnostic
tendency  was  always  associated  witn  an  assumption  of  superior  knowledge,  but  it  was
AB  utterly  groundless  assumption.    It  was  "  i)t  vain."     It  was  without  reason  or


CM.ii.  1— 23.]  THR  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANS.  117

ground.  God  would  resist  it  (Jas.  iv.  7) ;  men  would  not  regard  it  (Prov.  xi.  2)  ;  and
they  themaulves  would  inherit  nothing  by  it  but  folly  (Prov.  x'lv.  8;  1  Tim.  vi.  4).
liven  where  real  visions  are  vouchsafed,  there  is  a  temptation  to  self-elation,  as  in  the
case  of  the  Apostle  Paul  (2  Cor.  xii.  7).  But,  in  the  case  of  false  visions,  the  tendency
would  be  still  more  manifest.  The  mind  would  be  "  the  miad  of  the  flesh,"  as  it  is
literally;  not  "the  mind  of  the  Spirit."  It  was  "the  carnal  mind  that  is  enmity
with  God."  Let  us  rather  seeji  to  become  "  fools  that  we  may  be  wise ''  (1  Cor.  iii.
18),  and  not  be  "  puffed  up  one  against  another.''  It  Is  knowledge  that  puflfeth  up
(1  Cor.  viii.  1) ;  it  is  only  love  that  edifieth.

IV.  The  NBGtATiVE  SOURCE  OF  THE  HERESY  OF  angeLtWORSHIP,  ♦'  Not  holding  the
Head  from  whom  the  whole  body,  being  supplied  and  knit  together  through  the  joints
and  bands,  increaseth  with  the  increase  of  God."  The  Colossiaii  errorists  invented
angel-worship  because  they  did  not  see  in  Christ  the  true  and  only  Mediator  who  was
to  bridge  the  chasm  between  God  and  men.  They  put  inferior  beings  in  the  place  of
him  who  is  the  only  Source  of  spiritual  life.  They  did  not  "hold  the  heailship  "
doctrinally ;  they  had  no  individual  or  vital  adherence  to  the  Head  as  the  Source  of  Ufa ,
to  them.  1.  Jesus  Christ,  as  the  Head,  is  the  trvs  Source  of  spiritual  life  and  energy.
He  who  is  "at  once  the  lowest  and  the  highest,"  who  is  "the  Word  made  flesli,"
"  raises  up  man  to  God,  anil  brings  God  down  to  man."  The  fulness  of  the  Godhead
resides  in  hira  bodily,  and  out  of  that  fulness  he  communicates  freely  to  us.  2.  The
relation  of  the  hody  to  the  Etad.  "  From  whom  the  whole  body,  being  supplied  and  knit
together  through  the  joints  and  bands."  (1)  The  care  of  Christ  extends  to  every  member
of  the  body.  We  mii.st  likewise  learn  to  extend  our  love  to  all  the  saints.  (2)  There
is  a  double  effect  produced  by  the  relation  of  Head  and  members,  (a)  The  supply  of
nutriment.  Christ  is  the  sule  Source  of  supply  to  our  souls — "  through  the  joints."
God  calls  us  "to  this  fellowship  with  his. Son"  (1  John  i.  7).  (a)  We  can  have  no
spiritual  nutriment  from  Christ  tiU  we  have  believed  in  him.  (;8)  The  joints  through
which  our  supply  of  grace  comes  cannot  be  broken.  "  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the
love  of  Christ '?  "  (Rom.  viii.  39).  (y)  It  is  through  these  joints  we  receive  Christ's
"unsearchable  riches"  (Bph.  iii.  9);  "all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places"
(Eph.  i.  3);  so  that  we  come  behind  in  no  spiritual  gift,  (b)  The  compacting  of  the
frame  into  a  perfect  unity — "  knit  together  by  bands."  Clirist  is  the  Source  of  the
Church's  unit}'.  "  He  hath  made  both  one  "  (Eph*.  ii.  14).  There  is  a  unity  of  faith,
a  unity  of  spiritual  life,  a  unity  of  ordinance,  a  unity  of  love,  a  unity  of  final  destiny,  in
the  Church,  by  virtue  of  her  connection  with  her  Head.  3.  The  end  of  this  relation.
"Increaseth  with  the  increase  of  God  ;  "  that  is,  with  the  increase  which  he  supplies.
(I)  The  body  grows  extensively,  by  the  addition  of  new  members ;  it  grows  intensively
in  grace,  knowledge,  and  the  practice  of  all  holy  duties.  (2)  The  First  Cause  of  all  this
growth  is  God.  Paul  may  plant,  and  Apollos  water,  but  "it  is  God  who  gave  the
increase "  (1  Cor.  iii.  6).  Thus  through  Christ,  God  and  man  are  linked  together ;
the  finite  and  the  Infinite  are  reconciled ;  the  great  problem  of  speculation  has  been  «t
last  practically  solved.

V.  The  danoer  of  anqbl-woeship.  "  Let  no  man  rob  you  of  your  prize.''  The
apostle  implies  that  the  prize  of  eternal  life — "  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in
Christ  Jesus"— would  be  lost  by  turning  aside  from  the  Head  to  angelic  mediators.
We  must  not  "  lose  what  we  have  wrought  "  in  this  way  (2  John  10).  "  Let  no  man
take  thy  crown"  (Rev.  iii.  11).  Let  us,  therefore,  avoid  "profane  babblings  and
oppositions  of  scipnoe  falsely  so  called  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  20),  and  hold  fast  "  the  faith  onc«
delivered  to  the  saints  "  (Jude  4). — T.  0.

Vers.  20 — 23. — A  warning  against  asceticism.  The  apostle  now  proceeds  to  deduce
the  practical  consequences  of  oiir  fellowship  in  the  death  of  Christ.  "If  ye  died  with
Christ  from  the  rudiments  of  the  world,  why,  as  though  living  in  the  world,  do  ye
subject  yourselves  to  ordinances,  Handle  not,  nor  taste,  nor  touch  (all  which  things  are
to  perish  with  the  using)  after  the  precepts  and  doctrines  of  men  ?  "

I.  Mark  the  practical  conbeqdences  of  our  sharino  in  the  death  of  Christ.
1.  FellQMsh'p  in  Chrisfs  death.  "We  are  buried  with  him  by  baptism  unto  death"
(Boni.  vi.  3 — 9).  We  are  united  with  Christ  in  hia  death.  Community  in  death
iRvolvea  coramunit;  in  life,  and  Xkm  our  death  with  Christ  iuTOlrei  aoi  only  (1)


tld  tHte  EtlStLE  to  TfiE  C0L0SS1AN8.         [oa.  It.  l~2a

death  to  sin  (Rora  d.  2),  (2)  death  to  self  (2  Cor,  v.  14,  15) ;  but  (3)  dnath  to  th«
Law  (Rom.  vii.  6 ;  Gal.  ii.  14),  (4)  death  to  the  world  (Gal.  vi.  14),  and  (5)  death
"from  the  rudiments  of  the  world"  (ch.  ii.  20).  2.  The  inconsistency  of  this  fellow-
ship with  a  mere  ritualistic  religion.  (1)  Such  a  religion  is  rudimentary,  disciplinary,
designed  for  the  infancy  of  the  Church,  not  for  its  period  of  adult  experience  and
privilege.  Christ  by  his  death  wiped  out  these  rudiments  which  have  their  sphere  in
the  visible  life  of  the  world.  They  are  but  "  weak  and  beggarly  elements,"  from  which
we  are  for  ever  separated  by  the  death  of  Christ.  In  him  all  things  have  become  new.
Christians  cannot,  therefore,  live  in  that  which  Christ  died  to  take  av/ay.  Besides,
Christians  are  living  no  longer  in  the  world.  "  They  are  not  of  the  world  ; "  yet,  il
they  submitted  to  its  ordinances,  they  were  "as  though  living  in  the  world."  They
had  been  called  out  of  the  world  to  be  of  another  body,  of  which  Christ  is  the  Heai
Therefore  they  were  not  to  be  conformed  to  the  fashion  of  the  world  (Eom.  xii.  2).

(2)  A  ritualistic  religion  is  usually  negative  rather  than  positive  in  its  chaiaoter,  being
strong  in  the  element  of  prohibition  :  "  Handle  not,  nor  taste,  nor  touch."  The
apostle  repeats  the  prohibitions  of  the  false  teachers  in  their  own  words.  They,
believing  that  matter  was  essentially  evil,  resolved  upon  reducing  our  contact  with  it
in  its  most  familiar  forms  to  a  minimum.  The  prohibitions  here  referred  to  go  far
beyond  the  Levitical  enactments,  which  had  no  ascetic  tendency.  The  Essenes,  who
were  forerunners  of  the  Colossian  errorists,  shunned  oil,  wine,  flesh,  meat,  and  contact
with  a  stianger.  Mark  how  rigorous  and  precise  these  errorists  were  in  their  outward
observances.  They  were  like  the  Pliarisees  of  old,  who  cared  not  for  the  weightier
matters  of  the  Law,  but  tithed  mint  and  anise  and  cummin.  They  attributed  an  intrinsic
value  to  things  that  were  fleeting :  "  All  which  things  perish  in  the  using  ; "  leaving  no
spiritual  result :  "  For  meat  commendelh  us  not  to  God ;  for  neither  if  we  eat  are  we
the  better  ;  neither  if  we  eat  not,  are  we  the  worse  "  (1  Cor.  viii.  8).  Our  Lord  himself
said  it  was  not  that  which  "  eutereth  the  mouth  which  defileth  a  man  "  (Matt  xv.  16, 17).

(3)  A  ritualistic  religion  is  always  marked  by  "  the  precepts  and  doctrines  of  men."
Many  of  the  Jewi.sh  ordinances  were  lianded  down  by  tradition  and  had  no  wari'ant  in
the  written  Word  of  God.  Therefore  our  Lord  said,  "  They  teach  for  doctrines  the
commandments  of  men  "  (Matt.  xv.  9).

IL  The  pbbtentious  worthlessness  or  this  ascetic  eitualism.  "  Which  things,
indeed,  have  a  show  of  wisdom  in  will-worship,  and  humility,  and  severity  to  the  body,
but  are  not  of  any  value  against  the  indulgence  of  the  flesh."  1.  Its  reputation  for
wisdom.  It  had  a  show  of  wisdom  without  the  reality,  for  it  affected  an  air  of  extreme
piety,  of  profound  regard  for  God,  and  of  deep  knowledge  in  Divine  things.  All  its
ritualistic  observances  would  be  recommended  by  the  plea  that  they  tended  to  promote
piety.  The  repute  of  wisdom  was  manifested  in  three  things.  (1)  Will-worship,  or
service  beyond  what  God  requires — in  a  word,  superstition.  This  is  the  origin  of
penances  and  pilgrimages  and  festivals  in  Eomanism.  They  are  supposed  to  promote
piety,  but  they  have  "a  mere  show  of  wisdom."  They  charge  God  with  folly,  as  if  he
did  not  know  what  was  most  conducive  to  piety,  and  they  involve  a  tacit  claim  to
amend  God's  ordinances.  Bnt  God  loves  obedience  better  than  sacrifice  (1  Sam.  xv.  22),
and  may  well  ask  such  ritualists,  "  Who  hath  required  this  at  your  hands  ?  "  (Isa.
i.  12).  Will-worship  has  been  the  great  corrupter  of  pure^  religion.  (2)  Humility.
It  is  a  studied  and  affected  humility,  not  resting  on  a  basis  of  faith  and  love,  but  con-
sciously cultivated,  and  therefore  not  inconsistent  with  spiritual  pride.  "  Pride  may
be  pampered  while  the  flesh  grows  lean."  (3)  Severity  to  the  body,  (a)  There  seems
a  show  of  wisdom  in  this  habit,  because  an  apostle  found  it  wise  "  to  keep  his  body
under  "  (1  Cor.  ix.  27),  and  the  Colossian  ascetics  might  have  pleaded  that  they  could
thug  enhance  their  spiritual  insight.  (6)  But  such  severity  to  the  body  is  expressly
condemned.  («)  Keligion  belongs  to  the  body  as  well  as  the  soul.  The  body,  "  so
fearfully  and  wonderfully  made,"  becomes  "  a  temple  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  (1  Cor.  vi.  19).
Its  members  are  to  be  "  yielded  as  instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God  "  (Rora.
vi.  13).  We  are  to  offer  our  bodies  as  "  living  sacrifices,"  not  dead  or  mutilated  or
maimed  sacrifices.  There  is,  therefore,  nothing  religious  in  whipping  the  body,  like
the  Flagellants,  or  in  denying  it  necessary  food,  or  in  arraying  it  in  dirty  or  ragged
clothing.  "  The  sacrifice  of  God  is  a  broken  spirit,"  not  a  macerated  body.  We  must
keep  up  oiir  bodily  vigour  for  the  discbarge  p(  the  duties  of  life,  v^  that  the  body  may


OB.  n.  1—23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  119

serve  the  Sinrit.  ((8)  There  may  he  a  corrupt  lieart  under  an  •  ascetic  hatit  of  body.
Spiritual  pride  may  dwell  there  in  power.  2.  Its  failure  to  accomplish  its  chief  end,
"  But  are  not  of  any  value  against  the  indulgence  of  the  flesh.  (1)  This  ascetio
rigour  is  designed  as  a  check  upon  sensual  indulgence.  There  seems  "a  show  of
wisdom"  in  such  a  method.  (2)  But  it  is  no  check  to  such  self-indulgence,  as  the
history  of  asceticism  proves.  The  monastic  life,  while  it  seemed  hostile  to  self-indulgence,
made  way,  as  by  a  »rt  of  back  door,  to  all  sorts  of  sensual  extravagance. — T.  C.

Vers.  1 — 7. — The  Trinity  as  the  source  of  Christian  love  and  consolation.  It  would
appear  that  Paul  had  not  only  the  interests  of  the  Colossians  and  Laodiceani  nt  heart,
but  also  as  many  as  had  not  seen  his  face  in  the  flesh.  He  did  not  act  on  the  worldly
principle,  "  Out  of  sight,  out  of  mind ; "  but  on  the  gospel  principle,  "  Though  out  of
sight,  though  never  yet  seen,  yet  kept  in  mind."    We  are  thus  brought  at  once  to —

I.  Paul's  cosmopolitan  spirit.  (Vor.  1.)  The  selfish  soul  leaves  out  of  considera-
tion all  but  his  own  little  circle ;  the  Christian  leaves  out  of  consideration  none  but  his
own  little  circle.  The  gospel  made  a  cosmopolitan  of  Paul  the  Pharisee.  He  who  had
been  of  the  straitest  sect  becomes  the  man  of  broadest  spirit.  Besides,  the  problem
of  the  world  produced  a  "conflict"  within  him.  He  was  in  an  agony  of  earnestness
for  unseen,  uncounted  millions.  His  great  soul  throbbed  at  Rome  in  sympathy  for  all
who  were  under  Caisar's  sceptre.  As  the  "  apostle  of  the  Gentiles  "  he  magnified  his
office  by  making  all  mankind  his  spiritual  care.

II.  Hia    DBSIEE    WAS  THAT   THBO0GH   ChRIST   THBT    MIGHT  AtL    rNDERSTAND    THE

MYSTERY  OF  THE  Tbiunb  God.  (Ver.  2.)  For  the  gospel  does  not  commit  the  care  of
the  universe  to  a  "  lonely  God,"  but  to  a  Triune  Jehovah,  who,  as  Father,  Son,  and  Holy
Ghost,  has  the  elements  of  social  happiness  within  himsilf.  A  social  Trinity  presides
over  the  universe.  Now,  so  practical  a  truth  is  this  of  the  Trinity  that,  as  Paul  here
puts  it,  the  consolation  of  the  heart  and  Christian  unity  depend  upon  it.  It  is  some-
times insinuated  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Trinity  is  a  profitless  and  unpractical  specula-
tion. Any  one  who  thinks  so  would  do  well  to  read  such  an  essay  as  Mr.  Hutton's  on
'The  Incarnation  and  Principles  of  Evidence.*  It  will  be  seen  from  such  a  line  of
thought  that  there  are  deep  longings  of  our  nature  which  only  an  iiicarnation,  and  by
consequence  only  a  Trinity,  can  supply.  But  even  apart  from  such  subtle  disquisition
we  may  see  in  the  sociality  of  the  Trinity  as  distinguished  from  the  awful  loneliness  of
the  Socinian  hypothesis  an  element  of  consolation  and  of  union.  If  God  be  a  lonely
being,  and  Martineau  is  driven  to  the  term  "  lonely  God ; "  if  he  is  satisfied  in  his
loneliness, — then  there  gathers  round  him  that  repellent  element  which  we  associate
with  the  unsocial  among  men.  1  am  not  encouraged  to  come  to  this  lonely  and  infinite
One.  He  can  do  without  me,  and  it  repels  me  to  think  he  can.  But  when  I  learn  that
God  is  not  a  lonely  One,  but  has  been,  so  to  speak,  a  "  family  Being"  from  all  eternity,
rejoicing  as  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost  in  the  satisfaction  of  his  social  qualities,  then
I  am  encouraged  to  come  to  him  and  to  satisfy  in  him  the  longings  of  my  heart.  It
will  be  found,^then,  that  consolation  is  promoted  by  the  realized  truth  of  the  Trinity  in
a  way  that  cannot  be  secured  by  rival  hypotheses.  No  unitarian  abstraction  can  do  for
men  what  the  social  Trinity  can.  It  will  be  found  also  that  unity  among  Christians  is
promoted  by  tliis  mighty  truth.  God  as  our  Father  gathers  around  him  through  the
mediation  of  his  Son  Christ  Jesus,  and  through  the  gift  qi  his  Spirit,  the  scattered
members  of  the  human  family,  and  they  feel  united  in  a  sense  of  sonship  and  sociality.
A  social  Trinity  secures  a  united  society.  Hence  we  find  such  a  great  thinker  as  Jo'.n
Howe  preaching  from  ver.  2,  a  fine  discourse  for  "  union  among  Protestants."  Now,
it  is  when  Christ  is  preached  in  all  his  fulness  that  "the  treasury  of  wisdom  and  know-
ledge" to  be  found  in  him  is  opened  up  and  the  mystery  of  the  Triune  God  becomes
plain.  It  is  in  this  full  preaching  of  Christ  that  the  present  and  eternal  interests  of  the
human  race  lie.

III.  HK  bees  that  THIS  PRBACHIHO  WILL  ALSO  SECURE  A   PROPER  CHRISTIAN  WALK.

(Vers.  4 — 7.)  He  tells  the  Colossians  that  he  is  with  them  in  spirit,  taking  notice  of
.their  order  and  conversation.  He  calls  upon  them,  therefore,  to  walk  in  Christ  Jesus  the
Lord  as  they  have  received  liim.  This  lirings  before  us  the  fact  that  Jesus  Clirist,  when
received  by  iaiib,  becomes  the  tenant  of  the  human  heart.  He  becomes  the  recoi;nized
Lord  of  the  conscience,  and  to  his  sorereigntjr  all  things  are  submitted.    The  moralii;


I2d  tHE  EftSTLB  TO  tfiE  COLOSSlANS.         {m.ts.1—^

secured  by  the  gospel  is  therefore  the  simple  morality  of  pleasing  the  indwelling  Christ.
We  may  "here  follow  the  sainted  Henry  Martyn,  who  thus  describes  wliat  the  Christian
walk  is.  It  is  (1)  to  continue  to  apply  his  blood  for  the  cleansing  of  our  eonsciencea
from  guilt;  (2)  to  live  in  dependence  on  his  grace;  (3)  to  follow  his  example;  and
(4)  to  walk  in  fellowship  with  him.  And  this  morality  will  be  pervaded  constantly
by  the  grateful  spirit.  In  truth,  gratitude  is  the  spirit  and  morality  is  the  form
assumed  by  the  gospel  as  it  lays  hold  of  the  minds  of  men.  God  having  in  his  gospel
done  so  much  for  us,  we  feel  that  we  ought  to  do  all  we  can  for  him.  We  conse-
quently walk  before  him  in  love  aud  strive  gratefully  to  do  the  things  which  please
him.— E.  M.  E.

Vers.  8 — 15. — Christ  our  All.  Having  laid  down  the  truth  about  the  Trinity  as  the
great  want  of  the  race,  Paul  proceeds  to  warn  the  Colossians  against  the  so-called
philosophers.  "  There  are  certain  men,"  it  has  been  well  observed,  "  who,  because  thay
possess  somewhat  more  learning  than  others,  think,  when  they  become  converts  to
the  gospel,  that  they  are  great  acquisitions  to  the  cause;  they" officiously  extend  the
shield  of  their  learning  over  their  more  unlearned  brethren,  and  try  to  prove  where
others  Jfelieve;  but,  while  they  think  they  promote  the  cause,  they  generally  spoil
what  they  touch."  Against  such  philosophers  God's  people  in  all  ages  require  to  be
warned.

I.  The  philosophy  is  to  be  suspected  which  leads  men  away  from  Christ.
(Ver.  8.)  Paul  warns  the  Colossians  against  a  philosophy  which  led  njen  back  to
rudimentary  forms  and  ceremonies  instead  of  forward  to  Christ.  Now,  every  argument
which  leads  to  a  ceremony  for  hope  instead  of  to  Christ  has  some  flaw  in  it.  It  may
be  a  subtle  flaw,  not  easily  detected,  but  we  may  be  quite  sure  it  is  th^  re.  There  is  no
bettt-r  rule,  then,  than  this.  Christ  is  the  embodied  truth,  and  we  have  missed  tho  road
if  we  are  not  led  to  him  (John  xiv.  6),

II.  As  THE  EMBODIMENT  OF  THE  DiVINB  FULNESS,  HE  IS  THE  FoUNTAIN-HEAD  OF  ALL

TRUTH  AND  PERFECTION.  (Ver.  9.)  In  Jesus  Clirist  Divinity  has  expressed  itself  in
human  form.  We  can  see,  hear,  and  handle  the  Divine  Being  in  the  person  of  Christ.
The  Incarnation  gives  to  men  the  true  philosophy  they  long  after.  Christ  is  all  and  in
all.  Hence  we  are  resistlessly  drawn  to  him  for  the  solution  of  our  doubts  and  diffi-
culties as  well  as  for  the  salvation  of  our  souls.  No  wonder  that  an  acute  writer
entitled  one  of  his  volumes  'The  Knowledge  of  Jesus  the  Most  Excellent  of  the
Science^.'

III.  Christ  affords  us  all  provision  for  our  acceptance.  (Ver,  10.)  The  great
question  which  man  must  ask  is,  "How  can  sinful  man  be  accepted  with  God?"
Philosophy  replies,  "  By  certain  solemn  ceremonies,  by  sacrifipes,  by  circumcision,  by
baptism,"  etc.  The  gospel  replies,  "  Acceptance  is  secured  in  Christ ;  we  are  complete  in
him,"  or,  as  the  Revised  Version  has  it,  "  In  him  are  ye  made  full."  Now,  it  has  been
insinuated  that  merit  cannot  in  the  nature  of  things  pass  from  one  person  to  another.
The  fact  is,  however,  thKt  we  are  constantly  being  kindly  treated /or  the  sake  of  others.
Children,  for  example,  receive  consideration  for  the  sake  of  respected  parents :  individuals
receive  consideration  foi'  the  sake  of  respected  friends ;  and  the  whole  array  of  letters  of
introduction,  vicarious  influence,  and  the  like,  is  based  upon  the  recognition  of  the  fact
that  the  merit  of  others  can  overshadow  and  benefit  those  in  whom  they  are  interested.
The  acceptance  which  we  receive  from  the  Fatlier  for  the  sakp  of  Jesus  is  on  the  line,
therefore,  of  natural  law.  It  is  the  application  of  a  principle  upon  which  men  are
acting  every  day,

IV.  From  Christ  we  receive  TH?  true  circumcision.  ,(Ver.  11.)  Circumcisiou
was  among  the  false  teachers  the  initial  ceremony  which  si  cured  a  Jewish  standing  for
the  Gentile  proselyte.  Their  insinuation  was  that  Gentiles  who  remiiiiied  unoircum-
cised  could  not  possibly  be  saved.  It  was  this  which  Paul  oombatted  constantly.
Hence  he  shows,  in  this  eleventh  verse,  that  the  real  circumcision  is  secured  in  Onrist
for  all  who  trust  in  him.  It  is  a  circumcision  not  made  with  hands,  a  circumcision  of
the  heart,  a  circumcision  which  secnred  "the  putting  oft  of  tho  body  of  the  sins  of  the
flesh."  If  the  Gentile  converts  realized  this,  then  they  need  not  conceru  themselves
•bout  the  outward  circumcision.  It  surely  teaches  us  that,  not  by  mechanical,  but  by
tpiritual  means  we  may  vanquish  the  power  of  sin  within  ua.   It  ia  said  that  euvum'


m.  ti.  1—23.1  THE  IPlSTLE  tO  TfiE  COLOSSIAlJS.  121

cision  oivoumsoribes  Ivistful  tendencies  and   keeps  them  within  mechanicul  bounds.
Whatever  truth  may  be  in  this,  it  is  certain  that  Jesus  can  so  restiain  us  by  his
indwelling  and  grace  as  to  deliver  us  from  the  whole  body  of  the  sins  of  the  flesh.
V.  Chkist  has  also  cancelled  the  ceremonies  upon  the  oboss,  so  that  when  we

RISE  WITH  HIM  INTO  NEWNESS  OP  LIFE  WB  AKE  FREED  FROM  THEIR   OBLIGATION.      (Vers.

12 — 15.)  The  ritual  of  Judaism  typified  in  its  various  aspects  the  atoning  work  of
Jesus  Christ.  The  sacrifices  pointed  to  the  one  great  sacrifice  on  Calvary.  The  long
list  of  ordinames,  therefore,  conducted  the  intelligent  ^niind  to  Christ's  cross  and
received  their  fiilfilinent  tliere.  .  Hence  it  was  that  those  who  by  faith  passed  through
resurrection  with  Christ  became  as  free  from  the  obligution  of  these  ceremonies  as  the
risen  Jesua  was  himself.  Could  any  one  have  gone  to  Jesus  after  his  resurrection  and
asked  from  him,  with  any  show  of  reason,  a  fulfilment  of  the  ceremonial  Law?  Is  it
not  felt  by  every  intelligent  thinker  that  Jesus  had  so  fulfilled  the  ceremonies  in  the
actualities  of  atonement  that  more  ceremony  from  him  would  be  unmeaning?  A
similar  emancipation,  Paul  here  insists,  from  the  obligation  of  ceremonies  is  the  pro-
perty of  Chrisl  s  believing  people.  A  careful  study  of  the  cross  is  the  great  protection,
therefore,  against  improper  emphasis  being  laid  on  ceremonials.— B.  M.  E.

Vers.  X6 — Z^.—'Legaliam,  exposed.  The  apostle,  having  shown  in  the  last  section  how
much  (Christ  is  to  the  believer,  proceeds  in  the  verses  now  before  us  to  expose  the  false
use  of  ceremonies,  or,  in  modern  phraseology,  ritualism.  The  false  teachers  were
anxious  to  entniigle  the  Gentile  converts  in  a  tedious  round  of  ceremonies — to  make
them,  in  fact,  Old" Testament  ritualists.  They  could  even  adduce  what  seemed  to  them
philosophic  reasons  for  such  practice.  But  Paul  scatters  their  false  philosophy  to  the
winds  by  the  magic  power  of  liis  Redeemer's  cross.

I,  Legalism  ancient  ob  modern  is  the  practice  of  ceremonies  without  their
TRUE  mhanins  being  APPRECIATED.  (Ver.  16.)  The  Judaizers  insisted  on  the  Gentiles
entering  into  the  scrupulosity  of  the  Jews  about  meat  and  drink,  about  holy  days  and
new  moons,  and  about  the  seventh'day  sabbath,  for  the  word  is  singular  as  the  Revised
Version  has  it,  and  not  plural  as  in  the  Authoiized  Version.  Now,  it  was  quite  possible
for  Jews  and  Gentiles  to  enter  upon  the  keeping  of  these  ceremonies  without  ever  con-
sidering their  signification.  A  ceremony  may  be  kept  just  to  be  able  to  congratulate
ourselves  upon  the  keeping  of  it ;  that  is  to  say,  a  ceremony  may  be  kept  in  a  self-
righteous  spirit  instead  of  intelligently,  When  ceremonies  minister  to  self-righteous-
ness, when  they  lead  to  pride,  when  they  are  entertained  in  order  to  furnish  a  fancied
claim,  they  are  mere  superstition^.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  no  other  rationale  can  be
given  of  a  large  proportion  of  modern  ceremonial.  It  is  a  mere  blind  and  leads  souls
away  from  Christ  to  self-righteousness.  It  may,  indeed,  have  the  appearance  of  great
humility.  There  may  be  apparent  awe  and  regard  for  the  angels,  and  the  visible  may
seem  to  so  impress  the  soul  as  to  secure  deepest  humiliatiou  ;  but  when  the  issue  of  the
ritual  is  self-congratulation  and  a  fancied  inde[>endence  of  Christ's  merits  for  accetitance,
the  whole  process  is  simply  a  deceptive  superstition.  It  matters  not  how  esthetic  the
ritual  may  seem ;  the  Jew  of  the  apostolic  age  could  have  pleaded  ffistheticism  like  his
modern  counterpart;  but  the  true  analysis  of  the  whole  process  is  that  it  ia  self-
righteousness  cultivating  superstition.

II.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  must  test  the  meaning  of  all  ceremonies,  as  the
substance  determines  the  shadow.  (Ver.  17.)  If  ceremonies  cease  to  lead  souls  to
Jesus,  then  they  are  meaningless  and  condemned.  The  ceremonial  laws  of  Moses  were
so  constructed  as  to  lead  the  thoughtful  worshipper  on  to  the  promised  Messiah.  Meat
must  be  bloodless,  because  blood  was  to  be  the  atonement  for  sin,  when  Messiah  came.
The  blood  was  forbidden,  because  the  blood  of  Jesus  Clirist  was  to  be  shed  In  due
season.  The  regulations  about  drink  and  holy  days  and  new  moons  pointed,  as  may
easily  be  shown,  in  some  way  or  otlier  to  Chijst.  The  seventh-day  sabbath  was  the
type  of  the  spiritual  rest  to  which  Jesus  conducts  us  (Ileb.  iv.  9 — 12).  Christ  is  the
Substance,  and  these  ceremonies  simply  shadowed  forth  some  aspect  of  his  mission.
But  when  men  kept  the  ceremonies  without  ever  thinking  of  their  relation  to  Christ,
when  they  kept  them  and  made  saviours  of  them  instead  of  seeing  in  Jesus  their  only
Saviour,  they  became  not  only  meaningless  but  prejudicial  to  the  interests  of  souls,
Iiet  Christ,  then,  be  our  test  for  every  ceremony  to  which  n:^D  summon  ua.    Jf  it  ia  «


IM  TSE  EtlSTLE  tO  TflE  OOLOSSUNS.         lok.n.l-ii

substitute  for  Christ,  or  if  it  has  no  relation  to  Christ,  then  we  are  bound  to  dismisi
it  from  our  tlioughts  as  simple  superstition.

III.  Fellowship  with  Cheist  in  cRucirrxioN  makes  men  free  from  the  obliga-
tion DC  THE  Old  Testament  ceremonies.  (Vers.  20 — 23.)  When  Jesus  died  upon
the  cross  every  ceremony  was  fulfilled.  The  ceremonial  Law  had  no  further  claim
upon  him.  In  the  same  way,  when  the  Gentile  converts  so  appreciated  the  Crucifixion
that  they  were  able  to  say  they  were  "crucified  with  Christ"  and  so  "dead  with
Christ,"  then  the  ceremonies  of  circumcision  and  the  like  were  no  longer  obligatory
upon  them.  They  had  fulfilled  them  in  their  Substitute  and  so  were  free  from  them.
It  was  this  liberty  for  which  Paul  so  earnestly  contended.

IV.  Are  believers  in  consequence  to  renounce  all  ceremony  and  turn  Chris-
tianity into  QUAKERISM  ?  Certainly  not.  The  Gentile  converts  were  not  encouraged
by  the  apostles  to  set  all  ceremony  at  defiance.  Though  taui;ht  that  the  ceremonies  of
Judaism  were  fulfilled  in  Christ,  they  were  directed  not  to  eat  blood,  not  to  eat  things
strangled ;  they  were  directed  to  celebrate  baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  to  keep
the  Lord's  day.  But  what  kept  them  right  in  these  ceremonies  was  what  will  keep
us  right  in  ceremonies — the  simple  determination  whether  or  no  they  foster  reverence
for  and  deepen  our  interest  in  the  atoning  work  of  our  blessed  Lord.  What  really  con-
ducts the  soul  to  Jesus  is  safe ;  but  what  only  nominally  does  so  and  really  ministers  to
self-righteousness  is  dangerous  and  deadly  error.  Let  Jesus  be  our  test  continually,
and  we  shall  be  kept  safe. — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  1 — 7. — Introduction  to  the  polemical  part  of  the  Epistle.  I.  Personal  con-
cern. 1.  Paul's  striving.  "  For  I  would  have  yon  know  how  greatly  I  strive  for  yon,
and  for  them  at  Laodicea.  and  for  as  many  as  have  not  seen  my  face  in  the  flesh."
There  is  an  advantage  in  the  Revised  translation,  in  carrying  forward  the  word  "  strive  "
from  tlie  preceding  verse.  Having  declared  his  striving  in  general,  the  apostle  now
shows  ("  for")  how  his  striving  was  specially  directed.  (1)  His  striving  was  remar/c-
ihle  as  directed  toward  those  wJio  had  not  seen  his  face  in  the  flesh.  Among  these  are
plainly  included  the  Colossians.  With  them  are  associated  their  neighbours  the  Izac-
diceans.  The  Hierapolitans  (to  whom  there  is  reference  at  the  close  of  the  Epistle)  are
not  mentioned.  But  it  is  added  generally,  "  as  many  as  have  not  seen  my  face  in  tlie
flesh."  Spiritually  present  he  had  been  (as  he  tells  us  in  the  fifth  verse),  and  he  mus;
have  had  indirect  modes  of  intercourse  with  them,  yet  they  wanted  the  impression  of
his  presence  in  the  flesh — ^they  wanted  the  impression  of  his  personal  ministry  among
them.  It  can  be  made  out  that  in  none  of  his  journeys  be'ore  this  time  did  his  route
naturally  lie  by  the  valley  of  the  Lycus.  It  is  difficult  to  have  an  interest  in  those,
whose  faces  we  have  not  seen.  There  is  something  in  the  expression  of  the
countenance,  as  also  in  the  touch  of  the  hand,  the  sound  of  the  voice.  We  like  these,
not  as  substitutes  for  the  spirit,  but  rather  as  helps  to  our  getting  at  and  fixing  our
impressions  of  the  spirit.  Paul,  in  the  quickness  of  his  sympathy,  gotover  this  difficuliy.
He  had  associations  in  many  cases  with  countenance,  with  hand,  with  voice.  But  he
reserved  a  portion  of  his  sympathy  for  those,  like  the  Colossians,  with  whom  he  had  no
such  associations.  His  concern  was  simply  founrled  on  the  fact  that  they  had  been
rescued  from  heathenism,  that  they  were  exposed  to  perils,  and  on  the  information
which  he  received  from  time  to  time  regarding  their  condition.  (2)  Bis  difficulty  in
fhe  circumstances  in  giving  them  any  right  impression  of  the  greatness  of  his  striving,
"  Hiw  greatly  I  strive."  There  was  no  ordinary  conflict  in  his  mind.  There  was  the
vehemence  belonging  to  an  intensely  earnest  nature.  But  how  could  he  convey  the
impression  of  what  his  striving  was  (the  moral  fulcrum  on  which  he  depended  for
moving  them)  to  persons  in  the  position  of  the  Colossians  ?  If  they  had  had  an  inipres-
«ion  of  his  personal  ministry,  then  he  might  have  revived  that  wherewith  to  oppose
the  heretical  teachers;  but  he  had  never  been  at  CoIosseb.  If  he  had  been  able  the^  to
go  to  the  rescue,  he  might  have  given  them  an  impression  of  his  intensity  in  the  way
in  which  (like  a  good  athlete)  he  grappled  with  those  teachers.  But  he  was  in  an
imprisoned  condition  in  Rome;  and  hi^  conflict  would  be  noue  the  less  because  he  was
imprisoned  and  far  away  from  them.  Was  he,  then,  like  a  bird  beating  its  wearied
breast  against  the  wires  of  its  cage  ?  No ;  there  was  outlet  for  the  struggle  within.  U«
(ould  relieve  himself  at  the  throne  of  grace,  and  there,  by  his  earnest  pleading;,  movf


CB.  n.  1-23.]  TflE  EPISTLE  TO  TflE  COLOS91AN9.  m


tlie  hand  that  could  move  them.  But  that  was  not  enough ;  he  wished  to  have  influ-
ence with  them  in  impressing  on  them  what  his  striying  was,  and  so  he  writes ;  and,  aa
he  writes,  feeling  the  difficulty  that  arose  from  their  not  having  seen  him  in  the  flesh,
he  exclaims,  "  I  would  that  ye  knew  how  greatly  I  strive  for  you."  2.  Ths  end  of  his
striving.  "  That  their  hearts  may  be  comforted."  There  are  positions  in  which
Churches  and  individuals  stand  in  need  of  heart-comfort.  Our  English  word  "com-
forted "  is  etymnlogically  "  being  made  strong."  "  Fortified  "  belongs  to  the  same  root.
And  the  one  meaning  passes  into  the  other.  If  our  hearts  are  sad,  we  feel  unnerved  fir
work.  But  if,  amid  our  trials,  we  have  comfort,  we  feel  strong  for  work.  (1)  Com-
forted in  the  way  of  having  wnity  of  feeling.  "They  being  knit  together  in  love."  It
is  no  ordinary  union  of  Ohristixns  that  is  pointed  to  here.  It  is  such  a  welding  of  them
together  aais  not  easily  torn  asunder.  What  an  uncomfortable  thing  is  division!  How
much  to  be  desired  in  the  way  of  comfort  when,  however  assailed.  Christians  can  pre-
sent a  united  front !  And  the  union  which  is  not  easily  broken  up  can  only  subsist  in
love.  And  the  love  must  not  be  a  mere  negative,  or  pretence ;  but  must  be  a  deep,  per-
vading feeling.  It  is  only  when  love  avails  to  break  down  selfishness,  to  excite  mutual
interest  between  the  members  of  a  Christian  society,  that  there  is  knitting  together  or
the  strong  bond  that  is  referred  to  in  the  third  chapter.  (2)  Comforted  in  the  way  of
having  imity  of  sentiment.  "  And  unto  all  riches  of  the  full  assurance  of  understand-
ing." Unity  of  feeling  he  desired  for  them ;  but  as  the  cause  (not  the  consequence)  of
unity  of  sentiment.  When  there  is  unity  of  feeling  in  a  high  degree,  these  questions
can  be  calmly,  patiently  looked  at  without  risk  of  a  rupture.  We  have  to  aim  at  a
right  state  of  the  understanding.  "  Grive  me  understanding  "  is  the  repeated  prayer  of  the
psalmist.  Our  understanding  is  given  us  to  examine  into  facts,  to  plan  aright  for  our
conduct,  to  avoid  mistakes,  to  detect  errors.  And  we  are  constituted  so  that  we  can
not  only  judge,  but  have  the  assurance  that  we  are  judging  correctly.  There  is  an
assurance  which  is  begotten  of  ignorance,  of  self-conceit.  That  is  very  different  from  the
assurance  which  is  the  result  of  patient  investigation,  of  steady  contemplation.  There
is  a  self-evidencing  power  of  the  truth.  The  words  of  God,  when  we  closely  examine
them,  shine  in  their  own  light.  There  is  a  peculiar  satisfaction  in  our  being  sure  of  our
seeing  the  truth.  When  our  eyes  have  been  enlightened  by  the  Spirit,  we  can  say  with
confidence, "  One  thing  I  know,  that  whereas  I  was  blind,  now  I  see."  It  is  this  certainty
extending  over  a  wide  range  that  is  here  represented  as  being  the  wealth  of  the  under-
standing. This  is  of  far  more  value  than  material  riches  which  men  heap  up  and  know
not  who  shall  gather  them.  What  a  man  gains  in  the  way  of  clear  convincing  percep-
tion of  things  he  can  never  lose.  He  who  engages  in  the  pursuit  of  these  riches  shall
gather  them  in  his  own  everlasting  being.  And,  having  begun  to  have  an  assuring
view  of  truth,  he  shall  go  on  to  all  riches  of  the  full  assurance  of  understanding.  "  That
they  may  know  [unto  the  thorough  knowledge  of]  the  Mystery  of  God,  even  Christ,  in
whom  are  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge  hidden."  This  is  parallel  to  the
foregoing,  and  points  to  the  Christian  state  of  the  understanding.  All  things  are  dark
to  us  at  first;  we  have,  by  reflection,  to  clear  away  the  darkness.  There  is  one  thing
which  is  pre-eminently  dark,  which  we  could  never  have  found  out  for  ourselves ;  it  is
here  called  "  the  mystery,"  and  is  explained  to  be  Christ.  He  is  the  Mystery  of  God  in
this  sense — that  in  him  lay  hidden  all  the  thought  and  purpose  of  God.  The  theosophists
spoke  of  hidden  things,  and  made  much  of  wisdom  in  general  and  also  of  a  special
insight.  The  apostle  declare*  that  all  the  treasures  that  they  pretended  by  their
sophia  and  gnosis  to  discover  are  hidden  in  Christ,  and  that  it  is  by  coming  to  the
thorough  knowledge  of  him  that  we  get  jxissession  of  the  hidden  treasures.  The  object,
then,  of  the  apostle's  striving  for  the  Colossians,  as  for  others,  was  (in  view  of  what
follows)  this,  that,  unitedly,  in  the  use  of  their  understanding,  they  might  come  to  such
an  appreciation  of  Christ  as  would  lay  open  to  them  all  the  hidden  treasures.  If  they
had  that,  then  they  would  be  carried  away  by  no  false  sophia  and  gnosis.

II.  Relation  to  the  situation.  1.  Exposure  of  the  Colossians.  "  This  I  say,  that
DO  one  may  delude  you  with  persuasiveness  of  speech."  He  directs  himself  specially
to  the  Colossians.  He  has  been  telling  them  about  his  great  striving  for  them,  and
about  the  key  to  the  hidden  treasures,  in  order  to  put  them  on  their  guard.  They  were
in  the  presence  of  danger.  There  were  teachers  (of  whom  we  shall  hear  more)  that  had
designs  on  them.    The^r  uwd  a  persuasivv  ioxva  of  tpeech  (in  «  bad  sense).    Thej  ha,i


124  TflE  EPlSTLfi  TO  Tfifi  COLOSSUNS.  roH.ii.  1-53-

not  the  persuasiveness  tliat  comes  from  the  truth.  They  were  oonsoions  of  no  basis  of
reality  for  their  speech.  They  taught  a  system  for  which  there  were  not  proofs.  The^
pretended  by  their  sophia  and  gnosis  to  open  up  hidden  things  ;  but  it  was  only  pre-
tence. Their  fine  phrases,  their  plausible  representations,  their  large  promises,  wera
delusive,  leading  away  from  reality,  leading  away  from  Christ  in  whom  alone  are  the
liidden  treasures.  2.  Spiritual  presence  with  them.  "  For  though  I  am  absent  in  the
flesh,  yet  am  I  with  you  in  the  spirit,  joying  and  beholding  your  order,  and  the  stead-
fastness of  your  faith  in  Christ."  The  spirit  is  freer  than  the  body.  1'he  apostle  was
present  in  the  spirit,  where  he  was  absent  in  the  flesh.  This  spoke  to  a  certain  cogni-
zance of  them,  from  all  that  he  had  heard  of  them,  and  especially  from  the  intensity  ot
his  sympathy  with  them.  Transferred,  as  it  were,  to  Colosfae,  his  feelings  (and  to  this
prominence  is  given)  were  those  of  joy.  He  was  not  repelled  (as  from  what  was  dis-
agre(able),  but  was  rather enoliainid.  It  especially  gave  him  joy  to  observe  two  points
which  were  important  in  reference  to  his  purpose.  (1)  Their  order.  They  were  (to
take  one  of  the  associations  of  the  word)  like  a  well-appointed  regiment.  They  were
well  organized  as  a  community.  They  were  organized  for  the  advancement  of  the  cause
of  Christ  among  themselves  and  beyond  themselves.  Hitherto  they  had  been  free
from  divisions.  There  was  no  disorderliness,  such  as  there  was  in  the  Church  of  Corinth.
(2)  The  steadfastness  of  their  faith  in  Christ.  Their  outward  state  (which  was  one  of
order)  was  conditioned  inwardly  by  faith.  They  had  an  immovable  object  for  their
faith.  "  If  we  are  faithless,  he  abideth  faithful ;  for  he  cannot  deny  himself."  Their
faith  in  some  degree  corresponded.  It  had  such  a  hold  on  Christ  that  it  was,  as  the
word  is,  something  firm,  like  a  piece  of  solid  masonry  (in  a  fortification)  not  easily
battel  ed  down.  It  would  stand,  he  hoped,  the  assaults  made  on  it  by  the  false
teachers.

HI.  Exhortation  to  remain  true  to  their  stabting-podit.  He  does  not  bestow
jiraise  without  giving  exhortation  (in  view  of  the  danger).  The  spirit  of  the  exhorta-
tion is  given  in  the  words  of  the  Lord  to  the  Church  of  Smyrna  (where  danger,  how-
ever, had  not  been  well  mei),  "Bemember  therefore  how  thou  hast  reoeived,-and  didst
hear  "  In  the  force  of  the  apostle's  thought  there  is  a  certain  disregard  of  metaphor
(walk,  tree,  luilding).  It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  present  the  thought  (in  our  divi-
sion) without  keeping  to  metaphor.  1.  We  are  to  think  and  act  from  day  to  day  in
accordance  with  our  first  reciption  of  Christ.  .  "  As  therefore  ye  received  Christ  Jesus
the  Lord,  so  walk  in  him."  There  is  an  emphatic  specification  of  the  object.  They
received  Christ  (the  person  of  Christ  being  in  dispute).  Whom  did  they  receive  as
Christ?  The  historical  Jesus  (partaker  of  humanity).  This  Jesus  they  received  and
wor.shipped  as  the  Lord  (with  supreme  power  over  the  universe  and  the  Church).  And
the  aposile  holds  rightly  that  they  were  bound  by  their  past  action.  Havii^  thus
fjceived  Christ,  they  were  not  to  oast  him  off.  They  were  not  to  think  and  act  accord-
)i!g  to  their  pleasure  or  according  to  the  suggestion  of  heretical  teachers.  Bnt  their
thoughts  and  actions  (specially  the  former  in  the  present  instance)  were  to  be  controlled
by  Christ  and  his  laws.  2.  What  is  adiled  in  our  development  is  to  he  in  accordance
with  its  beginnings.  "  Booted  and  builded  up  in  him."  The  change  of  tense  is  not
brought  out  in  the  translation.  It  is  literally,  "  Having  been  rooted  and  being  builded
up  iu  him."  They  got  a  rooting  in  Christ  at  the  beginning,  viz.  under  Epaphras,  who
presented  Christ  plainly  to  them,  giving  them  line  upon  line  and  precept  upon  precept,
until  they  came  to  a  clear  conception  of  the  truth.  This  rooting  was  effectual  in  the
substquent  development.  To  change  the  figure  with  the  apostle,  they  got  a  grounding
in  Christ  (as  we  get  a  grounding  in  a  language  or  science).  Every  successive  layer  was
to  be  in  accordance  with  their  grounding.  The  building  was  to  rise  up  in,  and  to  take
form  from,  that  Christ  in  whom  they  had  been  so  well  grounded.  3.  Our  faith  is  to  be
established  in  accordance  with  our  early  teaching.  "And  stahlished  in  your  faith,
even  as  ye  were  taught."  All  early  teaching  is  not  good,  and  the  development  is  often
hindered  by  imperfect  or  faulty  grounding.  The  early  teaching  enjoyed  by  the  Colos-
sians  was  proved  to  be  good  by  the  subsequent  development.  There  is  a  missing  o(
the  thought  by  Meyer  and  Ellicott,  who  interpret,  "  Taught  to  become  6»tablished  in
[or, '  by ']  the  faith."  The  idea  rather  is  that,  under  the  teaching  of  Epaphias,  they  got  a
right  hold  of  Christ.  From  him  thus  laid  hold  of  by  them  they  were  not  to  be  moved
away.    The  whole  carrying  forward  of  their  faith  in  the  way  of  atability  was  to  In


cH.n.  1— 23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANS.  12S

toward  no  false  Ohfist,  but  toward  Christ  JesuS  the  Lord.  Subjoined  ixhortatiOn  to
thanksyiuing.  "  Abounding  in  thanksgiving."  Tliis  comes  in  with  a  certain  abrupt-
ness. But  the  duty  of  thanksgiving  is  so  frequently  (five  tiines)  introduced  as  to  form
a  subordinate  feature  of  the  Epistle.  An  overflowing  of  thanksgiving  to  God  for  the
faith  by  which  they  came  in  their  early  teaching,  and  for  all  the  blessing  ojicneil  u'l  to
them  by  faith  (the  hidden  treasures  in  Chrisi),  would  be  helpftd  to  their  faith  being
Btablished  in  view  of  present  danger.— E.  Ft

Vers.  8 — 15. — Philosophy.  1.  False  philosopht.  "Take  heed  lest  there  shall
be  any  one  that  makctli  spoil  of  you  tbrpugh  his  philosophy  and  Vain  deceit."  It
was  a  real  danger  (as  the  expi'ession  bears)  against  Which  the  apostle  warns  the  Colos-
sians.  He  refers  indefinitely  to  the  teachers  (aUV  one),  but  he  strikinriy  describes
what  their  work  would  be.  The  work  of  the  Ohristian  teachers  on  them  in  their
heathen  state,  as  described  in  ch.  i.  13,  14,  had  been  a  deliverance,  a  Ttdetnption;
the  Work  of  those  teachers  on  them  in  their  Ohristian  state  would  be  a  leading  them
into  captivity,  a  making  a  booty  of  them.  He  does  not  define  what  this  teaching  was,
but  he  characterizes  the  substance  Of  it~(as  distinguished  from  the  form,  which  is
characterized  in  the  fourth  verse)  as  a  philosophy  which  was  a  vain  deceit.  This  is
not  a  characterization  of  all  philosophy,  but  only  of  the  philosophy  with  which  these
teachers  Would  have  made  siitiil  of  the  Colossians.  A  philosopher  is  literally  a  lover
of  wisdom,  and  in  that  sense  a  Christian  is  a  philosopher.  The  origin  of  the  name,
as  given  by  Cicero,  is  as  follows:  Pythagoras  once  upon  a  time,  havini;  Oome  to  Phlius,
a  city  of  Pelop- mnesus,  displayed  in  a  conversation  which  he  had  with  Leon,  who  then
governed  that  city,  a  range  of  knowledge  so  extensive  that  the  prince,  admiring  his
eloquence  and  ability,  inquired  to  What  art  he  had  principally  devoted  himself.  Pytha-
goras answered  that  he  professed  no  art  and  Was  simply  a  philosopher.  Leon,  struck
by  the  novelty  of  the  name,  again  inquired  who  were  the  philosophers,  and  in  what
they  differed  from  other  men.  Pythagoras  replied  that  human  life  seemed  to  resemble
the  great  fair  held  on  occaston  of  those  solemn  uames  which  ali  Greece  met  to  cele-
brate. Por  some,  exercised  in  athletic  Contests,  resorted  thither  in  quest  of  glory  and
the  crown  of  victory ;  while  a  greater  number  flocked  to  them  in  order  to  buy  and  sell,
attracted  by  the  love  of  gain.  There  were  a  few,  however — and  they  were  those
distinguished  by  their  liberality  and  intellignnoe — who  came  from  no  motive  of  glory
or  of  gain,  but  simply  to  look  about  them,  and  to  take  note  of  what  was  done  and  in
what  manner.  "So,  likewise,"  continued  Pythao;oras,  "we  men  all  make  our  entiance
into  this  life  on  our  departure  from  another.  Some  are  here  occupied  in  the  pursuit
of  honours,  others  in  the  search  of  riches;  a  few  there  are  who,  indifferent  to  all  else,
devote  themselves  to  an  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  things.  These,  then,  are  they
whom  I  call  students  of  wisdom,  for  such  is  meant  by  philosopher."  The  philosophy
in  question  in  Colossae  was  no  humble  endeavour  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  things,
but  a  pretentious  system  without  any  basis  in  observed  facts,  or  in  reason  applied  to
them  (certainly  without  any  basis  in  revelation),  and  therefore  only  vain.  It  had  two
marks  of  a  false  system.  1.  It  was  purely  tradiiionat.  "  After  the  tradition  ot  men."
Our  sacred  books  have  been  handed  down  to  us,  but  we  do  not  rest  their  authority  on
mere  tradition.  There  is  evidence  (to  which  we  make  oiur  appeal)  that  tljey  do  not
owe  their  origin  to  men,  that  they  are  a  Divine  revelation,  that  they  have  been  first
handed  to  men  by  God.  Tradition  has  been  a  frequent  device  in  connection  with
systems  that  have  imposed  on  the  human  mind.  Tfie  answer  to  questionings  has  been
that  it  was  so  handed  down  from  remote  antiquity  (occultly,  for  the  traijitioual  and
occult  generally  go  together).  A  remarkable  instance  was  a  later  development  named
cabbala,  or  tradition.  The  mystic  elements  in  this  were  not  essentially  different  from
those  which  were  operating  around  the  Oolossian  Church.  The  priuiaiy  subsiance,  tke
Cabbalists  said,  is  an  ocean  of  light.  There  was  a  primitive  emanation,  named  Adam
tadmun,  from  which  proceed  decreasing  Stages  of  emanations,  named  Sephiroth.  Matter
is  nothing  but  the  obscuration  of  the  Divine  rays  when  arrived  at  the  la«t  stage  of
emanation,  This  (and  much  besides)  was  to  be  received  on  the  ground  that  it  had
been  secretly  handed  down  from  Moses.  But  it  is  no  sufficient  evidence  of  a  system
being  true  that  it  has  been  handed  down;  we  must  submit  it  to  further  examination,
gud  such  examination  the  philosophy  at  Colossi  POu}d  not  stand.     2.  It  was  purely


12«  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANS.  [oh.  n.  1— 2&

mundane.  "After  the  rudiments  of  the  world."  What  was  handed  down  had  no
liigh  genesis.  Very  crude  were  the  first  attempts  to  solve  the  riddle  of  the  universe.
Empedocles  taught  that  all  things  were  formed  out  of  the  four  elements,  fire,  air,
earth,  and  water,  hy  a  process  of  mingling  and  of  separation,  set  in  motion  by  the
two  principles  of  love  and  hate.  The  postulation  of  intermediate  agents  in  a  descend-
ing series  down  to  one  who  could  create  matter  was  yery  rudimentary.  The  apostle
was  sorry  that  such  meagre  and  earth-horn  philosophizings  should  he  palmed  upon
men  as  all  that  was  needed  to  make  them  perfect.  The  standard  of  condemnation.
"And  not  after  Christ."  What  is  tradition,  when  we  have  Christ  to  give  form  to  our
thoughts?  What  are  the  rudiments  of  the  world  (all  tliat  earth  can  produce  of  a
philosophy)  when  we  have  the  perfect  revelation  from  heaven  ?

II.  The  teub  philosophy.  There  are  two  cardtnal  points.  (1)  Vie  fulness  of  God
in  Christ.  "I"or  in  him  dwellelh  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  By  the
pleroma  of  the  Godhead  we  are  to  understand  .the  totality  of  the  Divine  attributes,
the  sum  of  the  Divine  perfections.  We  are  to  think  of  the  pleroma  as  residing  first
in  God  and  then  in  Christ  (just  as  we  think  first  of  Father  and  then  of  Son,  first  of
original  and  then  of  copy).  The  ^?eromo  resides  in  the  Second  Person  necessarily  and
eternally,  but  nineteen  hundred  years  ago  (such  is  our  creed)  it  began  to  reside  in  him
"bodily  wise,  that  is  to  say,  a  connection  was  mysteriously  formed  between  the  pleroma
in  him  and  (what  was  far  removed)  a  human  body.  In  the  body  he  took  to  himself
he  tabernacled  on  earth,  and  not  only  so,- but  in  it  now  glorified  he  permanently
resides  (such  is  the  force  of  the  Greek  word),  that  is  to  say,  the  time  will  never  come
when  there  will  be  a  separation  of  the  pleroma  in  him  from  our  humanity.  Such  is
the  apostolic  teaching,  but  on  it  reverence  forbids  that  we  should  dwell.  (2)  Thefulnesi
of  Christ  in  u8.  "  And  in  him  ye  are  made  full."  It  is  an  advantage  in  the  Revised
translation  that  "full"  is  carried  forward  from  the  preceding  thought  (not  "fulness"
and  then  "  complete,"  when  the  word  is  tho  same).  The  pleroma  in  Christ  is  com-
municated to  us.  Out  of  his  pleroma  have  all  we  received.  Christians  collectively
are  called  the  pleroma  of  Christ.  This  is  no  mere  refinement  of  thought.  The  comfort
of  it  is  that  Christ  in  his  redemptive  work,  in  the  fulness  of  his  atoning  merits,  has
made  it  possible  for  us  to  have  more  than  mere  beginnings  or  huska.  There  must  be
allowance  for  difference  of  essence,  but,  allowance  being  made  frfr  that,  then  all  that
is  in  Christ  can  be  communicated  to  us.  We  can  think  out  the  Divine  thought.  We
can  be  under  the  impulse,  of  the  Divine  love.  We  can  have  strength  to  perform  the
Divine  purpose.  We  can  come  X)ut  into  the  Divine  liberty.  It  is  only  Christ  actually
working  in  us  that  can  remove  all  moral  impediments,  and  educe  to  the  full  the
God-given  tendencies  of  our  being.  And,  therefore,  the  truest  philosophy  is  to  preserve
a  state  of  openness  towards  him.  This  philosophy  is  all-sufficient.  1.  Jt  enalles  us  to
dispense  with  what  intermediate  agents  may  be  supposed  to  do  for  us.  "  Who  is  the
Head  of  all  principality  and  power."  Christ  is  not  only  placed  over  all  that  can  be
called  principality  and  power,  but  he  is  the  Source  of  all  the  vital  force  that  belongs
to  them.  What  of  the  pleroma  may  be  dispersed,  fragmentary  in  them,  is  undis-
pensed, unbroken  in  him.  There  is  no  need,  therefore,  of  supplementing  what  he  can
supply.  2.  It  enables  us  to  dispense  with  circumcision.  It  would  seem  that  in  the
false  philosophy  with  which  the  Church  at  Colossse  was  threatened,  there  was  a
Judaistic  as  well  as  a  mystic  element.  Tho  combination  of  the  two  was  called
Essenisra.  (1)  Circumcised  with  Christ  in  his  circumcision.  "In  whom  ye  were  also
circumcised  with  a  circumcision  not  made  with  hands,  in  the -putting  off  of  the  body  of
the  flesh,  in  the  circumcision  of  Christ."  They  had  no  need  of  the  circumcision  made
with  hands  (the  material  circumcision) ;  they  had  been  circumcised  with  a  circumcision
not  made  with  hands  (a  spiritual  circumcision).  They  had  got  the  inward  reality
corresponding  to  the  outward  rite.  This  is  presented  here  as  the  putting  off  of  the
body  of  the  flesh.  There  was  the  putting  off  as  of  a  garment.  The  word  in  the
original,  being  intensive,  points  to  a  complete  putting  off.  The  putting  off  applied
to  tlu!  buily  as  a  whole.  The  body  of  the  flesh  points  to  our  old  impure  condition  (in
which  the  flesh  is  the  dominating  principle).  It  could  only  lie  iileally  that  we  were
tlius  circumcised,  for  there  is  still  actual  impurity  iu  our  conJitioa  that  needs  to  he  put
ofil  When  in  the  past  are  we  to  understand  this  circumcision  as  timed  V  The  general
•pinio'i  is  that  w«  are  to  ti^lce  the  time  from  the  baptism  refened  to  ia  the  next  vers^


OH.  n.  1—23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  127

It  seems  more  natural  to  interpret  the  circumcision  of  Christ  as  the  circumcision  under-
gone by  Christ,  and  to  take  the  time  from  that  event.  It  is  not  unnatural  to  pass  from
the  spiritual  circumcision  described  to  the  circumcision  of  Christ  so  understood,  unless
its  spiritual  significance  is  left  out.  That  event  was  more  than  a  mere  honouring  of
the  Mosaic  rite,  it  pointed  to  (though  it  did  not  actually  effect)  its  fulfilment.  Did  it
not  point  to  Christ  putting  ott  in  his  death  the  body  with  which  our  sin  was  asso-
ciated ?  It  could  be  said  then  that  when  Christ  was  circumcised  we  were  spiritually
circumcised  in_his  circumcision.  A  cognate  thoui/ht  is  added /or  the  purpose  of  further
elucidation.  (2)  Baptized  with  Christ  in  his  ha/iiism.  As  we  interpret  the  circumcision
of  Christ  of  the  circumcision  undergone  by  Christ,  so  we  interpret  baptism  here  of  the
baptism  undergone  by  Christ  (not  their  baptism).  It  could  be  said  that  when  he  was
baptized  we  were  baptized  in  his  baptism.  There  are  two  sides  of  baptism,  (a)  A
going  down  into  the  water.  "  Having  been  buried  with  him  in  baptism."  There  is
similar  language  employed  in  Eom.  vi.  4.  We  were  buried  with  him  through  baptism
into  death.  The  language  is  evidently  taken  from  immersion.  It  is  said  of  Jesus  that
he  came  up  out  of  the  water,  so  we  are  to  understand  that  he  went  down  into  the  water.
There  was,  as  it  were,  a  burial  under  the  waves.  And  as  the  coming  up  out  of  the  water
is  connected  in  what  follows  with  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  so  we  are  to  understand
that  the  burial  in  baptism  is  connected  with  the  burial  of  Christ.  In  baiitism  we  are
represented  as  burj'ing  what  Christ  may  be  said  to  have  put  away  in  his  grave — the
old  state  of  sin.  The  language  employed  here  tells  in  favour  of  immersion  as  a
scriptural  mode.  There  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  it  was  the  mode  followed  in
Palestine  in  our  Lord's  day.  It  has  an  advantage  over  sprinkling  in  pointing  so
strikingly  to  the  burial  of  the  old  nature  as  in  the  grave  of  Christ.  The  only  reason
that  can  be  urged  against  it  is  that  it  is  not  suitable  in  a  cold  climate.  The  use  of
water  being  all  that  is  essential,  the  mode  may  be  accommodated  to  altered  conditions.
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  an  identification  of  baptism  with  circumcision.  What  is
the  putting  off  and  laying  aside  of  the  body  cf  the  flesh  in  the  one,  is  the  burial  in  the
other.  And  thus  the  language  of  the  apostle  seems  to  tell  in  favour  of  infant  baptism.
(6)  A  coming  up  out  of  the  viater.  "  Wherein  ye  were  also  raised  with  him  through
faith  in  the  working  of  God,  who  raised  him  from  the  dead."  The  language  is  taken
from  the  coming  up  out  of  the.  water  which  is  associated  with  our  Lord's  baptism,  but
none  the  less  truly  does  it  point  to  the  fact  of  Christ's  resurrection,  which  is  clearly
referred  to.  Christ  went  down  into  the  grave,  but  came  up  again.  So  the  believer
disappears  under  the  waters  of  baptism,  but  comes  up  to  sight  again.  This  is  a  side
that  is  not  presented  in  circumcision.  In  baptism  there  is  an  impressive  exhibition  of
the  fact  that  we  are  regenerated.  This  new  life  we  get  in  union  with  Christ.  The
working  of  God  was  signally  displayed  in  raising  Christ  from  the  dead.  But  that  was
more  than  a  display  of  omnipotence.  It  is  to  be  taken  in  connection  with  the  removal
of  the  cause  that  operated  in  Christ's  death  and  burial,  viz.  sin.  Christ  rose  from  the
dead  the  possessor  of  a  new  and  endless  life.  And  if  we  take  as  the  object  of  our
faith  the  working  which  raised  Christ  from  the  dead,  we  shall  become  sharers  with  him
in  the  same  new  and  endless  life.  3.  Parenthetical  application  of  the  being  raised  vnth
Christ  to  the  Colossians  and  to  the  Qentiles  generally.  "  And  you,  beins  dead  through
your  trespasses  and  the  uncircumcision  of  your  flesh,  yoUj  I  say,  did  he  quicken
together  with  him,  having  forgiven  us  all  our  trespasses."  There  is  a  ditBculty  started
here  regarding  the  subject  of  the  remainder  of  the  paragraph.  Meyer,  Allord,  and
Eadie  make  God  the  subject;  EUicott  makes  it  Christ.  Lightfoot  makes  it  a  case  of  a
sudden  change  of  subject.  It  can  be  said  in  favour  of  Christ  being  "  subject,"  that  he
has  been  prominent  in  the  apostle's  thought  in  the  context  as  in  the  Epistle  as  a  whole.
It  can  also  be  said  that  the  putting  off  from  himself  the  princi|ialities  and  powers  is
languau'e  which  can  only  be  applied  to  Christ.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is*unnatural,
with  EUicott,  to  pas's  from  the  thought  of  Christ  being  raised  by  God  to  the  thought
of  Christ  quickening  himself.  Nor  is  it  satisfactory  simply  to  say  that  there  is  a
sudden  change  of  subject.  The  most  natural  solution  of  the  difficulty  seems  to  be
to  regard  this  verse  as  [larenthetical.  The  apostle  applies  the  thought  of  being  raised
with  Christ,  and,  having  done  so,  he  proceeds  with  Christ  as  the  subject  as  though  the
application  had  not  been  interjected.  The  Colossians  had  been  in  a  state  of  deadness.
Their  deadness  w^  caused  by  tl^eir  trespasses.    There  is  nothing  of  the  pantheistic


128  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  00L0S8IANB.  [oh.  n.  1—23.

eletnoDt  here  that  was  so  prevaleftt  in  the  East.  They  had  committee!  personal  trespasi
against  a  personal  Lawgiver,  and  thus  were  thrown  into  a  state  of  deadness.  Their
deadiiess  through  trespasses  is  associated  with  the  unciroumoision  of  their  flesh.  They
had  not  the  sign  of  circumcision  on  them.  And  so  they  had  that  deadness  which  in
circumcision  is  represented  as  being  put  away.  Being  dead,  God  quickened  them
together  with  Christ,  gave  them  the  reality  of  circumcision  or  the  reality  correspond-
ing to  the  coming  up  out  of  the  waters  of  baptism.  This  presupposed  the  exercise  of
fortjiveness  toward  them.  They  (and  not  only  they)  had  been  forgiven  their  tresjiasses.
And  thus,  the  cause  of  deadness  being  removed,  thfy  could  be  quickened.  (1)  How
circumcision  can  he  dispensed  with,  "  Having  blotted  out  the  bond  written  in  ordinances
tliat  was  against  us,  which  was  contrary  to  us :  and  he  hath  taken  it  out  of  the  way^
nailing  it  to  the  cross."  Our  obligation  to  keep  the  Law  of  God  (so  we  are  constituted)
is  compared  to  a  bond.  It  is  as  though  we  had  subscribed  it  with  our  own  hand.  The
fford  is  handwriting.  In  the  case  of  the  Jews  it  was  in  the  form  of  well-known
ordinances  (of  which  circumcision  was  one).  In  the  case  of  the  Gentiles  the  public
sense  of  right  also  found  expression  in  ordinances.  The  bond  was  against  us  in  this
Sense,  that  it  contained  obligation  which  had  to  be  met  by  us.  It  was  not  only  against
us  in  that  sense  (which  it  was  from  its  very  nature),  but  in  its  actual  incidence  on  ub
in  our  fallen  condition  it  was  contrary  to  us.  It  could,  as  it  were,  be  brought  into  a
court  of  law  to  effect  our  conviction.  There  it  was  with  our  autograph.  We  had  not
met  our  obligation  and  had  no  tnanner  of  meeting  it.  What  Ohrist  did  with  the  bond
was  to  cancel  it.  His  pen,  as  it  were,  was  drawn,  through  it.  Or  the  writing  was
erased  that  it  could  never  again  be  biought  as  evidence  against  us.  To  make  it  mora
emphatic,  it  is  added  that  he  took  it  (lut  of  the  way  (so  tliat  it  could  never  again  be
found).  "  He  took  it  out  of  the  midst,"  it  is  literally,  so  that  it  could  never  be  produced
between  us  and  God,  And  to  make  it  still  more  emphatic,  it  is  added  that  he  nailed  it
to  his  cross.  It  was  so  affixed  to  the  cross  that  wlien  he  was  crucified  it  was  treated
similarly  and  com|iletely  made  an  end  of.  His  crucifixion  was  a  meeting  the  bond,
discharging  all  our  obligations  to  the  broken  Law.  There  is  thus,  therefore,  no  bond
that  can  be  produced  for  our  conviction,  but  thefe  is  a  discharged  bond  which  can  be
produced  for  our  justification.  (2)  How  the  help  of  intermediate  agents  can  be  dis-
pensed with,  "Having  put  off  from  himself  the  piincipalities  and  the  powers,  he
made  a  show  of  them  openly,  triumphing  over  them  in  it."  The  principalities  and
powers  were  those  that  sought  to  thwart  Christ  in  his  great  undertaking,  to  prevent
the  salvarion  of  men.  They  began  to  gather  around  him  at  his  temptation.  Especially
at  the  close  did  they  obtain  power.  These  evil  principalities  and  powers  clung  to  him
like  a  garment.  It  was  only  by  his  thus  allowing  them  to  come  into  close  contact
with  him  that  they  could  for  ever  be  put  off  from  men.  It  is  said,  regarding  Hercules,
the  most  celebrated  of  all  henies  of  mythology,  that  he  came  by  his  end  by  putting
on  a  robe  that  had  been  steeped  in  the  blood  of  Nessus,  whom  he  himself  had  shot
with  a  poisoned  arrow.  When  it  became  warm  round  him  the  poison  penetrated  into
his  system.  He  attempted  to  wrench  it  off,  but  it  tore  away  his  flesh.  And  ha
hastened  his  end  by  placing  himself  on  a  burning  pile.  It  was  sin  that  made  the
principalities  and  the  powers  like  a  poisoned  clinging  robe.  But  he  put  them  off  from
himself.  So  complete  was  his  victory  that  he  held  them  up  publicly  to  view  as  spoils.
This  triumph  he  obtained  on  the  cross.  It  was  there  that  the  principalities  and  the
powers  had  him  at  a  terrible  disadvantage.  'I'hey  had,  as  it  were,  power  given  them
against  him.  But  he,  trusting  in  God,  thiew  them  off.  And  thus  the  symbol  of
weakness  became  the  symbol  of  triumih. — 11.  F.

Vers.  16— 23. — Three  errors.  I.  Leoalism.  "Let  no  man  therefore  judge  yon
in  meat,  or  in  drink,  or  in  respect  of  a  feast  day  or  a  new  moon  or  a  sabbath  day :
which  are  a  shadow  of  the  things  to  come ;  but  the  body  is  Christ's."  There  is  a
detailed  reference  here  to  Jewish  institutions.  Eating  (rather  than  meat)  was  encom-
passed with  regulations.  There  was  a  distinction  drawn  between  clean  and  unolean
animals.  Certain  parts  of  animals  (the  fat,  the  blood)  were  not  to  be  eaten.  God's
lights  (firstborn,  portions  of  the  priests)  were  not  to  be  infringed  in  eating.  There  was
not  so  much  binding  down  in  regard  to  drinking.  Priests  were  forbidden  the  use  of
wine  before  miaistering  in  the  tabernacle  ;  and  the  Navarite  vow  included  entire  absti-


OH.  II,  1—23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANS.  121

nance  from  the  use  of  wine.  The  sacred  times  are  cla«Bed  according  to  their  frequency.
■^'here  were  the  three  great  annual  feasts  (extending  each  over  a  week)  of  the  Passover,
Pentecost,  and  Tabernacles.  Every  month  commenced  with  a  celebration.  And  the
weiMy  sabbath  (older  than  Jewish  institutions)  had  its  special  services.  The  falsa
teachers  who  sought  to  impose  these  institutions  on  the  Coloasian  Christians  were  Easenet.
'J'hese  went  far  beyond  the  Pharisees.  They  ate  no  animal  food,  drank  no  wine.
They  would  not  light  a  fire,  move  a  vessel,  perform  the  most  ordinary  functions  of  life
on  the  sabbath.  Everything  material  was  inherently  evil  and  was  not  to  be  touched
more  than  was  absolutely  neoessary.  The  apostle  claims;  against  these  teachers,  on
behalf  of  the  Colossians,  that  they  were  not  to  be  judged  in  respect  of  their  non-
observance  of  Jewish  institutions.  And  the  ground  on  which  he  does  so  is  this.  These
institutions  (in  their  purity,  and  not  as  exaggerated  in  Essenism)  were  only  shadows  of
the  things  to  come.  They  were  connected  with  what  was  substantial  (and  therefore
were  cliannels  of  blessing  so  long  as  they  lasted),  but  Christians,  having  got  the  sub-
stasttal  in  Christ,  are  necessarily  freed  from  the  shadowy  in  the  Law.  No  conclusion  is
to  be  drawn  from  this  adverse  to  gospel  institutions,  "  We  may  observe,"  says  Alford,
commenting  on  this  passage,  "tba^  if  the  ordinance  of  the  sabbath  had  been  in  any
form  of  lasting  obligation  on  the  Chiistian  Church,  it  would  have  been  quite  impossible
for  the  apostle  to  have  used  this  language."  This  carried  out  would  take  the  ground
from  under  all  gwBpel  institutions.  There  would  be  no  sign  whatever  now,  connected
with  our  religion,  the  reality  having  come.  Liberation  from  all  form  is  not  certainly
the  New  Testament  idea.  An  argument  may  be  drawn  from  the  context.  Circumcision
was  a  shadow  of  the  coming  reality,  viz.  the  putting  off  of  the  body  of  the  flesh  (death
to  the  old).  This  reality  we  have  now  in  Christ,  but  it  does  not  therefore  follow  that
it  is  disconnected  from  all  positive  institution.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  the  teaching
of  the  apoetle  that  the  same  reality  has  been  put  into  the  gospel  institution  of  baptism.
Another  argument  may  be  diawn  from  the  text  itself.  One  of  the  feasts  referred  to  is
the  Passover.  The  Paschal  lamb  was  a  shadow  of  the  coming  reality,  viz.  the  sacrifice
of  Christ.  But  that  great  gospel  reality  has  not  been  disenahrined.  On  the  contrary,
it  has  been  put  into  an  institution,  which  is  to  last  till  the  close  of  the  earthly  order  of
things.  So  with  the  sabbath.  It  foreshadowed  the  reality  of  rest  in  Christ.  We  have
now  got  ihe  substance,  but  still  the  substance  has  been  put  into  the  institution  of  the
Lord's  day,  in  which  it  will  remain  till  all  earthly  institutions  are  done  away.  Only
there  is  this  to  be  remembered,  in  connection  with  our  use  of  gospel  institutions.  We
are  not  to  be  legalistic  in  the  use  of  them.  We  are  not  to  feel  as  though  baptism,  or
the  Lord's  Stipper,  or  the  Lord's  day  had  any  magical  power  in  them.  They  simply
serve  to  bold  up  gospel  realities  for  our  faith  to  grasp.  And  there  is  a  freedom  (as  of
sons)  which  belongs  to  us  in  the  use  of  them,  such  as  there  was  not  connected  with
the  Law.

II.  Angel-wobship.  "  Let  no  man  rob  you  of  your  prize."  The  Colossian  Christians
are  here  compared  to  the  contenders  in  the  Grecian  games.  The  prize  for  which  they
were  contending,  and  which  they  were  in  the  way  of  obtaining,  was  eternal  life.  The
word  translated  "rob"  might  seem  to  point  to  the  false  teachers  as  showing  hostility  in
the  character  of  judges.  But  that  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  Pauline  conception,
'U  which  Christ  is  Judge.  Bather  are  we  to  think  of  them  as  showing  their  hostility
in  interfering  with  them  in  one  form  or  another,  so  as  to,  bring  it  about  that  they,  the
ColossianB,  did  not  receive  the  prize  from  the  judge.  And  this  is  required  by  the  con-
ii^tion.  For  the  false  teachers  are  represented  as  putting  an  obstacle  in  the  way  of  the
Colossians  to  trip  them  up  so  that  they  lose  the  prize.  The  obstacle  is  angel-worship.
1.  Its  spurious  humility.  "  By  a  voluntary  humility  and  worshipping  of  the  angels,
dwelling  in  the  things  which  he  hath  seen,  vainly  puffed  up  by  his  fleshly  mind."  We
have  already  described  the  Basiern  doctrine  of  successive  emanations.  These  the  Bssenes
(with  their  Jewish  tendencies)  identified  with  the  successive  orders  of  angeli.  These
orders  at  intervals  filled  up  the  distance  between  God  and  men.  They  were  so  familiarly
known  as  to  be  named.  There  was  an  appearance  of  humility  in  that.  For  it  west
on  the  suppositiou  of  the  unapproachableneis  of  Qod.  We  are  such  insignificant  beingt
that  it  is  not  for  us  to  worship  se  great  a  being  as  God.  It  only  becomes  us  to  worship
the  beiBfts  that  lie  nearer  to  us  (the  angels),  and  who  have  had  more  immediately  to  do
wTth  our  creation.     li^^garding  this  humility  tlie  apostle  asserts  that  it  h^d  its  grsurui

OOl/OSSIAiSJi,  B


130  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [ch.  ii.  1— 2a

in  (heir  own  will,  not  in  reality.  The  way  in  which  he  makes  it  out  is  this :  The
aiigel-worshi|iper  "dwells  in  the  things  which  he  hath  seen."  This  must  be  held  lo
be  a  great  blot  on  the  Bevised  translation.  The  meaning  suggested  is  that  the  angel-
worshipper  is  an  inhabitant  of  the  wurld  of  sense,  'i'his  is  nothing  less  than  grotesque.
For  the  angel-worshipper  shows  the  spuriousnesa  of  his  humility  by  confidently  going
across  the  boundary  line  of  sense.  "Dwelling  in  "  is  a  most  objectionable  translation.
The  word  is  literally  to  step  on,  to  step  off  one  place  on  to  another.  The  exact  sense
depends  on  the  retention  or  non-retention  of  "not"  in  the  text.  The  former  makes
the  better  sense,  well  brought  out  in  the  old  translation,  "  intruding  into  those  things
which  he  hath  not  seen."  The  latter  has  a  slight  preponderance  of  authority  in  its
favour,  and  may  he  understood  as  giving  the  sense — stepping  on  to  the  domain  of  tlie
visionary.  The  general  meaning  is  undoubtedly  this — that,  while  professing  (in  his
humility)  that  he  is  only  fit  to  worship  angels,  he  penetrates  illegitimately  into  the
invisible  world,  i.e.  not  in  the  way  of  faith  and  revelation.  He  makes  the  large  asser-
tion that  the  Divine  Being  does  not  care  for  our  worship.  And  he  names  (as  though
he  had  actually  seen)  the  different  orders  of  angels.  And  so  the  apostle  makes  it  out
to  be  not  humility  at  all.  It  is  (when  unbared)  inflation.  It  is  inflation  with  what  is
baseless,  unreal.  It  is  inflation  from  a  bad  principle — the  mind  of  the  flesh  (as  dis-
tinguished from  the  mind  of  the  Spirit).  That  is  to  say,  there  is  in  it  fleshly  discontent
with  the  simple  contents  of  revelation  regarding  the  angel-world.  And  there  is  the
fleshly  desire  to  appear  to  know  more  than  is  to  be  known.  The  lesson  to  be  learned
from  this  is  that  we  are  not  to  undervalue  our  humanity.  We  are  all  the  greater  beings
that  our  Father  in  heaven  is  so  great.

"We  look  up  in  our  littloneei
To  tliy  majestic  state  ;
Our  comfort  is  thou  art  so  good.
And  that  thou  art  so  great."

As  the  an  gel- worshipper  said  that  it  was  not  for  us  to  worship  God,  so  the  agnostic
says  nowadays  that  it  is  not  for  us  to  know  God.  If  there  is  a  God,  he  is  not  to  be
known,  and  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  go  beyond  the  known.  There  is  an  appearance  of
humility  in  that,  but  if  there  is  abundant  evidence  against  holding  the  existence  of
God  in  suspense,  then  it  is  not  really  an  indication  of  humility,  but  rather  of  proud
dislike  of  God.  2.  Its  renunciation  of  the  Head.  "  And  not  holding  fast  the  Head,
from  whom  all  the  body,  being  supplied  and  knit  together  through  the  joints  and
bands,  increaseth  with  the  increase  of  God."  The  apostle  puts  his  objection  to  angel-
worship  on  a  strong  basis  of  truth.  The  parts  of  the  body  are  jointed  and  banded.
The  joints  and  bands  serve  for  the  body  being  nourished  and  compacted.  This  take^
place  in  connection  with  a  common  centre  of  vital  energy.  The  result  is  the  increase
appointed  for  the  body  by  G;od.  So  Clnistians  in  their  relations  to  one  another  are  as
jomts  and  bands.  They  form  lines  along  which  communications  can  be  sent  fiom
Christ,  by  which  the  Church  is  nourished  and  compacted  and  has  its  appidnted  increase.
But  this  is  on  condition  of  holding  fast  the  Head.  The  angel-worship,  by  wbicli  the  false
teachers  would  have  tripped  up  the  Colossians  on  their  way  to  the  goal,  would  have
been  a  losing  hold  of  Christ.  It  would  have  been  a  substituting  for  the  mediation  of
Christ  the  mediation  of  inferior  beings.  It  would  have  been  fatal  severance  from  him
who  does  the  whole  work  of  mediation  for  men.  And  the  same  strong  objection  is  to
be  taken  to  the  regard  paid  to  angels,  to  saints,  especially  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  in  the
Church  of  Rome.  Whatever  distinctions  may  be  drawn  by  Roman  Catliolic  theologians,
whatever  safeguards  may  be  adopted,  the  practical  result  is  what  the  apostle  notes  her^ ,
the  letting  go  of  the  all-sufficiency  of  the  mediation  of  Christ  and  the  paralyzing  of  the
Church's  energies.

III.  Aboetioism.  The  teaching  of  the  apostle  is  that  Christians  are  freed  from
mundane  ordinance*.  "If  ye  died  with  Christ  from  the  rmliments  of  the  world,  why,
as  though  living  in  the  world,  do  ye  subject  yourselves  to  ordinances  ?  "  One  part  «<
the  truth  of  baptism  is  that  we  are  sliaiers  with  Christ  in  his  death.  We  not  only  die
with  Christ ;  but  there  is  something  to  or  from  which  we  die.  This  is  thought  of  some
times  as  sin,  sometimes  as  self,  suinetimes  as  the  Law.  It  is  here  thought  of  as  th
ivorld  in  its  mdimentt,  that  )■  to  say,  its  t«ltcbiugs  and  rules  (the  latter  promine


(iH.n.  1— 23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANa  181


here),  which  are  all  rudimentary  compared  with  the  perfect  form  of  Christianity.  We
have  died  to  the  world  (God-forsaking)  and  its  ordinances,  why  then,  as  though  living
in  the  world  (as  though  we  had  not  died,  as  though  our  former  relations  to  the  woi  Id
were  still  maintained),  should  we  suhject  ourselves  to  its  ordinances?  1.  These  ordinance*
are  prohibitory.  "  Handle  not,  nor  taste,  nor  touch."  Some,  hy  a  strange  blunder,  have
sujjpoiied  this  to  be  an  inculcation  of  abstinence  hy  the  apostle.  He  is,  on  the  contrary,
disparagingly  giving  the  spirit  of  asceticism.  It  said,  "Abstain,  abstain,  abstain."  Ha
gives  the  very  words  of  asceticism,  "  Handle  not,  nor  taste,  nor  touch."  The  words  aie
given  in  the  correct  order  in  the  Eevised  translation.  With  a  descent  of  language,  theie
is  an  ascent  of  superstition.  The  things  referred  to  we  are  not  to  handle,  noi  are  we  to
tasto  them,  nor  have  the  slightest  contact  with  them.  The  error  of  asceticism  is  that
it  makes  prohibition  (negation)  the  essence  of  religion.  The  counteractive  thougiit  is
that  it  is  not  by  heaping  up  prohibitions  that  man's  spiritual  need  can  be  met.  2.
These  ordinances  relate  to  the  outward.  "  All  which  things  are  to  perish  with  the
using."  The  things  are  the  foods  and  drinks  which  were  prohibited.  The  apostle
seems  to  direct  a  double  argument  against  asceticism.  The  meats  and  drinks  had  a
good  property;  they  had  also  a  defect.  (1)  They  were  for  use.  "With  the  using"
is  his  language.  That  is  to  say,  they  had  no  inherent  evil  (according  to  the  ascetic
idea).  They  were  made  to  be  handled,  to  be  tasted,  to  be  touched.  They  were  made
for  consumption.  They  were  made  (with  a  certain  heartiness  in  the  expression  used)
to  be  used  vp.  (2)  They  were  in  the  use  of  them  to  go  to  corruption.  They  could  not
be  used  over  again.  Decomposition  set  in  which  became  complete  (destruction).  As
they  could  not  thus  be  the  be-all  for  man  (not  being  eternal),  so  neither,  on  the  other
hand,  was  religion  to  be  placed  in  mere  ab.-jtinence  from  them.  3.  These  ordinances  are
humanly  imposed.  "After  the  precepts  and  doctrines  of  men.*  There  were  numerous
ordinanc  s  of  Ood  before  the  perfect  religion  came.  These  had  close  connection  with
religion  as  Divine  helps.  They  were  laid  down  authoritatively  by  God,  and  by  them
God  taught  important  lessons.  But  the  ascetics  were  out  of  date  with  their  ordinances
(partly  Jewish  tliey  were  in  Essenism).  They  were  only  (even  tlie  Jewish  parts  of
them)  the  precepts  and  doctrines  of  men.  There  was  no  authority  for  imposing  them
on  the  consciences  of  men.  4.  These  ordinances  are  not  in  their  contents  entitled  to  be
called  wisdom.  "  Which  things  have  indeed  a  show  of  wisdom  in  will-worship,  and
humility,  and  severity  to  the  body;  but  are  not  of  any  value  against  the  indulgence  of
the  flesh."  Ascetic  observances  were  thought  to  be  wisdom.  They  were  intimately
associated  with  worship.  They  were  supposed  to  be  based  on  the  two  great  virtues  of
humility  and  self-denial.  The  ascetics  had  the  reputation  of  carrying  these  virtues
even  to  excess.  We  have  already  referred  to  the  practices  of  the  Bssenes.  As  an
illustration  of  what  the  apostle  means  by  humility  and  severity  to  the  body,  we  may
take  the  modem  instance  of  Lacordaire.  "  Immediately  after  Mass,  and  while  his  face
was  yet  lighted  up  with  ineffable  joy,  he  would  seek  the  cell  of  one  of  his  brethren,
kneel  humbly  down,  and  beg  for  the  full  severities  of  discipline.  Bising  from  it,  all
bleeding,  he  would  press  his  lips  on  the  feet  of  him  who  had  chastised  him,  and  over-
whelm him  with  expressions  of  gratitude.  Sometimes  he  would  place  himself  under
the  monk's  feet,  and  remain  there  a  quarter  of  an  hour  in  silence ;  sometimes  he  would
not  be  content  without  the  bestowal  of  still  ruder  chastisement — he  must  be  boxed  on
the  ears,  be  spit  upon,  be  ordered  about  like  a  slave, '  Go,  wretch,  brush  my  shoes,  bring
me  this  thing  or  that;'  he  must  even  be  spurned  like  a  dog.  Once  in  the  convent  at
Chalais,  after  having  delivered  an  affecting  sermon  on  humility,  he  felt  irresistibly
impelled  to  follow  up  precept  by  example.  He  came  down  from  the  pulpit,  begged  the
assembled  brethren  to  treat  him  with  the  severity  he  deserved,  and,  uncovermg  his
Bhoulders,  received  from  each  of  them  twenty-five  strokes.  The  community  was  a
large  one,  and  the  ordeal  lasted  a  long  time.  Brethren,  novices,  and  fathers  stood  by
in  deep  emotion  until  all  was  over,  and  Lacordaire  rose  up  pale  and  exhausted.  One
Good  Friday  he  made  himself  a  cross,  raised  it  in  a  subterranean  chapel,  and,  bound  to
it  by  cords,  remained  on  it  three  hours."  The  apostle  teaches  that  ascetic  observance*
have  only  a  show  of  wisdom.  (1)  They  are  voluntary.  He  points  to  this  element  in  the
worship  with  which  they  were  associated.  We  are  to  have  soul-humiliation  before  God.
We  are  to  have  humiliation  for  sin.  But  there  is  no  call  for  our  demeaning  ourselves
or  our  demeaning  the  humanity  which  God  has  given  us.    And  such  demeaning  is  uu4


18t  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANS.  foH.  n.  1— 2»

to  be  taVen  as  an  iDdication  of  soul-humiliation.  In  the  aame  way,  we  have  to  deny
ourselves.  The  apostle  even  notes  severe  treatment  of  his  body,  "I  buffet  my  bndy,  and
bring  it  into  bondage."  But  we  are  not  wantonly  to  buffet  the  body,  as  though  God  had
given  it  to  be  a  plague  to  the  spirit,  or  as  though  it  were  meritorious  in  itself  to  do  so.
Such  severity  is  not  to  be  taken  as  a  true  laying  of  self  on  the  altar.  (2)  They  are
ineffective.  He  finds  no  fault  with  the  end.  They  are  intended  to  check  the  indulgence
of  the  flesh.  But  he  denies  them  value  as  means  toward  that  end.  Tljey  have  inly  a
charm  for  the  few;  the  many  must  be  repelled.  And  even  with  the  few  they  are  no
pBoper  safeguards.  There  are  often  witnessed  outbreaks  of  the  flesh,  and  even,  where
there  are  not  such  outbreaks,  there  is  not  the  proper  condition  of  the  spirit.  The  only
proper  safeguard  is  the  positive  of  the  risen  life  with  Christ,  and  especially  of  attraction
toward  him,  to  the  consideration  of  which  the  apostle  proceeds. — li.  F.

Vers.  1 — S. — Three  wonderful  thinga.    We  have  here—

I.  A  NOBLE  ANXIETY.  In  the  words  he  here  uses  Paul  pictures  his  eagerness  as  the
eagerness  of  the  racer  and  the  wrestler  in  the  then  familiar  national  games.  So  far  there
is  nothing  very  rare,  for  the  spectacle  of  anxious  men  struggling  with  keenest  eagurneas
to  gain  some  purpose  of  their  own  is  common.  Life  is  an  arena  crowded  with  such.
But  the  elements  of  nobleness  in  Paul  as  here  discovered  are:  1.  His  anxiety /or  others.
He  says  to  the  men  of  Colossae — My  "  conflict  is  for  you."  It  is  no  self-centied  life
that  Paul  lives  when  he  spends  himself  lavishly  for  these  early  Churches.  2.  His
anxiety  for  the  absent.  There  is  a  counterfeit  coin  in  cunent  speech :  "  Out  of  sight,
out  of  mind."  It  is  a  proverb  coined  in  the  mint  of  a  very  shallow  and  selfish  life.  It
is  only  true  of  the  worst  men.  Such  a  spirit  (1)  limits  power  ;  (2)  narrows  chaixtcter.
Whilst  real  care  for  the  absent;  (1)  Increases  the  power  of  the  mind.  It  gels  strong
enough  to  wing  its  pinions  over  oceans  and  even  to  pierce  other  worlds.  (2)  Cultivates
a  tjnritual  habit.  It  delivers  man  from  being  the  creature  of  sense.  3.  His  anxiety
for  those  with  whom  he  had  no  direct  connection.  He  is  caring  for  the  group  of  Churches
on  the  Lycus  that  he  had  not  planted  or  even  visited.  It  was  puie,  disinterested  love.
Biich  is  Paul's  noble  anxiety.  Wherein  does  the  modern  gospel  of  altruism  excel  this
gospel  Paul  believed  and  practised  ?  And  where  has  altruism  the  motives  with  which
Christianity  pulsates  or  the  examples  that  Christianity  can  cite?

II.  A  BLESSED  EXPERIENCE.  Analyzing  these  verses,  we  find  signs:  1.  Of  personal
comfort.  The  word  "  comfort"  here,  as  in  the  word  "  Comforter,"  points  to  more  than
solace ;  it  tells  of  encouragement,  strengthening.  What  better  experience  could  he
desire  for  the  membersof  this  young  Church  than  that  their  hearts  should  be  comforted  ?
But  to  that  is  added  the  blessing :  2.  Of  social  security.  Few  expressions  can  better
describe  a  completer  unity  than  this,  "knit  together."  It  means  an  interweaving  of
sympathies,  an  interlinking  of  destinies.  And  this  interweaving  and  interlinking  is
attained  by  the  highest  and  surest  method,  "in  love."  8.  Of  firm  conviction.  "Full
assurance."  There  is  much  more  here  than  mere  opinion ;  there  is  conviction.  A  con-
viction, too,  of  man's  noblest  faculty,  the  understanding,  which  is  more  than  the  reason
alone.  And  this  complete  conviction  is,  as  to  the  truth,  of  the  supremest  importance,
namely,  the  acknowledgment  of  the  open  secret  about  God.

III.  An  open  secret.  As  we  have  seen,  Paul  did  not  mean  by  "  mystery"  an  unknow-
able, mystical  something,  but  rather  a  truth  once  hidden  but  no  longer  concealed,  a
truth  fully,  freely  revealed.  Christianity  is  the  open  secret.  The  self-revelation  of
Clirist  is  the  revelation  of  man,  of  duty,  of  God,  of  Heaven.  In  him  were  stored  away
all  the  riches  of  truth  and  love  for  which  men  cried.  He  is  the  exhaustless  Storehouse
of  God's  supplies  for  man's  higher  nature.  He  is  the  still  small  voice,  and  God  is  in  the
voice,  and  only  the  listenint;  will  hear.  Or  he  is  a  vast  mine  of  thought,  of  synipaihy,
of  giaoe,  and  only  the  industrious,  who  sink  the  shaft  of  incjuiry,  of  fellowship,  of  iitith,
will  know  what  the  mine  contains,    Paul  knew. — U.  B.  T.

Vers.  4 — 7. — Bless/'d  Christian  possibilities.  These  words  of  apostolic  desire  open
to  us  three  blessed  Christian  possibilities — ^a  possibility  to  the  Church,  a  possibility  to
the  iiiciividual,  and  a  possibility  to  the  inner  life  of  each.

I.  The  fobmidablb  stkenqth  possiblb  to  a  Christian  Church.  The  apostle  declares
that  it  gave  him  joy  to  behold  the  condition  of  the  Coloesian  Church ;  indeed,  the  words


tAit.1-28.')         Tfifi  EPISTLS  TO  TM  OOtOSSlAKS.  tU

he  ueea  describe  his  looking  again  and  again  because  of  the  joy  it  gave  him.  What
gave  him  such  joy?  1,  Their  orderly  array.  2.  Their  solid  front,  as  the  word  "  stead,
fastness  "  here  depicts.  In  the  centre  of  the  military  world,  and  made  a  soldier's  guar  I,
no  wonder  Paul  lays  his  hands  on  metaphors  so  vividly  suggesting  precision,  coiupaot-
ness,  obedience.  He  sees  how  a  Church  can  be  perfectly  marshalled  for  its  mission — the
mission  of  a  holy  war  against  ignorance,  pride,  selfishness,  sin.  Well  for  a  Church  to
have  its  every  member  a  "  defender  of  the  faith."

II.  The  constant  growth  possible  to  the  Christian  ohabacteb.  The  growth
implies  life.  1.  The  origin  of  the  life  is  here  described.  It  is  "  having  received
Christ."  As  Simeon  took  the  holy  infant  into  his  arms,  the  true  Christian  receives
Christ  into  his  trust,  thoughts,  affections.  2.  The  progress  of  life  is  here  described.
The  three  metaphors  used,  of  a  path,  a  tree,  a  structure,  teach  the  same  lesson  ut
intimate  and  advancing  union  with  Christ.  Whether  walking,  or  being  rooted,  or
being  built,  it  is  all  "  in  Christ."

HI.      The     PBRPETITAti     THANKSaiVINa     POSSIBLE    IN     THE     ChBISTIAN     LIFE.       Tilis

summons  to  thanksgiving  is  a  sort  of  refrain  throughout  the  Epistle  (ch.  i.  10  ;  iii.  15,
17  ;  iv.  2).  Faber  inquires  whether  there  can  be  true  worship  without  joy.  iJccaiise
he  asserts,  "  Worship  is  not  fear  of  God  or  love  of  God,  but  delight  in  God."  This  is
Paul's  exposition  and  doctrine,  for  there  must  be  joy  in  thanksgiving.  And  perpetual
thanksgiving  is  the  true  spirit  of  those  who  are  (1)  objects  of  perpetual  piouidence ;
(2)  subjects  of  perpetual  grace.    Therefore  abound  with  thanksgiving. — U.  R.  T.

Vers.  8—15. — The  complete  man.  The  one  thought  around  which  we  may  let  the
many,  varied,  and  some  of  them  strange  ideas  of  this  paragraph  gather,  is  the  conception
of  the  complete  man.    The  words  teach  us —

I.  That  the  complete  kan  is  not  led  away  by  ebbob  in  thought  ob  by  evil  in
LIFE.  Any  one  who  is  so  led  is  incomplete.  And  the  apostle  is  here  warning  his
readers  to  be  on  their  guard,  lest,  having  once  been  emancipated  from  such  captivity,
they  should  be  insidiously  captured  again  and  taken  away  as  prey  into  such  slavtry.
His  words  here  show :  1.  Eow  error  in  thought  and  evil  in  life  are  closely  connected.
(Vers.  8, 18.)  2.  The  two  common  causes  of  such  error  and  evil.  "Traditiens  of  men,"
mere  superstitions,  are  the  "  rudiments  of  the  world  " — mere  beginnings  of  knowledge.
All  such  are  to  be  condemned  when  they  are  not  "  after  Christ ; "  that  is,  when  they
are  not  (1)  doctrines  of  which  he  is  the  Teacher,  or  (2)  doctrines  of  which  he  is  the
ultimate  Theme.

II.  The  complete  man  dbbives  his  completeness  from  Chbist.  "  Ye  are  complete
in  him,"  or  we  might  paraphrase  it,  "  Ye  are  filled  up  from  him."  This  paragraph
stiows  what  Christ  has  done  for  such  a  man.  1.  By  Christ  he  is  separated  from  evil.
(Vers.  11,  12.)  Circumcision  was  the  great  symbol  of  the  separation  of  the  Jews;
baptism  of  the  separation  of  the  Christians.  The  complete  man  is  as  one  "  circumcised
without  hands  "  by  Christ,  baptized  as  in  a  burial  by  Christ.  2.  By  Christ  he  is  made
alive  to  goodness  and  to  Ood.  (Vers.  12, 13).  Such  a  man  is  "risen  with  Christ."  He
is  a  man  marked  by  pre-eminent  livingness.  (1)  The  type  of  his  livingness  is  here :
the  risen  Christ ;  he  who  was  gloriously  alive.  (2)  The  means  of  his  livingness  are  here :
through  faith  in  the  mighty  power  of  God,  which  was  triumphantly  manifested  in  the
raising  of  Jesus.  3.  By  Ghnst  he  ia  emancipated  from  guilt.  (Vers.  14, 15.)  Most  vivid
and  full  are  the  metaphors  describing  emancipation  from  the  guilt  and  from  the  power
of  sin.  "  Blotting  out  handwriting,"  etc.  And  all  this  work  of  Christ  was  consummated
on  Calvary.  He  like  a  conqueror  nailed  to  his  cross  "  the  writings"  that  were  against
us ;  on  his  cross  he  openly  triumphed  over  evil.

III.  Christ  thus  makes  men  complete  because  or  what  he  is  in  himself.  The
life  of  God  must  be  wafted  in  upon  man ;  borne  in  upon  him.  Whence?  From  Christ,
"  in  whom  dwells  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,"  There  are  three  thoughts  here
about  Christ.  1.  All  the  fulness  of  God  is  in  him ;  he  is  not  a  mere  emanation  of  God ;
not  a  mere  flash  of  the  light,  but  its  Brightness ;  not  a  mere  tone  of  the  truth,  but  the
Word.  2.  All  the  fulness  of  God  is  permanent  in  Christ.  In  him  "  dwdleth."  He  is
a  reservoir  whose  waters  never  fail ;  he  does  not  say  he  has  bread  or  he  has  water  to
bestow,  but  he  is  the  Bread  of  life,  he  is  t^e  Water  of  life ;  the  Holy  Ghost  abode  on
him.    3.  All  the  fulnesi  of  God  was  incarnate  in  Mie  humanity.    It  flwelt  in  kim


134  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SS1AN8.  [ch.  n.  1— 23


"bodily."  The  purity,  righteousness,  wisdom,  compasBion,  love,  of  God  was  gathered
up  in  that  humaa  life.  He  was  Immaauel,  aud  from  his  fulness,  thus  complete,  last-
ing, human,  we  are  fed. — U.  E.  T.

Vers.  16 — 19. — Christian  independence.  Remembering  the  evils  in  the  Church  at
Colossje,  namely,  the  ceremonialism,  the  asceticism,  the  appeal  to  angelic  mediators,  and
at  the  same  time  recalling  the  theme  of  the  paragraph  preceding  the  verses  now  before
us,  the  complete  sufficiency  of  Christ  as  man's  Mediator,  nature's  Lord  and  Consecrator,
and  the  soul's  Deliverer  from  bondage  to  ceremonies,  we  are  prepared  to  notice  the
result  of  Christ's  work  for  man  and  over  man,  as  here  suggested,  and  to  consider  the
great  theme  of  Christian  independence.

1.  That  Christian  independence  is  a  febbdom  fbom  the  bondaob  of  obrbmont
AND  OP  superstition.  The  sixteenth  verse  suggests  what  ceremony  may  bind  men ;
the  eighteenth  what  superstition  may  enslave  them.  We  notice  the  Christian's  inde-
pendence :  1.  From  the  londage  of  ceremonialism.  The  form  of  this  bondage  varies,
but  its  spirit  continues.  The  form  of  bondage  in  those  days  was  (1)  bondage  as  to
food.  There  were  restrictions  as  to  meat  and  drink,  which  were  rigid  as  any  moral
code.  They  were  mostly  Jewish,  and  had  wrongly  been  inserted  in  the  Christian
system.  (2)  Bondage  as  to  days.  These  were  also  mostly  Jewish  anniversaries,  or
monthly  or  weekly  celebrations.  The  claim  of  their  observance  was  so  punctilious  as
to  be  a  sore  bondage.  Prom  both  of  these  the  Spirit  of  Christ  frees  men.  As  to  meats,
"nothing  was  commoner  unclean;"  as  to  days,  the  shadow  thrown  in  advance  had
given  way  to  the  substance.  2.  From  the  bondage  of  superstition.  A  heathen  super-'
stition  had  intruded  in  the  form  of  the  worship  of  angels,  which  led  to  "  a  voluntary
humility,"  that  is,  to  an  artificial,  self-conscious  aflfectauon  of  humility,  leading  to  the
prostration  of  men  before  imaginary  superior  beings.  From  this  parade  of  humility
and  morbidly  fostered  prostration  Christ  delivers  by  bringing  each- soul  into  conscious
relationship  with  the  Highest.  That  lofty  relationship  enjoyed,  there  wiU  be  no  cring-
ing before  any  who  are  inferior  to  him.

n.  That  false  tbachbks  reek  to  deprive  men  of  this  indbpendencb.  So  they
did  in  Paul's  day,  and  so  they  do  now.  They  "  beguile  "  men,  trip  them  up  in  the
race,  and  hinder  their  attaining  the  prize.  Two  sets  of  false  teachers  so  beguile  men.
1.  The  sentimentalist — those  who  foster  among  their  adherents  a  pietism  under  the
name  of  unworldliness.  2.  The  sacerdotalist — those  who  exercise  over  their  followers
a  priestism  that  makes  the  man  a  slave  of  the  institution,  instead  of  the  institution
being  a  servant  of  the  man.

III.  That  Christian  independence  is  derived  from  and  nourished  bt  union
WITH  Christ.  1.  The  right  relationship  with  Christ  gives  independence  because  of  the
strength  flowing  from  union  with  the  Head,  the  Source  of^all  power  and  control.  2.
This  right  union  with  Christ  gives  independence  because  it  involves  healthy  relationship
to  the  body,  i.e.  all  fellow-Christians.  There  is  none  of  the  ruptured  relationship  with
Christ  or  the  Church  that  some  count  liberty,  but  which  is  really  only  licence.  There
is  rather  the  being  healthily  and  perfectly  united  to  Christ  and  to  the  Church  by  the
ligaments  of  loving  relationship — ligaments  these  that  hold  all  together  and  hold  all  to
Christ,  and  give  him  the  complete  control  of  all.  Each  soul  has  liberty,  just  as  the
limbs  of  a  healthy  man  have  free  play.  Moreover,  such  a  soul  grows  with  the  growth
ot  God^U.  R.  T.

Vers.  20 — 23. — The  Christian's  exemption  from  londage  to  outwardness.  "The
rudiments  of  the  world,"  of  which  our  text  speaks,  are,  according  to  Bishop  Lightfoot,
"  the  rudimentary,  elementary,  ordinances  and  discipline  of  the  mundane  sphere;"  or,
according  to  Conj  beare,  "  the  childish  lessons  of  outward  things."  Taking  the  two
renderings  together,  does  it  not  seem  that  Paul  is  rather  speaking  of  the  spirit  of  out-
ward things,  and  not  of  outward  things  themselves — the  spirit  of  outwardness  ai
oppohed  to  that  of  inwardness  ?    And  if  so,  is  it  not  suggested  here —

I.  That  the  Christian  is  exempt  from  bondage  to  outwardnbss?  He  is  not
ordinance-ridden.  What  ordinances  does  Paul  primarily  speak  of?  Mingled  and  inter-
fused Judaic,  Gnostic,  Essene,  and  Pharisaic.  Paul  quotes  the  wr/rds  of  some  of  their
prescriptive  limitations  about  wine,  oil,  meat,  etc.     And  also  he  shows  what  embarg«


OH.  n.  1—23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  13.5

tliat  spirit  of  outwardness  placed  on  Intercourse  with  persons  wlio  were  (1)  ceremonially
unclean,  (2)  religiously  inlerior,  (8)  nationally  alien.  He  adduces  three  reasons  against
being  bourid  in  the  bondage  of  ordinances  and  regulations  concerning  such  outward
things.  1.  Tliat  such  things  themselves  are  transitnt  and  fleeting,  "  The  fashion  of
the  world  passeth  away,"  he  says  in  another  place;  and  here,  "  which  all  are  to  perish
with  the  using."  They  who  guide  their  course  by  such  things  are  as  rtiariners  who
would  direct  their  voyage  rather  by  the  clouds  than  by  the  stars.  2.  That  the  virtues
that  are  cultivated  in  care  for  such  are  artificial  virtues.  They  engender  (1)  vanity,
(2)  arbitrariness,  (3)  false  humility,  because  voluntary  and  affected.  3.  That  such
bondage  fails  in  its  object.    "  Not  in  any  honour."

II.  That  in  Chbist's  death  is  the  power  and  pattern  of  exemption  from  such
CUTWABDNESS?  Paul  is  accustomed  to  dwell  on  the  Christian's  complete  identifica-
tion with  Christ:  "crucified,"  "buried,"  "  risen,"  with  him.  Here  it  is  identification
with  Jesus  in  his  death.  "  Make  thou,  0  Christ,  a  dying  of  ray  life."  This  first  and
mainly  describes  a  dying  to  sin,  here  a  dying  to  the  dominion  of  outwardness.  It  is
the  paradox  of  Christian  experience,  "  I  am  truly  alive  because  I  am  dead."  About
this  insensibility  to  the  dominion  of  the  external,  this  "  death  to  outwardness,"  Paul
here  teaches ;  1.  Christ's  death  is  the  power  by  which  man  dies  to  merely  outward  rule
and  regulation.  Through  meditation,  sympathy,  fellowship,  faith  in  the  death  of
Christ,  not  only  is  the  soul  fired  with  hatred  to  sin  which  slew  him,  and  with  the  love
of  God  who  could  love  thus,  but  of  the  hoUowness  of  all  formality  and  the  coldness  of
all  legality  in  the  presence  of  such  motives.  2.  Christ's  death  is  the  pattern  of  such
exemption  from  bondage  to  the  outward.  The  unresponsiveness  of  his  dead  body  on  the
cross  is  an  image  of  the  soul  that  through  faith  in  him  is  dead  to  the  world.  That
independence  to  the  external  is  (1)  complete,  and  (2)  gradually  obtained.

**  Let  no  man  think  that  sudden,  in  a  minute.
All  is  accomplished  anil  the  work  is  done ;
Though  with  thine  earliest  dawn  thou  ehouldst  begin  it.
Scarce  were  it  ended  with  thy  setting  sun."

U.  R.  T.

Vera.  1 — 3. — St.  Paul's  anxieties  for  the  Colossians,  and  how  they  were  allayed.
I.  St.  Paul's  anxieties  for  brethren  he  had  never  seen.  We  infer  from  this
passage,  as  well  as  from  other  considerations,  that  the  apostle  had  not  visited  Coloss»
and  was  not  acquainted  with  the  Church.  Yet  he  felt  much  interest  in  them  and  had
many  anxious  thoughts  about  them.  Our  sympathies  are  not  to  be  confined  to  the
narrow  circle  of  our  acquaintance.  If  a  heathen  could  say,  "  Homo  sum,"  etc.,  much
more  should  a  disciple  of  "  the  Son  of  man  "  respond,  "  I  am  a  Christian,  and  consider
nothing  that  concerns  Christians  a  matter  of  indifference  to  me ; "  "  For  we  are  members
one  of  another,"  and  the  heresies  that  may  distract  our  brethren  in  France  or  the
persecutions  that  befall  the  converts  in  China  should  call  forth  our  anxieties  and  our
prayers.  The  apostle  has  to  utter  solemn  warnings.  Most  skilfully  does  he  attract
and  conciliate  these  unknown  Christiana  by  telling  them  of  his  cares  and  his  prayers
on  their  behalf.  There  was  an  liy^y  in  his  public  ministry  (oh.  i.  29)  and  in  his  quiet
hours  (ver.  1  ;  ch.  iv.  12).  It  was  caused  by  the  care  of  souls  (2  Cor.  xi.  28).
Absence  intensified  it.  (Illustrations:  Caged  bird  hearing  theories  ofitsyoting.  A
mother  hearing  of  the  sickness  or  spiritual  peril  of  a  child  far  from  home.  Cf.  2  Cor.
xi.  2,  3 ;  Gal.  iv.  19.)  "  The  pastor,"  says  Cyprian,  "  is  wounded  by  the  hurt  of  his
flock."  Paul's  anxiety  was  for  the  spiritual  comfort  and  concord  of  the  Colossians.
"  Comfort "  in  its  older  sense  includes  the  ideas  of  help  and  strength  as  well  as  of  soothing
and  consolation.  Error  weakens  as  well  as  disturbs.  The  attitude  of  perpetual  doubt
and  criticism  is  most  unfavourable  to  growth  and  harmony.  We  notice  three  things
that  he  was  very  anxious  for  the  Colossians  to  enjoy  as  means  of  preserving  them  from
the  errors  that  encompassed  and  assailed  them,  1.  Ardent  love.  It  is  by  love  that
we  gain  spiritual  discernment,  and  are  thus  enabled  to  explore  the  hidden  treasures  of
grace.  The  intellect  is  affected  by  the  heart  (Ps.  xiv.  1).  Love  to  a  godly  father  may  b«
our  safeguard  against  scepticism  ;  hpw  much  more  may  love  to  Christ  be  1  Like  a
rocking  stone,  our  soul  may  he  somewhat  swayed,  but  not  "  greatly  moved  "  (Ps.  Ixii.  2).
Like  a  magnet,  our  hearts  may  be  liable  to  partial  deflections,  but  still  point  towards


IM  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SS1AK8.         ton. «.  1--29.

the  pole.  Moreover,  love  will  unlock  many  a  truth.  Pascal  has  said,  "  In  or^er  to  love
human  things,  it  is  necessary  to  know  them  ;  in  order  to  know  things  that  are  Divine,  it
is  necessary  to  love  them."  If  we  trust  and  love  Christ  we  shall  know  him  ("  We  have
believed,  and  we  know"  etc.,  John  vi.  68,  69  ;  observe  the  order  of  the  words),  and  then
all  the  controversies  of  Christendom  need  not  shake  tis  (2  Tim.  i.  12).  2.  Intelligent
faith.  "  The  full  assurance  of  understanding,"  etc.  Love  as  a  mere  sentiment  may
degenerate  into  a  weak  toleration  of  any  error  that  disguises  itself  in  the  garb  of  love.
Or,  under  the  plea  of  jealousy  for  truth  and  love  for  souls,  it  may  be  depraved  into  an
intolerant  bigotry.  Love  must  be  a  means  to  an  eod  (John  viii.  31,  32).  There  are
hidden  treasures  of  truth  in  Christ  "  the  Truth,"  which  need  manly  inteftigence  insjiired
by  childlike  love  and  trust  (Ps.  XXV.  9  ;  Matt.  xi.  26).  3.  Steadfast  oonaistency.  (Vers.  6,
7  ;  see  next  sketch.)  We  are  thus  reminded  of  three  chief  preservatives  against  error-^
a  warm  heart,  a  dear  judgment,  a  clean  conscieflce  (Eph.  iv.  14, 15).

II.  How  St.  Paul  bought  to  allay  his  anxibtibb.  1,  He  strives /or  the  Oolossiant
in  prayer.  Like  his  ancestors  Abraham,  Jacob,  and  Moses,  and  his  brother  Epaphras
(ch.  iv.  12),  he  knew  what  it  was  to  strive,  to  wrestle  in  prayer.  No  doubt,  like  his
Master,  he  was  sometimes  "  in  an  agony  of  prayer."  Gather  up  Paul's  references  to  his
intercessions,  and  illustrate  from  the  lives  of  others  who  have  been  mighty  in  prayer  ;
e.g.  John  Welsh,  the  minister  of  Ayr,  and  son-in-law  of  John  Knox,  of  whom  it  is  said
that  he  used  always  to  sleep  with  a  plaid  upon  his  bed,  that  he  might  wrap  it  round  him
if  he  rose  in  the  night  to  pray.  Sometimes  his  weeping  would  awaken  his  wife,  and
when  she  asked  the  reason,  he  would  reply, "  0  woman,  I  have  the  seuls  of  three  thousand
to  answer  for,  and  I  know  not  how  it  is  with  many  of  them."  2.  He  points  them  to
Christ.  (Ver.  3.)  With  an  allusion  to  the  false  teachers  who  boaBtad  access  to  sorae  secret
knowledge  and  wisdom  into  which  they  could  initiate  their  disciples,  Paul  aesures  them
that  all  the  richest  treasures  of  a  wisdom  they  had  not  yet  attained  to  were  concealed
and  could  be  discovered  in  Christ  himsslf  (like  pearls  at  the  bottom  of  the  ocean).
The  truth  is  even  wider  than  the  application  the  apostle  gives  sf  it.  As  all  things
were  made  "by  him  and  for  him"  and  "consist  in  him,"  so  all  branches  of  knowledga
have  a  relation  to  him  and  find  their  truest  meaning  in  him.  (1)  He  is  the  Key  to
history.  Its  treasures  are  not  unlocked  until  God's  education  of  the  world  in  its
history  is  connected  with  the  advent  of  Christ  (John  i.  3, 4, 9, 10 ;  Gal.  iv.  4).  (a)  He
is  the  Interpreter  of  science,  which  may  reveal  many  of  its  secrets  to  a  godless  inves-
tigator, but  reserves  its  choicest  treasures  for  those  who  can  see  in  them  his  handy-
work.  (3)  The  philosophy  of  mind  and  of  Kiorals  is  best  understood  if  Christ  b«
known.  We  see  in  him  ideal  human  nature  and  the  power  which  can  recover  men
from  that  itijury  to  human  nature  which  philosophy  no  less  than  theology  must
recognize.  We  learn  the  supremacy  of  conscience,  the  dignity  and  value  of  the  soul,
and  the  fact  of  a  life  beyond  death.  (4)  Christ  is  the  Essence  of  true  thaology.  A
knowledge  of  Divine  things  apart  from  Jesus  Christ  is,  at  the  bast,  most  imperfect  and
unsatisfactory  (1  Cor.  i.  20,  21).  But  Christ  is  Light,  Truth,  Revelation,  God  (Luke  x.
22 ;  John  i.  18  ;  xiv.  9).  6.  Christ  is  the  Wisdom  of  God  and  the  Power  of  God  unto
salvation.  In  him  we  are  made  "  wise  unto  salvation,"  and  tliis  pearl  of  great  price  is
the  most  precious  of  all  the  treasures  which  can  be  found  in  him  (1  Cor.  i.  30, 31),  He
alone  can  satisfy  the  hunger  of  the  soul,  and  thus  fortify  it  against  the  errors  of  those
who  would  beguile  with  "  enticing  words  "  which  are  "  not  after  Christ." — ^E.  S.  P.

Vers.  4 — 7. — Congratulations  and  counsels.  We  have  seen  that  the  heresy  that
was  threatening  the  Colossian  Church  was  twofold  in  its  character.  Its  piop^ators
"  had  a  false  conception  in  theology  and  they  had  a  false  basis  of  morals."  These  two
errors  were  closely  connected  together,  and  seem  to  have  s])rung  from  the  prevalent  idea
that  matter  was  the  abode  of  evil  and  therefore  opposed  to  God.  It  was  the  plausibility
of  these  false  doctrines  that  made  the  apustl«  so  anxious.  But  he  had  the  firmest
conviction  that  the  Christ  he  proclaimed  could  satisfy  every  reasonable  want  and
aspiration  of  the  inquiring  spirit.  The  words,  "  This  I  say,"  etc.  (ver.  4)  look  back
over  vers.  1 — 3,  and  remind  them  both  of  his  aaxieties  and  his  convictions.  But  at
present  the  leaven  had  not  spread  in  the  Church,  so  that  the  apostle  can  address  to
them —

L  CoNOBATULATiOKS  ON  THEIR  BTSADTABTNBss.    (Ver.  6.)    St.  Paul  thus  most  wiscly


09.  It.  1-28.]         THE  EPtSTLB  TO  THE  OOLOSSUm  W

prepares  the  way  for  warnings.  He  shows  them  how  deep  is  his  interest  and  sympathy.
He  says  all  he  can  in  their  favour,  as  our  Lord  does  to  the  Ghurchea  in  Asia.  The
recognilion  of  what  is  good  in  others  is  one  of  the  best  means  of  helping  them  to  see
and  to  strive  against  error.  All  right-minded  Christians  at  CoIosssb  would  be  encouraged
by  the  declaiation  that  so  eminent  an  apostle  as  Paul  could  rejoice  in  them  while  lie
saw  tliem  holding  their  present  faith.  (For  other  illustrations  of  commendation,  see
Phil.  i.  3 — 5;  ii.  22;  2  Thess.  i.  3,  4;  3  John  .3,  etc.)  Men  can  more  easily  be
encouraged  m  the  truth  than  scolded  into  it.  The  terms  "  order  "  and  "  steadfast-
ness" may  both  have  been  used  as  military  figures,  suggested  by  the  apostle's
familiarity  with  military  matters  in  the  Prastoiian  camp  at  Eome  (of.  Bph.  vi.  13,  etc.).
He  saw  their  "  orderly  array  and  solid  front."  They  were  still  loyal  to  the  truth  and
steadfast  in  the  faith.  Their  ranks  were  not  yet  thinned  by  deserters,  in  spite  of  all  the
seductive  appeals  of  the  emissaries  of  error  around  them.  But  cautions  were  not
needless  in  the  midst  of  congratulations.  When  an  epidemic  is  in  the  country  pre-
cautions are  needed,  though  it  may  not  yet  have  entered  our  house  or  even  our  town.
A  fearless,  cheerful  mind  may  in  itself  be  one  precaution,  just  as  the  encouragement  in
our  faith  which  we  receive  from  the  sympathetic  words  of  experienced  Christians  may
be  one  safeguard  against  the  epidemic  of  unbelief.  But  with  these  congratulations  on
their  steadfastness,  St.  Paul  thinks  it  needful  to  blend—

II.  Cautions  respecting  theib  dangbrb.  (Ver.  4.)  Note :  1.  Paul  does  not  make
light  of  erroneous  teaching.  He  warns  against  "  enticing  words,"  "  persuasiveness  of
tpeech."  The  tendency  of  many  now  is  to  make  light  of  doctrinal,  definite  teaching
altogether,  using  the  Greek  term  for  "  doctrine "  (dogma')  as  a  terra  of  reproach — a
Bourse  as  childish  aa  it  is  dangerous.  Paul  knew  that  doctrine  had  a*  moulding
power  on  the  characters  of  those  who  came  under  its  influence  (Eom.  vL  17).  He  was
not  indifierent  even  to  the  form  of  sound  words  (2  Tim.  i.  13).  The  variety  of  meaning
in  good  honest  words  may  nevertheless  make  them  instruments  of  error,  not  to  say
deception.  (Illustrate  from  such  words  as  "  inspiration,"  "  atonement,"  etc.)  Solemn
cautions  are  suggested  to  teachers  and  disputants  by  Prov.  xviii.  21 ;  Matt.  xii.  36,  37.
2.  Paid  nowhere  charges  these  false  teachers  with  immorality  or  any  gross  sin.  Else-
where he  does  bring  such  charges  against  other  heretics  (1  Tim.  yi.  5;  Titus  i.  10 — 16).
Here  the  strongest  is  in  ver.  18.  This  is  instructive  for  two  reasons.  (1)  The
errors  at  Colosste  were  as  yet  in  the  bud,  and  had  not  brought  forth  the  bitter  fruit  that
was  natural  to  them.  Dr.  Lightfoot  has  shown  that  it  is  probable  that  the  more
pi-rilous  heresy  of  Cerinthus  was  the  outgrowth  of  these  errors  at  Colossae  (Comm.,  pp.
106.— 113).  The  gradual  corruption  of  the  truth  respecting  the- ministry  as  a  teaching
and  pastoral  office,  apparently  harmless  enough  at  first,  led  on  to  full-blown  sacerdo-
talism, Romanism,  Vaticanism.  (2)  We  are  reminded  of  the  special  danger  of  erron
when  held  and  taught  by  holy  men.  A  Tetzel  and  a  Tom  Paine  are  harmless  com-
pared with  advocates  of  substantially  the  same  doctrines  whose  lives  are  blamele&s.
We  must  seek  to  combine  charity  to  men  with  unflinching  opposition  to  their  erroneous
teaching  when  it  touches  the  "  faith  in  Christ."  "  Obata  principiis  "  (Jude  3).  8.  Paul
counsels  them  to  holdfast  to  the  gospel  of  Christ.  (Vers.  6,  7.)  Till  you  can  find  some-
thing bfttter,  "hold  that  fast  which  thou  hast,"  etc.  (Rev.  iii.  11).  They  had  received
a  definite  gospel  from  Epaphras;  Panl  certifies  it  as  his  own.  They  had  received
"  Jesus "  (a  living  example,  a  dying  Saviour)  as  "  the  Christ "  (God's  own  Son,  the
anointsd  Priest  and  King  of  men)  their  "  Lord  "  (Rom.  xiv.  9).  The  reception  of  this
gospel  had  brought  "  great  joy  in  that  city,"  and  they  could  still  "  abound  in  thanks-
giving" (ver.  7;  Bom.  v.  11).  They  had  begun  well;  now,  says  St.  Paul,  go  on  well ;
"  Walk  in  him."  Abide  in  Christ  and  proceed  hy  Christ,  for  as  he  is  "  the  Truth  "
wherein  we  are  to  abide,  he  is  also  "  the  Way  "  wherein  we  are  to  walk.  But  he  takes
for  granted  that  holding  the  truth  of  Christ  is  essential  to  walking  in  the  ways  of
Christ.  Notice  the  connection  of  Phil.  iii.  8 — 11  and  12 — 14.  This  is  still  further
seen  by  the  other  figures  which  he  employs.  The  first  is  that  of  a  tree.  Notice  the  tenses
employed  in  the  participial  clauses.  We  are  once  for  all  to  be  firmly  rooted  in  Christ.
As  "  God's  hugbandry,"  "  planted  In  the  house  of  the  Lord,"  the  roots  of  our  life  are
"hidden  with  Christ  in  God."  To  him  we  must  cling;  around  him  every  fibre  of  the
soul  must  twine.  Thus  "  rooted  and  grounded  in  love  "  because  in  Christ  himself,  we
shall  be  safe  against  the  gales  of  false  doctrine  (Eph.  ir,  11),  which  would  uproot  our


188  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANS.  [oh.  ii.  1— 2a

Bouls.  The  second  figure  is  that  of  a  house,  "  God's  building,"  a  more  frequent  figurs
(Eph.  iL  20 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  5).  Edification  is  a  gradual  work,  and  in  proportion  to  it  shall
we  be  "  established  in  our  faith."  In  the  West  Indies  we  have  seen  trees  that  seemed
to  combine  the  two  figures  of  this  verse.  In  the  magnificent  silk-cotton  trees  (Erioden-
drum)  we  see  enormous  trunks  sometimes  rising  eighty  or  a  hundred  feet  before  they  send
forth  any  of  their  huge  branches.  The  widespreading  roots  secure  the  safety  of  the
vast  superstructure  from  the  wildest  hurricane.  But  around  the  base  of  the  trunk  there
rise  above  the  roots  massive  buttresses  whereby  the  tree  is  "built  up"  to  still  greater
stability.  Thus  "rooted  and  built  up  "  in  Christ,  the  Cliristian  mny  defy  storms,  may
"wax  stronger  and  stronfier,"  may  bring  forth  "much  fruit,"  "abounding  therein
in  thanksgiving." — E.  S.  P.

Vers.  8—10. — Qhrist's  fulness  the  Christian's  safeguard.  While  thus  abiiling  and
walking  in  Christ  (vers.  6,  7),  the  Colossians  still  needed  the  warning,  "  Be  on  your
guard;"  "Take  heed,"  etc.     In  the  words  that  follow  we  find  —

I.  A  BUQGESTIVB   SKETCH   OF  THE   FALSE   TEACHING   THAT  ASSAILED   THE   CoLOSSIANS.

1.  It  came  in  the  garb  of  philosophy.  Eeal  philosophy  is  nowhere  condemned  by  the
apostle.  The  term  itself  warns  against  its  abuse.  It  is  attributed  to  Pythagoras,  who
taught  that  no  man  was  truly  wise  but  God  only,  but  he  claimed  to  be  a  lover  of
wisdom.  The  false  teaching;  at  CoIosseb  was  rather  a  theosophy  than  a  philosophj'.
As  such  it  was  "  vain  deceit "  (Job  xi.  7 — 9 ;  1  Cor.  i.  19 — 21 ;  iiL  18 — 20).  It  was  part
of  that  "  knowledge  which  is  falsely  so  called  "  (1  Tim.  vi.  20).  2.  It  claimed  respect
lecaute  of  human  authority  and  antiquity.  It  was  "  after  the  tradition  of  men."  So
far  as  th#error  was  of  Jewish  origin,  we  can  imagine  something  of  its  nature  from  the
references  to  it  in  the  Gospels  (Matt.  xv.  2 — 9 ;  Mark  vii.  3 — 5).  These  traditions  had
an  attraction  for  many  religious  minds  (Gal.  i.  14).  Grafted  upon  the  genuine  command-
ments of  God,  they  had  a  semblance  of  authority,  and  some  of  them  an  undefined
antiquity.  The  false  teaching  that  was  of  Gentile  origin  could  bring  forward  iu  its
support  names  eminent  in  the  philosophical  world.  But  the  authority  was  merely  ol
men  and  could  not  appeal  to  "  Scripture  inspired  of  God."  3.  It  prescribed  services
cmd  ceremonies  pleasing  to  the  unspiritual  mind.  The  rite  of  circumcision  (ver.  11),
the  strict  observance  of  feasts  or  fasts,  and  the  distinction  of  meats  (ver.  16),  might  form
important  parts  of  a  religion  which  would  be  easy  to  a  mind  religious  but  not  truly
spiritual  (Rom.  xiv.  17, 18).  4.  It  was  probably  recommended  by  the  personal  influence
of  one  or  more  popular  teachers  in  their  midst.  This  is  an  inference  from  the  words,
"  Take  heed  lest  there  shall  be  any  one  that  maketh  spoil  of  you  through  his  philo-
sophy," etc.  (Revised  Version).  A  devout  and  pure  heresiarch  is  a  source  of  peculiar
peril.  Hence  the  vehement  warning  in  Gal.  i.  8,  9.  5.  But  it  was  alien  from  the
doctrine  and  Spirit  of  Christ.  "  Not  after  Christ."  Paul  had  absolute  confidence  that
the  good  news  he  proclaimed  was  Christ's  own  gospel,  by  which  he  was  prepared  to  test
any  teaching,  and  if  needs  be  to  condemn  it  as  "a  different  gospel  which  is  not  another
gospel "  (Gal.  i.  6).  There  are  points  of  resemblance  between  the  heresy  at  Colossse  and
the  most  prominent  errors  of  the  present  day  that  are  suggestive.  Rationalism,  in  its
various  degrees  of  anti-supematuralism,  bases  itself  on  philosophy  and  science  (so-called);
it  speaks  in  tones  of  autiiority,  and  teaches  as  truths  the  thoughts  and  traditions  and
alleged  discoveries  of  men  quite  irrespective  of  whether  we  have  a  revelation  of  the
thoughts  of  God.  It  is  recommended  by  the  personal  influence  of  exemplar--  men.
"  Science  and  Christ  have  nothing  to  do  with  one  another  except  in  as  far  as  the  habit
of  scientific  investigation  makes  a  man  cautious  about  accepting  any  proofs "  (from
a  letter  by  the  late  Charles  Darwin  to  a  student  at  Jena,  June  5, 1879).  But  it  is  "  not
after  Christ,"  the  Christ  of  history  and  of  apostolic  doctrine.  Sacerdotalism  boasts  ol
antiquity,  bases  itself  on  the  tradition  of  the  early  Fathers  and  the  "  development "
of  apostolic  doctrine  rather  than  on  "  the  Scriptures  of  truth."  Its  ritual,  though
helpful  to  some  devout  minds,  involves  the  danger  of  spiritual  truths  being  hidden
behind  sacramental  symbols  and  religious  ceremonies.  It  makes  religion  easy  to  an
unspiritual  man.  And  sacerdotal  errors  are  commended  to  us  by  the  infiuence  of  men
IlluBtrious  both  in  talent  and  character.  Nevertheless,  the  most  attractive  sacerdotalism
is  "not  after  Christ."
iL  An  assueancb  that  the  fulness  of  Christ  can  supply  all  that  we  need.


CH.  n.  1—23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  1^9

(Vera.  9,  10.)  1.  The  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwelt  in  the  eternal  Word  from  the
ieginning.  This  is  one  of  tlie  aiiperhiiman  truths  revealed  by  God's  Spirit  and
which  stands  or  falls  with  Christianity  (John  i.  1 ;  1  John  i.  2).  2.  That  fulness  now
dwells  in  "  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,"  "  the  Word  made  flesh,"  "  bodily."  The  Incarnation  is
the  grandest  supernatural  fact  in  the  world.  It  is  a  "  present  truth,"  for  Jesus  Chiist
Btill  lives,  and  the  "fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwelleth  in  him"  still.  No  wonder  that
mysteries  and  miiacles  should  gather  around  our  incarnate  God.  The  transfiguration
and  the  resurrection  are  natural  to  him.    His  dying  rather  than  his  rising  is  miraculous.

3.  Sis  sufficiency  as  Mediator  renders  as  independent  of  all  other  mediation.  His  one
sacrifice  as  an  atonement  takes  the  place  of  all  the  elementary  lessons  of  Jewisli
symbolism,  and  makes  the  sacrifices  of  a  so-called  Christian  priesthood  a  practical  denial
of  his  work  on  the  cross  (Heb.  ix.  and  x.).  Since  he  is  "  the  Head  of  all  principality  and
power,"  we  need  neither  saints  nor  angels  as  intercessors  (1  Tim.  ii.  5;  Heb.  vii.  25),
nor  can  we  degrade  ourselves  to  receive  God's  absolution  from  an  intrusive  priest.

4.  The  fulness  of  Messing  that  flows  direct  from  Christ  can  satisfy  all  the  necessities  of  the
human  heart.  Let  us  not  make  light  of  churches,  ministries,  sacraments,  or  other  means
of  grace.  But  let  us  hold  fast  to  the  truth  that  Christ  himself  can  immediately  supply
all  our  needs,  so  that  we  may  be  "tre  him  made  full."  We  are  thus  reminded  of  inan's
emptiness  and  need  (John  xv.  5 ;  Eev.  iii.  17) ;  of  his  capacity  for  receiving  blessings
indefinitely  great  ("filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God");  of  "the  exceeding  abundant
grace  of  our  Lord"  (John  i.  16 ;  1  Cor.  i.  30;  Eph.  iii.  17—21 ;  Phil.  iv.  13) ;  and  of
the  need  of  union  with  Christ  by  faith  ("in  him")  as  the  necessary  condition  oi
spiritual  life.— E.  S.  P.

Vers.  11 — 15.— Ptirity,  pardon,  and  victory  through  Christ.  Errors  in  religion,  when
taught  sincerely,  are  intended  to  secure  spiritual  blessings  (e.g.  purity  by  austerities ;
peace  of  conscience  and  assurance  of  pardon  by  confession  and  priestly  absolution).
Bat  the  truth  of  our  completeness  in  Christ  strikes  at  the  root  of  all  sach  errors,  for  it
assures  us  that  all  the  blessings  we  can  need  may  be  gained  direct  from  him.  In  ver.  10
we  learn  that  the  headship  of  Christ  is  our  guarantee  that  we  are  not  dependent  upon
any  intermediate  superhuman  power.  In  vers.  11 — 15  we  are  reminded  that  the
personal  blessings  which  eiternal  rites  were  designed  to  secure  are  ours  if  we  are
Christ's.

L  PuBlTT.  Judaizing  teachers  taught  the  necessity  of  circumcision  even  by  Gentile
converts  as  a  means  of  purification  and  salvation.  St.  Paul  teaches  the  Colossians  that
they  have  no  need  of  this,  because,  by  union  with  Christ,  they  receive  that  inward  purity
of  which  circumcision  was  a  type  (ver.  11;  Eom.  ii.  28,  29).  Moses  and  the  prophets
had  seen  through  the  type  (Deut.  i.  16 ;  xxx.  6 ;  Jer.  iv.  4).  The  believer's  circum-
cision is  distinguished  from  that  which  was  typical  of  it  in  these  particulars :  1.  In  its
character;  spiritual,  not  external,  wrought  not  by  hands  but  by  the  Spirit  himself.
2.  In  its  extent ;  it  puts  off,  not  a  mere  morsel  of  the  flesh,  but "  the  body  of  the  flesh,"
the  whole  body  of  carnal  aileotions.  3.  Its  Author;  it  is  the  circumcision,  not  of  Moses
(John  vii.  22)  for  a  nation,  but  of  Christ  for  all  believers  (Phil.  iii.  3).  And  as  Paul
speaks  here  of  spiritual  circumcision,  so  does  he  also  of  spiritual  baptism.  His  argument
is  not,  "You  need  not  be  circumcised  because  you  have  been  baptized."  Here  he  speaks
highly  of  some  baptism  "  wherein  ye  were  also  raised,"  etc.  Elsewhere  he  clearly
denies  the  doctrine  of  regeneration  by  baptism  (cf.  1  Cor.  i.  13 — 17  with  1  Cor.  iv.  15).
It  would  be  strange  if  here  he  spoke  disparagingly  of "  hand-wrougl  it "  circumcision,  and
then  passed  on  immediately  to  speak  of  the  spiritual  efficacy  of  "  hand-wrought "
baptism.  This  would  be  to  introduce  the  very  element  of  ceremonialism  and  ritualism
which  he  is  here  denouncing.  Many,  never  baptized  with  water,  are  now  "in  Christ,"
in  gloiy.  It  is  the  spiritual  baptism  alone  in  which  we  are  buried  aud  raised  with
Christ  (Bom.  vl.  3 — 5).  The  one  great  baptism  of  the  New  Testament  is  that  of  the
Holy  Spirit  (Mark  i.  8 ;  Acts  L  5).  Of  that,  baptism  by  water  is  a  beautiful  emblem.
But  in  Paul's  Epistles  he  generally  speaks  of  that  "  one  baptism "  rather  than  of
baptism  with  water.  Here  he  speaks  of  a  spiritual  circumcision,  a  spiritual  death  and
burial  and  resurrection,  and  a  spiritual  baptism.  The  baptism  by  the  Holy  Spirit
is  that  purification  of  the  soul  from  the  love  and  dominion  of  sin  by  which  we  are  set
apart,  consecrated  to  a  course  like  Christ's,  to  a  spiritual  history  of  which  our  Lord'k


14d  THE  EPlSlLE  TO  THE  OOLOSStAKS.         tea.  n.  1-23

earthly  history  was  typical  as  well  as  causal.  By  union  with  him  we  are  "  crucified
with  Christ,"  "  dead  to  the  Law,"  "  dead  with  Christ,"  "  buried  with  him,"  "  risen  wi  h
him,""8ittii^  with  him  in  the  heavenly  places."  If  the  apostle  here  makes  an  allusion
to  water  baptism,  which  was  symbolic  of  the  higher  baptism,  his  argument  does  not  rest
on,  but  is  opposed  to,  the  supposition  that "  it  is  in  that  font,  and  when  we  are  in  it,  that
the  first  breath  of  [the  new]  life  is  drawn."  Nor  can  we  see  that  the  lowering  of  a
body  into  a  bath  and  the  lifting  it  up  again  is  a  significant  and  striking  symbol  of  the
burial  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  especially  when  we  remember  how  different  the
customs  of  burial  among  Jews  and  Eomans  were  from  our  own.  However,  the  mi  in
truth  of  these  verses  is  clearly  that  in  Christ  we  have  purity.  "  He  is  made  unto  us  >•{
God  sanctification."  Every  pure  motive,  every  good  resolution,  every  iioly  impulse  is
from  him.  Our  entire  renunciation  of  sin  ("  the  putting  off  of  the  body  of  the  flesh  ")
is  through  the  power  of  his  purifying  Spirit  (Gal.  ii.  19,  20;  vi.  14,  15).  By  faith  in
God,  who  by  his  Divine  power  raised  the  dead  body  of  our  Saviour  from  the  tomb
(Eph.  i.  19, 20),  we  too  are  "  raised  with  him,"  etc.  (ver.  12).  Whatever  he  who  has  raised
us  prescribes  as  means  of  attaining  greater  purity,  we  will  revere  and  observe;  but  we
reject  new-fangled  methods  of  hciliness  "after  the  tradition  of  men"  (Ps.  ciix.  128).

II.  "  JuBTlFiOATioN  OF  LiFR."  This  Pauline  phrase  (Rom.  v.  18)  sums  up  the  bless-
ings described  in  vers.  13,  14.  We  regard  Christ  as  the  Subject  of  the  whole  sentence.
He  is  one  with  his  Father  in  the  work  of  quickening  (John  v.  21 ;  Eph,  ii.  1 — 5),  and  of
pardoning  (ch.  iii.  13 ;  Eph.  iv.  32).  But  in  order  to  accomplish  this  Divine  work  of
giving  hfe,  there  needed  the  no  less  Divine  work  of  providing  justification.  For  there
was  what  Paul  describes  as  a  document  in  existence,  which  was  a  barrier  to  our  pardon.
It  was  God's  Law,  not  merely  for  the  Jews  (Rom.  iii.  19),  but  for  the  Gentiles  (Rom.  ii.
14, 15),  which  "  worketh  wrath  "  (Rom.  iv.  15).  But  Jesns  Christ,  in  whom  "dwelleth,"
etc.  (ver.  9),  has  removed  the  barrier.  He  had  power  to  forgive  sins  "on  earth  "  (Mark
ii.  10),  and  has  it  still  (Acts  v.  31).  The  value  of  Christ's  obedience  unto  death  as  an
atonement  for  sin  is  constantly  taken  for  granted  by  the  apostle.  He  was  not  sent  to
prove  it,  but  to  "deliver"  it  and  testify  to  it  (1  Cor.  xv.  3;  1  Tim.  ii.  6).  By  Christ's
vicarious  sacrifice  the  ransom  is  given,  the  bond  is  cancelled,  the  document  is  annulled,
and  our  sins  may  be  blotted  out  (Isa.  xliii.  25 ;  Matt,  xviii.  21 — 35 ;  xx.  28).  We
are  redeemed  from  the  curse  of  the  Law.  As  the  instrument  of  our  condemnation,  it  is
taken  out  of  the  way ;  it  is  crucified  with  Christ,  nailed  to  his  cross.  According  to
Paul's  allegory  in  Rum.  ii.  1 — 4,  the  Law,  a  holy  but  inexoralile  husband,  is  dead,  and
we  are  joined  to  a  no  less  holy  but  a  loving  Lord  and  Saviour.  The  conditions  of
acceptance  with  God  and  final  salvation  are  no  longer  "  The  man  that  doeth  these
things  shall  live  by  them,"  but  "Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be
saved  "  (Heb.  iii.  14  ;  1  Pet.  i.  9).  What  need  have  we  of  other  means  of  forgiveness  ?
of  angelic  intercessors  or  absolving  priests  or  euoharistic  sacrifices?  "In  him  ye  are
made  full."

III.  Delivbeance  moM  cub  infernal  foes.  Christ  in  his  fleshly  nature  was
exposed  to  the  assaults  of  sin  and  of  the  evil  one  throughout  his  life  (Matt.  iv.  1 — 11 ;
Luke  iv.  13)  till  the  last  day  of  it  (Luke  xxii.  53;  John  xiv.  30).  But  on  the  cross
his  lifeof  huniiliatiim  and  strife  came  to  an  end  (Rom.  vi.  10).  His  cry, "  It  is  finished !  "
declared  that  his  work  of  conflict,  as  well  as  his  work  of  atonement,  was  ended.  He
put  off  from  himself  once  for  all  and  for  ever  the  hostile  principalities  and  powers
(cf.  John  xii.  31 ;  Heb.  ii.  14  ;  1  John  iii.  8).  The  entrance  of  Christ  into  Jerusiilem,
commonly  called  his  triumphal  entry,  is  nowhere  called  his  triumph  in  the  New  Testa-
ment. His  triumph  was  on  the  cross.  The  powers  of  darkness  plotted  his  death,  and  by
his  death  they  received  their  deadly  blow.  The  malefactor's  cross  became  the  victor's  car
(Rom.  xiv.  9 ;  Phil.  ii.  7 — 11 ;  Eev.  i.  l6).  This  victory  is  for  us  who  are  "in  Christ."
Satan  and  all  his  allies  (Eph,  vi.  11,  12)  who  work  through  the  world  and  the  flesh  are
conquered  foes ;  they  know  it,  and  we  do  too  (Rom.  vi.  14 ;  viii.  37 — 39 ;  xvi.  20 ;
1  Cor,  X7.  55 — 57 ;  Gal.  vi.  14).  We  need  no  other  allies  in  this  conflict,  no  mystic
methods  of  exploring  the  secrets  or  annulling  the  power  of  our  spiritual  foes  (Phil.
iv.  13).— E.  S.  P.

Vers.  16—19. — Two  dangers  to  he  avoided.  We  find  here  two  notes  of  warning — "  Let
no  m»n  judge  you ; "  "  Let  no  man  rob  you,"    Two  dangers  need  to  be  guarded  against.


OH.  n.  1—23.]  THK  EPiciTLB  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANS.  14]

I.  Tmt  INFLUBNOB  OF  DNJTJ8T  JtTDnMENTS.  The  apogtie  has  here  In  view  the  prac-
tical error  of  Judaizing  ritualists.  They  liad  recfiveil  from  Moses  regulations  respecting
meats  and  drinks  and  feasts,  which  they  endeavoured  to  enforce  on  Gentile  converts  as
necessary  to  salvation  (Acts  iv.  1).  If  they  did  not  always  proceed  to  this  extreme,
they  treated  others  as  negligent  of  most  imi)ortant  means  of  grace.  They  thus  brought
a  strong  pressure  to  bear  on  the  consciences  of  new  converts  who  had  received  no  such
instructions  from  apostles  or  other  Christian  teachgjs  who  had  "  begotten  them  through
the  gospel."  It  was  no  easy  thing  to  resist  such  pressure  exerted  by  men  witli  all  the
sacred  traditions  of  Judaism  behind  them  ;  just  as  it  must  have  been  hard  work  for  the
early  Beformers  to  resist  the  influence  of  the  hostile  opinions  of  all  the  leaders  and
Fathers  of  the  Christian  world.  (Illustrate  from  the  case  of  Cranmer.)  Thus  the
Colossian  converts  weje  in  danger. of  yielding  to  the  censorious  judgments  of  these
teachers  and  conforming  to  their  requirements.  In  so  doing  they  might  grasp  at
shadows  which  bekmged  to  Moses  and  lose  the  substance  which  was  Christ's.  I^cither
the  twelve  apostles  nor  Paul  made  light  of  Mosaic  ordinances  (Acts  xvi.  3 ;  xviii.  18  ;
xxi.  26)  or  saortd  seasons  (Acts  xvi.  13 ;  xviii.  21  j  xx.  16  ;  xxiv.  11).  But  St.  Paul
earnestly  protests  against  the  yoke  of  bondage  being  imposed  on  Gentile  converts.  We
too  must  beware  of  yielding  to  similar  pressure  from  ritualizing  Christians.  So  long  as
we  endeavour  to  observe  all  things  which  Christ  has  commanded,  we  must  be  prepared
to  brave  the  judgments  of  those  who  would  impose  on  our  consciences  observances  and
expedients  which  are  not  of  Divine  authorits" ;  e.g.  the  enforcing  on  the  conscience  of
the  observance  of  Good  Friday,  or  of  early  communion,  evening  communion  being
denounced ;  the  forbidding  of  marriage  during  Lent  or  Advent.  There  is  peril  in
regarding  any  human  appointments  as  taking  rank  with  Divine  ordinances:  "lam
afraid  of  you  "  (Gal.  iv.  10,  11).  There  is  positive  sin  in  enforcing  them  on  the  con-
sciences of  others  (Bom.  xiv.  1 — 6, 13).

II.  The  LOSS  of  odr  expected  pbize.  (Vers.  18,  19.)  This  danger  arose  from  the
theological  errors  of  the  advocates  of  a  rudimentary  Gnosticism.  This  heresy  was
more  serious  than  the  other,  as  we  infer  from  the  fact  that  to  lose  our  expected  prize
is  afar  greater  calamity  than  to  endure  the  condemnation  of  narrow-minded  brethren.
By  yielding  to  the  temptation,  even  through  the  influence  of  false  opinions,  of  robbing
Clirist  of  his  glory  as  sole  Mediator,  we  may  ourselves  be  robbed  of  our  prize,  our
"  crown."  False  doctrines  may  be  fatal  when  they  have  their  roots  in  moral  causes
»nd  bring  forth  "  wild  grapes.'.'  The  element  of  error  here  cliiefly  condemned  is  the
worship  of  angelic  mediators.  It  had  four  sources.  (1)  A  spurious  humility,  as
though  we  could  not  venture  to  have  access  to  God  except  through  the  mediiition  if
inferior  beings.  (2)  A  vain  pretence  to  know  more  than  is  revealed  respecting  the
W'  rid  of  spirits  ("Dwelling  in  the  things  which  he  hath  seen,"  t.e.  his  assumed  visions),
(.-i)  Spiritual  pride  (which  is  a  frequent  source  of  heresy  even  in  Christian  men  ;  1  Cor.
viii.  1).  (4)  An  imperfect  knowledge  of  or  trust  to  Christ  ("  not  holding  the  Head,'
etc.)  This  analysis  of  error  applies,  to  a  large  extent,  to  the  modern  errors  of  the
intei  cession  and  worship  of  angels,  saints,  and  the  Virgin  Mary.  They  arise  from :  (1)
Spurious  humility ;  as  though  a  child  should  appeal  to  his  father  through  a  domestic
servant,  when  his  elder  brother  was  appointed  as  his  tutor  and  counsellor  (1  Tim.  ii.  5 ;
Heb.  L.  14).  (2)  Pretended  knowledge ;  for  whatever  speculations  we  may  indulge  as  to
the  employments  of  "  the  dead  in  Christ,"  we  hnow  nothing  to  authorize  us  to  appeal
to  them  as  intercessors.  (3)  Spiritual  pride,  which  shows  itself  in  declining  to  be  satis-
fied or  even  in  setting  aside  "the  things  which  are  revealed"  respecting  worship  and
mediation  (1  John  ii.  2 ;  Eev.  xix,  10,  etc.),  and  exalting  our  own  imaginations  or  the
unsupported  assertions  of  fellow-sinners  to  the  level  of  the  true  sayings  of  God  (Rev.  ii.
14,  15,  20).  In  some  respects  Eomanists  and  spiritualists  are  victims  of  similar  delu-
sions. (4)  A  failure  in  "holding  fast  the  Head,"  etc.  Unhappy  menl  "if  thou
knewest  the  gift  of  Godl"  God  is  better  to  you  than  your  servile  fears  or  false
humility  would  suggest.  We  have  an  Advocate,  even  Christ  (John  xiv.  6 ;  Bph.  ii.  18).
We  need  no  advocate  with  him.  "  I  can  speak  more  safely  and  cheerfully  to  my  Jesus
than  to  any  of  the  holy  sjiirits  of  God  "  (Augustine).  The  angels  have  not  my  nature,
and  I  need  no  redeemed  sinners  as  intercessors,  since  1  have  the  Sinless  One  (Heb.  vii.
25,  26).  To  admit  any  one  to  share  with  Josus  Christ  the  glory  of  the  work  of  media-
tion is  (to  say  the  least)  to  "  hold  the  Head,"  not  "  feat,"  but  in  a  manner  that  ia  both


142  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [ch.  n.  1— 2a

lax  and  perilous.  If  we  are  "holding  fast  the  Head,"  we  must  acknowledge  him  as  th«
Image  of  God,  in  whom  "  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,"  as  the  Author
and  the  End  of  all  creation,  as  the  Lord  of  the  world  and  the  supreme  Buler  of  hia
Church,  as  the  great  Beconciler  between  God  and  man  by  the  blood  of  his  cross,  and  as
the  believer's  only  Hope  of  glory.  It  is  from  him  alone  that  his  members  receive
spiritual  supplies,  are  knit  together  and  grow.  False  teachers,  who  would  divert  our
faith  or  affections  from  him,  may  rob  us  of  our  reward.  (Illustration  :  Eacers  diverted
from  the  straight  course  toward  the  umpire  at  the  goal,  or  persuaded  to  neglect  one  of
the  laws  of  the  game  (Gal.  v.  7  ;  Phil.  iii.  12—14 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  5 ;  Heb.  xii.  1,  2).)  To
us  the  exhortations  come  home  (Bph.  iv.  14 — 16;  Heb.  iii.  12 — 14;  Eev.  iii.  11). —
E.  S.  P.

Vers.  20 — 23. — The  imrtMessness  of  unauthorized  ceremoni'ilism.  The  apostle  here
reverts  to  the  ethical  errors  of  the  false  teachers.  Combining  his  teaching  here  and
elsewhere  respecting  what  he  calls  "  the  rudiments  of  the  world,"  we  learn  the  follow-
ing truths : —

I.  "  The  bddiments  of  the  wobld  "  week  useful  ih  thbib  own  time  and  place.
The  difficult  expression,  "  rudiments  of  the  world,"  seems  to  mean  elementary  teaching
on  the  religious  life  which  was  no  part  of  the  teaching  of  Jesus  Christ.  It  was  not
necessarily  opposed  to  Christianity ;  for  it  included  much  of  the  Mosaic  legislation  under
which  the  Jews  were  treated  as  children  and  pupils  (Gal.  iv.  3).  These  rudimentary
lessons  were  both  disciplinary  and  typical.  Paul  respected  the  prejudices  of  Jews  and
of  Jewish  converts  in  their  favour  (Acts  xvi.  3  ;  xxi.  23 — 26).  He  allowed  tender
consciences  to  be  bound  by  such  rudiments  as  were  not  either  of  Jewish  or  Christian
obligation  (Bom.  xiv.  2,  3, 14).  So  in  the  present  day,  among  heathens  just  emerging
from  darkness  but  not  yet  "  risen  with  Christ,"  certain  elementary  precepts  and  restric-
tions may  he  valuablu  as  temporary  educational  expedients.  And  more  stringent  rules
of  Church  discipline  than  the  New  Testament  enforces  may  be  expedient  for  a  time  in
the  training  of  converts  from  heathenism  who  have  just  come  out  from  a  worse  than
Egyptian  bondage.  (Illustrate  from  Exod.  xxiii.  13,  and  similar  requirements  in  Poly-
nesia or  other  mission  fields.)

II.  The  Chbistian  is  emancipated  pkom  bondage  to  these  rudiments.  "  If  ye
died  with  Christ,"  etc.  "  This  death  has  many  aspects  in  St.  Paul's  teaching.  It  is
not  only  a  dying  with  Christ  (2  Tim.  ii.  11),  but  it  is  also  a,  dying  to  or  from  some-
thing. This  is  sometimes  represented  as  sin  (Rom.  vi.  2) ;  sometimes  as  self;  sometimes
as  the  Law  (Rom.  vii.  6  ;  Gal.  ii.  19) ;  sometimes  slill  more  widely  as  the  world,"  as
here  and  in  ch.  iii.  3.  Our  Lord,  by  his  teaching  and  ex.imple,  set  his  disciples  free  from
the  traditions  of  men  (Matt.  xii.  1 — 13 ;  xv.  1 — 9)  and  from  some  of  the  ceremonial
laws  of  Moses  (Mark  vii.  14 — 19,  "  Tliis  he  said  making  all  meats  clean ; "  cf.  Acts  x.
15).  By  his  death  as  the  Sacrifice  he  fulfilled  all  that  was  typical  in  the  ceremonial  Law,
so  that  by  union  with  him  "  we  have  been  discharged  from  the  Law  "  (Rom.  vii.  6).  By
his  power  as  the  risen  Saviour,  the  supreme  Head  and  Lawgiver  of  his  Church,  he  replaces
the  precepts  of  Moses  by  his  "  I  say  unto  you."  He  thus  introduces  all  believers  into
a  new  sphere  of  life  and  liberty  (Heb.  xii.  18 — 25).  We  experience  what  Christ  can
do  for  us  apart  from  "  the  rudiments  of  the  world,  and  therefore  need  not  go  back  to
them.  Having  pardon,  peace,  puiity,  through  the  death  and  resurrection  of  Christ,  it
would  be  as  unreasonable  to  seek  those  blessings  in  rudiments,  as  it  would  be  for  a
cultured  literary  man  to  be  constantly  practising  in  elementary  reading  and  spelling
books.  To  "  subject  ourselves  "  to  such  restrictions  would  be  as  though  a  slave  on  the
free  soil  of  Britain  should  still  crouch  before  his  old  master  (Gal.  v.  1).

III.  These  rudiments  have  no  power  to  promote  the  object  for  which  they  abb
bbcommended.  (Ver.  23.)  So  far  as  they  were  Mosaic  they  had  no  longer  the  value
which  belongs  to  even  the  most  "positive"  precepts  as  a  test  of  obedience.  In  the
Christian  Church  even  the  laws  of  Moses  are  merely  "  the  precepts  of  men ; "  Jesus
only  is  Lord.  The  rudiments  respecting  fasting,  etc.,  which  originated  in  asceticism,
never  had  any  spiritual  value,  but  were  for  the  most  past  the  result  of  fundamental
error  (1  Tina.  iv.  1 — 5).  Self-denial  for  our  own  good  or  that  of  others  is  commended
by  Paul  (1  Cor.  viii.  13;  ix.  27);  but  the  asceticism  of  Colossa  which  was  enforced  ou
Christian  converts  is  condemned  as  fostering   pride   and  powerless  to  suppress  tin.


OH.  n.  1—23.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANa  M3

"  Pride  may  be  pampered  while  the  flesh  grows  lean  "  (Wordsworth).  Thus  the  axe  is
laid  at  the  root  of  those  unscriptural  austerities  which  are  glorified  in  tlie  Church  of
Rome ;  e.g.  even  the  saintly  Pascal  "  wore  beneath  his  clothes  a  girdle  of  iron  with
sharp  points  affixed  to  it,  and  when  he  found  bis  mind  disposed  to  wander  from  religious
subjects  or  take  delight  in  things  around  him,  he  struck  the  girdle  with  his  elbow  and
forced  the  points  iuto  bis  aide."  Men  notorious  for  filth  have  been  canonized  (for  an
illustration,  see  Eadie  on  Colossians,  p.  211).  How  absurd  to  think  that  hair  shirts  and
"  thongs  and  whip-cord  are  means  of  grace"  1  But  as  Dr.  South  has  said,  "  The  truth  is,
if  men's  religion  lies  no  deeper  than  their  skin,  it  is  possible  they  may  scourge  them-
selves into  very  great  improvements."  Occasional  fasts  may  be  of  value,  but  a,  religion
of  asceticism  is  "a  libel  upon  Providence,  a  surly  and  superstitious  refusal  of  Divine
benignity."  The  safeguard  against  such  errors  is  a  clear  view  of  our  salvation  by  Christ,
our  union  with  him,  our  submission  to  him,  and  our  fulness  in  him. — E.  S.  P.

Ver.  3. — Christ  th»  Treasury  of  wisdom.  I.  Wisdom  is  a  tbbasube  fob  the  gbeatebt
TBBAStJBT.  St.  Paul  agrees  with  Solomon.  Both  exalt  wisdom.  It  is  a  mistake  to
suppose  that  the  gospel  discourages  knowledge  and  sets  a  premium  on  folly.  It  dis-
regards worldly  wisdom  just  because  it  brings  a  higher  wisdom.  It  uses  what  the
world  calls  the  foolishness  of  preaching  in  order  that  it  may  confound  the  worldly
wise  and  enlighten  the  ignorant  with  the  true  wisdom  of  God.  1.  The  treasury  of
wisdom  is  a  jewel-chamber.  Knowledge  is  good  in  itself.  It  is  a  treasure  worth
possessing  for  its  own  sake.  The  truly  wise  man  would  rather  lose  his  money  than
his  knowledge.  Knowledge  has  these  advantages  over  other  possessions :  (1)  it  caunot
be  stolen;  (2)  it  is  not  lessened  by  being  shared  by  many;  (3)  it  does  not  suffer
corruption ;  (4)  it  is  a  pure,  calm,  and  elevating  source  of  delight.  2.  This  treasury  is
a  granary.  Knowledge  is  good  for  the  soul.  The  mind  lives  and  grows  upon  ideas.
The  Boul  is  nourished  by  the  Word  of  God,  which  is  the  revelation  of  his  wisdom.  To
know  God  is  eternal  life,  S.  This  treasury  is  a  bank.  True  knowledge  is  like  money.
It  is  the  means  for  procuring  many  other  good  things.  It  has  a  far  larger  purchasing
power  than  gold  and  silver.  Knowledge  is  power,  just  because  it  shows  us  how  to  use
many  things  which  are  useless  to  ignorance.  The  knowledge  of  Divine  tratl]  helps  us
to  the  use  of  Divine  grace  and  the  performance  of  Divine  Law.

II.  Christ  is  the  Treasury  of  wisdom.  The  Gnostics  looked  elsewhere.  St.  Paul
says  that,  not  only  some  wisdom,  but  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,  are
in  Christ.  They  are  part  of  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ.  Nature  is  a  mine  in
which  science  discovers  numberless  treasures  of  knowledge,  but  it  is  knowledge  about
Nature  herself,  not  about  the  supernatural,  the  Divine,  and  the  spiritual.  Speculation
soars  in  search  of  knowledge.  But  what  it  flatters  itself  to  have  discovered  as  moun-
tain heights  of  knowledge  often  turns  out  to  be  but  the  shadows  of  cloudland.  All
the  highest  and  best  knowledge  is  in  Christ.  1.  The  knowledge  is  in  Christ  himself.
It  is  not  simply  in  his  teaching,  much  less  is  it  in  doctrines  about  him.  To  know
him  in  his  life  and  character  and  nature  is  to  have  the  treasure  of  the  best  wisdom.
2.  The  knowledge  covers  the  moat  important  subjects  of  inquiry.  We  may  include
these  in  three  questions.  (1)  Th  i 'logical :  What  is  God?  Christ  says,  "He  that
bath  seen  me  hath  seen  the  Father."  To  know  Christ  is  to  know  God.  (2)  Anthropo-
logical :  What  are  man  and  his  destiny  ?  In  his  earthly  life  Christ  revealed  the  true
nature  and  glory  of  humanity,  and  in  his  resurrection  its  great  destiny.  (3)  What  is
duty?    The  example  of  Christ  is  the  answer  to  this  question.   Our  duty  is  to  follow  him.

III.  Love  is  the  key  to  this  treasury  of  wisdom.  1.  The  treasure  is  hidden.  A
superficial  glance  at  Christ  will  not  reveal  it.  The  merchantman  seeks  for  goodly
pearls ;  the  purchaser  of  the  field  digs  for  the  hidden  treasure.  2.  Nothing  but  love  will
open  up  the  treasury.  Gnostics  thought  intellectual  enlightenment  would  do  this ;
theologians  in  all  ages  have  tried  various  keys — the  rusty  key  of  old-world  learning,  the
ponderous  key  of  argumentation  with  its  intricate  wards ;  too  often  they  have  forgotten
the  golden  key  of  love.  3.  Love  opens  up  the  treasury  of  wisdom  in  Christ.  St.  Paul
desires  the  Colossians  to  be  "  knit  together  in  love  "  (ver.  2)  in  order  that  they  may
"  know  the  Mystery  of  God,  even  Christ,"  etc.  (1)  This  love  must  be  love  to  Christ,
that  we  may  ije  in  sympathy  with  man  and  so  know  him ;  and  (2)  love  to  one  another,
that  we  may  be  in  sympathy  with  Christ's  way  of  regarding  God  and  man.— W.  F.  A.


t**  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIAKS.  [cH.  n.  1—38.

Vers.  6,  7. — Orowth  in  Christ.  St.  Paul  is  anxious  lest  the  invasion  of  a  new
philosopliy  should  lead  the  Colossians  away  from  their  earlier  life  in  Christ.  Recogniz-
ing how  rightly  they  had  at  first  received  the  gospel,  he  desires  them  to  oontiime  in
the  faith  as  they  had  beea  taii^ht.  But  while  he  is  most  earnest  in  deprecating  any
departure  from  the  primite  foundation,  he  is  equally  earnest  in  wishing  for  programs  in
a  continued  building  on  that  foundation.  The  true  Christian  life  is  neither  a  so-called
progress  that  carries  us  away  from  Christ  to  newer  masters,  nor  a  dogged  and  stupid
obstinacy  that  will  not  budge  from  the  past  and  stagnates  in  its  immobility,  bat  a
growth  in  Christ.

I.  GiiowTH  IN  Christ  impubs  continuance  in  Chbist;  Any  other  change,  even
though  it  may  seem  to  involve  an  advance,  is  a  retrogression  from  Christ.  The
Coloshians  are  exhorted  to  walk  in  Christ  as  they  had  received  him.  They  had  received
him  as  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord.  1.  As  Jesus.  They  had  begun  by  recognizing  the  true
human  nature  of  Christ.  The  Gnostics  were  persuading  them  to  give  this  faith  up  for
the  idea  of  a  phantom  Christ.  We  are  not  troubled  with  these  Docetic  notions.  But
practically  we  are  tempted  to  lose  our  hold  upon  the  human  brotherliness  of  Christ  in
our  doctrinal  systems  of  divinity  and  our  elaborate  solemnities  of  devotiun.  2.  As  the
Lord.  He  was  not  only  a  Teacher,  a  mystic  Mediator  such  as  the  Gnostics  regarded
him,  but  a  Master.  To  regard  Christ  as  Lord  is  not  merely  to  have  an  abstract  con-
viction of  his  divinity,  not  simply  to  offer  him  worship ;  it  ig  to  submit  to  his  kingly
rule.  To  grow  in  Christ,  then,  we  must,  first  of  all,  continue  in  brotherly  sympathy
with  him,  and  also  in  dutiful  submission  to  him.

II.  Growth  in  Christ  consists  in  a  continuous  advance  in  the  Christian  limb.
1.  We  must  be  rooted.  As  the  root  derives  nourishment  from  the  soil  for  the  increase
of  the  tree,  so  are  we  to  send  out  the  deepest  eflbrts  of  our  soul  to  Christ  and  to  draw
from  him  ever  more  and  more  of  spiritual  vigour.  2.  We  must  be  built  up.  This  is
a  gradual  progress.  It  does  not  abolish  the  past  in  making  the  future,  but,  on  the
contrary,  it  erects  the  latter  on  the  former.  It  produces  a  compact  and  harmonious
structure.  So  the  temple  of  the  Christian  life  should  be  rising  in  solid  strength  and
grace  and  beauty,  based  on  Christ  as  the  Foundation,  to  be  finished  with  Christ  as  the
chief  Corner-stone,  and  consecrated  for  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  Christ.

III.  Growth  in  Christ  results  in  enlarged  faith  and  gratitude.  1.  Enlar^d
faith.  "  Stablished  in  your  faith."  Faith,  which  is  the  means  o<  growing  in  the
Christian  lile,  is  itself  enlarged  and  strengthened  by  the  process.  2.  Great  gratiiitde.
"  Abounding  in  thanksgiving."  An  advanced  Christian  will  always  be  a  thankful  one,
for  he  will  know  more  of  the  goodness  of  God  in  Christ,  and  his  own  beart  will  be  more
full  of  love.  Therefore  also  the  joy  of  Christianity  will  increase  with  the  growth  oi
the  Christian  life.— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  9. — The  full  divinity  of  Christ.  The  Gnostic  error  which  St.  Paul  seems  to  be
opposing  was  twofold.  It  denied  that  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  resided  in  Christ,
teaching  that,  while  the  highest  effluence  of  that  fulness  was  in  him,  other  effluences
which  completed  it  were  distributed  through  the  angels,  in  descending  gradations  ot
being.  At  the  same  time,  in  its  abhorrence  of  matter,  it  refused  to  believe  that  so
much  divinity  as  it  allowed  to  Christ  could  dwell  in  a  human  earthly  body,  and,
accordingly,  it  favoured  the  absurd  idea  that  what  men  saw  of  Christ  was  a  phantom
nppearance,  not  a  real  man.  In  reply  to  this  twofold  error,  St.  Paki  teaches  that  all
the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  is  in  Christ,  and  that  this  dwells  in  him  bodily.

I.  Christ  is  fully  Divine.  The  fulness  of  the  Godhead  is  in  Christ.  Wherein
this  fulness  consists  is  an  infinite  mystery.  We  must  be  omniscient  to  Bteasure  and
sound  its  contents.  But  we  see  glimpses  of  parts  of  it,  rays  of  divinity  breaking  out
here  and  there.  And  all  that  we  see  is  in  Christ.  There  is  no  known  characteristic  oi
divinity  which  is  not  ascribed  to  Christ  in  the  New  Testament,  from  cKation  (ch.  1,  16)
to  judgment  (Acts  x.  42)  and  the  final  restitution  of  all  things  (Eph.  i.  10).  1.  In
this  fact  is  the  essential  difference  between  the  divinity  of  Christ  and  God's  dwelling
in  the  tem|ile  of  the  heart  of  good  men.  In  men  be  dwells  partially.  They  can  hold
but  a  small  part  of  God's  nature,  and  they  do  nat  give  up  the  whole  «f  &eir  hewtg  for
that.  Christ  is  wholly  filled  with  the  whole  of  God.  3.  This  fact  helps  us  to  escape
irom  the  ide*  of  two  or  three  separate  gods.    It  is  the  o*e  iufinita  Ood  who  works  in


HH  n.  1—23.1  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  1«

ertation,  and  rules  in  heaven,  and  pleads  with  our  spirits,  wnd  dwells  fully  in  Christ.
(JhrUt  is  perfectly  Divine,  because  the  one  God  dwells  perfectly  in  him.  Thus  when
we  worship  God  and  Christ  we  are  not  worsliipping  two  beings,  but  the  one  God  in
Christ.  Tiierefore,  also,  all  that  we  see  and  know  of  Christ  is  so  much  revelation  of
God.    To  be  in  sympathy  with  Christ  is  to  be  reconciled  to  God.

II.  God  18  INCARNATE  IN  Cheist.  The  fulness  of  the  Godhead  dwells  in  Christ  Id
«  bodily  way.  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh."  Some  have  thought  to  make  this  fact
seem  impossible  by  absurd  representations,  which  go  on  the  assumption  that  an  infinite
God  cannot  enter  a  finite  being  without  ceasing  to  be  infinite.  How  he  can  do  »o  we
cannot  understand.  This- is  not  a  subject  that  admits  of  being  rationalized.  But
dogmatic  objectors  may  be  reminded  that  it  is  their  teaching  which  sets  a  limit  to  the
infinite  by  proclaiming  its  inability  to  enter  fully  a  finite  being.  Does  not  the  infinity
of  God  involve,  not  the  distribution  of  innumerable  parts  through  all  space,  but
presence  of  him  wholly  in  every  region  of  the  universe  ?  Why,  then,  cannot  he  mani  lest
hie  presence  in  a  peculiar  way  in  one  being  ?  Moreover,  if  God,  who  is  always  infinite,
can  dwell  in  man  at  all,  that  fact  is  a  mystery  which  seems  to  foreshadow  the  greater
mystery  of  his  full  dwelling  in  Christ.  The  humanity  of  Christ  is  real  and  pure  and
perfect  humanity,  and  God  who  dwells  in  him  is  still  perfect  God.  This  is  very
different  from  the  metamorphosis  of  a  God  into  a  man  that  is  described  in  heathen  my-
titologies.  It  is  to  be  practically  learnt  from  this  Christian  mystery  (1)  that  God  is  now
veiy  near  to  us  in  a  brother  man ;  (2)  that  we  can  be  raised  to  God  and  become  one  with
Christ  and  God  through  Christ's  oneness  with  us  and  God  (John  ivii.  23). — W.  F,  A.

Ver.  10. — Tlie  fulness  of  humanity.  I.  Whbrbin  thb  fulness  of  humanity  com-
BisTS.  St.  Paul  has  been  writing  of  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead,  He  now  turns  his
thoughts  to  our  poor,  naked,  hungry  humanity,  and  he  Bhows  how  there  is  a  com-
pletion and  a  satisfaction  that  may  be  called  our  fulness,  in  some  way  corresponding  to
the  fulness  of  God.  1.  Th»  fvU  satisfaction  of  our  wants.  We  are  empty,  hungry,
and  needy.  We  require  pardon  for  sin ;  strength  for  trouble,  temptation,  and  toil ;  light
in  darkness ;  innumerable  graces  for  innumerable  distresses.  Our  fulness  must  be  the
quenching  of  the  soul's  thirst,  the  satisfaction  of  the  aching  void  within.  2.  The  full
attainment  of  the  perfection  of  humanity.  We  may  have  every  known  desire  satisfied
and  may  be  full  up  to  the  measure  of  our  present  capacity,  and  yet  not  have  attained
to  the  fulness  of  humanity.  Our  capacity  may  be  enlarged,  new  aspirations  may  be
inspired  in  us.  To  attain  to  the  stature  of  the  perfect  miin,  to  be  quite  like  Christ,  is
to  reach  our  spirit's  prime  and  to  have  onr  human  fulness.  This  will  be  a  fulness  of
knowledge,  of  goodness,  of  power  for  spiritual  service.

II.  Fboh  what  the  fulness  of  HUMANiTir  IS  DERIVED.  By  the  word  "  fulness  "
St.  Paul  means  that  which  fills  as  well  as  that  which  is  perfected  iu  itself.  Christ
alone  can  fill  and  perfect  us.  1.  We  must  find  the  fulness  in  Christ.  Because  he  is
filled  with  the  fulness  of  God  he  is  himself  a  perfected  Man  and  the  Source  of  the  same
grace  for  us.  We  have  to  learn,  then,  that  to  reach  our  fulness  we  must  have  what  is
in  Christ.  Perfect  humanity  is  not  possible  without  God.  When  we  become  possessed
by  the  Spirit  of  God  we  become  true  men.  This  true  religious  life  does  not  make  us
less  human ;  it  perfects  our  humanity.  Not  by  science,  nor  by  learning,  nor  by  energy
in  affairs  of  the  world,  nor  by  any  purely  human  effort,  though  all  these  things  have
their  missions,  but  through  Christ,  we  may  attain  the  true  ideal  of  humanity.  2.  Wi
tan  attain  to  this  fulness  by  personal  U7iion  with  Christ.  We  must  not  simply  learn
the  method  from  Christ,  nor  seek  the  blessing  as  a  gift  of  his,  but  derive  it  from  close,
living  fellowship  with  him.  The  secret  is  to  be  "  in  Christ,"  "  rooted  "  as  the  tree  by
being  rooted  in  the  soil  derives  nourishment  therefrom,  au'l  "  builded  up  in  him  "  as  the
inmple  stands  firm  when  erected  on  a  solid  foundation. — W.  F.  A.

Vet.  16. — The  righti  of  liberty.  At  first  sight  the  advice  of  St  Paul  to  the
Colossians,  not  to  let  any  one  interfere  with  their  private  judgment  in  regard  to  meats,
days,  etc.,  may  seem  to  conflict  with  the  principle  of  generosity  laid  down  in  the  First
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians :  "  If  meat  maketh  my  brother  to  stumble,  1  will  eat  nc
fleeh  for  evermore,  that  I  make  not  my  brother  to  stumble."  But  a  closer  examinattun
of  the  two  cases  will  show  that  they  differ  essentially.

OOLOiiblANS.  I*


'46  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  loh.  n.  1— 23.

I.  COKBIDERATION   FOR   THE   SCETJPLES  OP  THE   WEAK   MUST   BE   DISTINGUISHED   FROM

TiBLDiNO  TO  THE  TYRANNY  OP  THE  BIGOTED.  1.  It  IS  Weak  brethren  wHom  St.  Paul
spares  in  his  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians.  But,  when  writing  to  the  Colossians,  he  has
no  such  people  in  view,  but  a  very  different  class — censorious,  bigoted  enemies  of
Christian  liberty.  Such  men  should  be  firmly  opposed.  2.  In  the  former  case  St.
Paul  was  considering  the  condition  of  the  weak  brethren  whom  he  wished  to  save/rom
itnmhUng.  In  the  present  instance  no  such  consideration  is  called  for.  It  is  not  their
imperfections  that  the  Colossians  are  to  deal  gently  with,  but  the  interference  of
troublesome  people  who  will  not  stumble  the  less  because  they  have  their  own  way
in  unlawful  tyranny.  3.  In  the  former  case  the  concession  was  voluntary.  St.  Paul
spoke  of  his  own  action,  freely  adopted.  Here,  however,  it  is  not  a  case  of  generous
concession  on  the  part  of  the  more  liberal,  but  one  of  tyrannical  assumption  on  that  of
the  more  bigoted.  This  case  may  be  illustrated  by  St.  Paul's  vigorous  resistance  to  the
attempts  that  were  made  by  certain  professed  Christians  at  Jerusalem  to  compel  the
circumcision  of  'J'itus  (Gal.  ii.  3 — 5).

II.  It   IB  CUE  POSITIVE    DUTY    TO   KAINTAIN    THE    EIGHTS  OF  LIBERTY.      Ws  may  be

tempted  to  yield  out  of  love  of  peace,  or  from  an  unselfish  feeling  of  generosity.  But
this  is  more  than  a  mistake ;  it  is  a  fault.  Several  reasons  concur  to  forbid  us  to  yield
to  the  judgment  of  the  more  bigoted  in  these  matters.  1.  The  claims  of  truth.  K  we
believe  that  our  position  is  the  right  one,  to  renounce  it  will  be  to  sacrifice  truth.  In
maintaining  our  own  rights  in  this  instance  we  are  upholding  great  principles.  2.
The  honour  of  Christ.  If  we  renounce  the  freer,  larger  gospel  for  a  cramped  and
mutilated  one,  we  dislionour  the  Name  of  Clirist.  For  his  sake  the  broad  generosity
and  liberal  spirituality  of  Christianity  must  be  maintained.  3.  The  performance  of
our  own  duty.  We  cannot  serve  God  so  well  when  our  liberty  is  fettered  by  the
interference  of  the  narrower-minded  as  when  we  follow  our  own  conscience  without
such  restraints.  4.  The  good  of  our  fellow-men.  By  permitting  encroachments  on
the  liberty  of  the  gospel,  we  narrow  the  privileges  which  we  should  be  offering  to  our
fellow-men.  We  are  put  in  trust  of  the  gospeL  Let  us  beware  of  traitorous  efforts  to
rob  it  of  its  richest  treasures  (Gal.  ii.  5).

Nevertheless,  let  us  take  home  to  ourselves  a  further  lesson,  and  beware  of
judging  our  brother  ChristLins  in  regard  to  sabbath  observance  and  other  external
habits  either  way — on  the  one  hand,  for  too  strict  formalism  in  our  eyes ;  or,  on  the
other  hand,  for  too  free  behaviour.  "  To  his  own  Lord  he  standeth  or  falletb"  (Rom.
xiT.  4).— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  23. — The  failure  of  asceticism.  I.  Asceticism  is  FAScnfATiNO.  It  is  remarkable
to  oixerve  how  readily  the  severest  devotees  of  asceticism  have  found  followers  when
the  performance  of  the  simpler  duties  of  Christian  charity  has  been  left  neglected.  A
St.  Simeon,  scorched  by  the  blazing  sun  of  noonday  and  chilled  by  the  cruel  frosts  of
night  on  his  pillar  in  the  desert,  finds  enthusiastic  imitators  who  would  be  slow  in
following  Christ's  lowly  work  of  going  about  to  do  good  to  his  brethren.  1.  Asceticism
follows  the  notion  that  since  indulgence  of  the  lower  nature  is  sinful,  that  nature  itself
must  he  evil.  In  this  notion  is  the  explanation  of  the  inclination  of  many  of  the  best
men  to  asceticism.  2.  Asceticism  appears  to  be  the  readiest  way  of  preventing  tins  of
the  flesh.  It  seems  as  though  the  flesh  could  not  be  tamed ;  therefore  it  is  caged,
chained,  crushed,  slain.  3.  Asceticism  aspires  to  the  rare  holiness  of  excessive  purity.
Thus,  while  professing  humility,  it  is  often  guilty  of  great  pride.  4.  Asceticism  is
within  our  own  power  and  is  dependent  on  our  own  will.  It  is  will-worship.  It  is
not  the  submission  of  our  will  to  the  will  of  God,  but  the  assertion  of  our  will  though
in  self-restraint.  This  is  much  easier  and  requires  less  humility  and  faith  than
spiritual  obedience.  5.  Asceticism  is  effective  at  a  display  of  holiness.  It  would  be
unjust  to  accuse  all  ascetics  of  playing  for  the  admiration  of  the  world.  But  it  is
impossible  to  doubt  that  the  Church  has  had  her  hypocrites,  who  "disfigure  their
&ces,  that  they  may  be  seen  of  men  to  fast."

IL  Abobticism  pails  in  its  peopessed  object.  Not  only  can  it  be  accused  of
setting  up  a  false  ideal ;  it  does  not  even  realize  that  ideal.  Even  from  its  own  point
of  view  it  must  be  regarded  as  a  monstrous  failure.  It  is  "  not  of  any  value  against
tbe  indulgenc*  of  the  flesh."    History  gives  horrible  proofs  of  this  fe»rful  S»ot,  °  Th*


OH.  ni.  1 — 2B.}


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.


U7


monasteries  of  the  Middle  Ages  were  hofbeds  of  vice.    No  more  immoral  men  could

be  found  among  the  libertines  of  gay  society  than  the  celibate  priests,  bishops,  and  popes
of  the  great  age  of  professed  asceticism.  Literature  confirms  the  testimony  of  history.
The  writings  of  ascetics  are  too  commonly  tainted  with  an  unwholesome  flavour.
Subjects  which  to  ordinary  men  would  call  up  no  impure  associations  are  suggestive
of  corrupt  ideas  to  these  saints.  The  most  sacred  relations  of  life  are  degraded  by  the
ascetic  handling  of  them.  Marriage  is  regarded  only  in  its  lowest  character,  and  is
lowered  by  being  so  treated.  The  finger  of  the  monk  leaves  an  unclean  mark  on  the
purest  page  of  domestic  life.  This  is  what  might  be  expected.  1.  Asceticism  is
unnaturai.  Outraged  nature  avenges  herself  on  the  insult  that  is  put  upon  her  in  the
distortion  of  her  life.  2.  Asceticism  is  opposed  to  the  sympathies  of  Christ.  He
sanctioned  the  ties  of  domestic  life  and  sanctioned  its  joys.  3.  Asceticism  does  not
touch  the  seat  of  sin.  This  is  not  in  the  body.  It  is  in  tliu  soul.  So  long  as  the  heart
is  corrupt,  no  bodily  restraints  will  make  the  lile  holy.  The  ascetic,  like  the  Pharisee,
cleanses  only  the  outside  of  the  cup.  The  stream  must  be  cleansed  at  the  fountain.
The  heart  must  be  renewud.  Then  it  will  be  found  that  "  to  the  pure  all  things  are
pure."— W.  F.  A.


EXPOSITION.


OHAPTEE  m.


Vera.  1—17.— Section  VII.  Thu  True
Christian  Life.  The  apostle,  having  de-
livered his  attack  on  the  system  of  error  in-
culcated at  CoIosssB,  now  passes  from  the
controversial  to  the  more  practical  pur-
port of  his  letter.  There  is  no  break,  how-
ever, in  the  current  of  his  thought;  for
throughout  this  chapter  he  urges  the  pursuit
of  a  practical  Christian  life  in  a  sense  and
in  a  manner  silently  opposed  to  the  ten-
dencies of  Gnostioizing  error.  How  much
more  congenial  was  the  task  to  which  he
now  addresses  himself  we  may  judge,  per-
haps, from  the  ease  and  simplicity  which
mark  the  language  of  this  chapter,  as  com-
pared with  the  abrupt  and  seemingly  em-
barrassed style  of  the  last  section.  We  may
analyze  the  hortatory  section  of  the  Epistle
(oh.  iii.  1 — iv.  6)  as  follows :  (o)  ch.  iii.  1 — t,
urging  the  Colossians  to  maintain  a  lofty
spiritual  life ;  (6)  vers.  5 — 8,  to  put  off  their
old  vices,  impurity,  malice,  fahehood;  (e)
vers.  9 — 14,  to  put  on  the  new  Christian
virtues,  especially  gentleness,  forgieingness,
love;  (d)  vers.  15 — 17,  to  let  the  sovereign
influence  of  Christ  sway  their  whole  life —
inward,  social,  secular;  (e)  ver.  18 — ch.  iv.
1,  enjoining  the  Christian  discharge  of  their
relative  duties,  as  wives  and  hushands,  chil-
dren and  fathers,  ser  cants  and  masters,  under
the  sense  of  their  allegiance  to  the  Lord
Christ;  (/)  ch.  iv.  2 — 4,  exhorting  to  con-
stant prayer,  and  especially  for  the  apostle
himself  at  the  present  juncture;  and  (y)
vers.  5,  6,  to  wise  conduct  and  edifying
speech  toward  them  that  are  without.  It
will  be  seen  how  much  more  comprehensive
and  systematic  ii  the  view  thus  presented
of  Christian  duty  than  that  furnished  by
uglier  Epistles;  and  how  the  ideai  of  the


supremaey  of  Christ,  the  unity  of  the  Chris-
tian brotherhood,  and  the  sacredness  of  tlte
natural  constitution  of  human  life,  which
were  threatened  by  the  rise  of  Gnosticism
in  Colossffi,  underlie  the  apostle's  exposition
of  Christian  ethics.  Paragraphs  (o)  to  (d)
in  the  above  analysis  we  have  grouped  to-
gether imder  the  title  given  to  this  section ;
(e)  demands  a  separate  treatment ;  and  (/)
and  (g}  will  finally  be  bracketed  together.

Vers.  1,  2. — ^If,  therefore,  ye  were  raised
together  with  Christ,  seek  the  things  above,
where  Christ  is,  seated  at  God's  right  hand ;
mind  the  things  above,  not  the  things  upon
the  earth  (ch.  ii.  11—13, 20 ;  Bom.  vi.  1—11 ;
Eph.  i.  20—22;  Phil.  iu.  20;  Matt.  vi.  19,
20;  Luke  xii.  13—40).  The  apostle  has
already  shown  that  when  his  readers,  enter-
ing the  gate  of  baptism,  became  Christians
through  faith  in  Christ,  they  died  with  him
(ch.  ii.  20),  were  buried,  then  raised  and
made  alive  together  with  him  (ch.  u.  11 — 18):
comp.  Bom.  vi.  1 — 11.  So  they  were  re-
stored to  peace  and  favour  with  God  (oh.  i.
21 — 23;  ii.  13,  14),  severed  from  their  old
life  of  sin  (ch.  ii.  11),  and  set  in  the  path  of
holiness  (en.  i.  22).  At  the  same  time,  they
left  behind  all  childish,  tentative  forms  and
notions  ("  rudiments  ")  of  religion,  whether
Jewish  or  non-Jewish  (ch.  ii.  8,  11,  18,
20 — 23).  They  became  dead  both  from  sin
and  from  human  modes  of  salvation.  Both
are  included  in  "  the  things  upon  the  earth,"
to  which  belong  at  once  the  grosser  sensual
forms  of  sin  (ver.  5)  with  its  "  surfeiting  of
the  flesh"  (ch.  ii.  23),  and  that  vaunted
philosophy,  which  is  after  all  earth-born  and
earthward  tending  (ch.  ii.  8,  20),  bringing
the'  soul  again  into  bondage  to  material
things.  The  apostle  lifts  his  readers  into  a
new,  heavenly  sphere.  He  bids  them  make
"the  things  above,"   i«.  "the  thin^  of


148


TEE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN9.


[cH.  ni.  J— 25t


Christ,"  the  one  object  of  their  thought  and
endeavour.  So  they  will  master  the  flesh  by
rifing  abovg  it,  instead  of  fighting  it  on  its
own  ground  by  ceremonial  rite  and  asietio
regimen.  "The  things  above"  are  no  ab-
•traet,  transcendental  conception,  as  in  the
theology  of  St.  Paul's  opponents,  for  they
are  "wl)ere  Christ  is."  The  things  "in
the  heavens"  as  well  as  those  "upon  the
earth  "  \Mere  created  "  in  him,  through  him,
unto  him  "  (ch.  i.  16) ;  there  he  is  Lord,  even
as  here  (ch.  i.  17;  li.  10;  Matt,  xxviii.  IK).
His  presence  gives  distinctness  and  positive-
nesB  tu  the  Chridtian's  view  of  heaven,  and
concentrutea  his  interests  and  affections
there  (comp.  Phil.  i.  23;  iii.  20;  1  Thess  i
10;  Eph.  i.  3;  ii.  6;  Matt.  vi.  19,  20;  John
xii.  26;  liv.  3;  Acts  1.  11;  vii.  56).
"Seated"  is  placed  with  emphasis  at  the
end  of  its  clause,  indicating  the  complete-
ness of  tlie  Saviour's  work  and  the  dignity
of  his  position  (comp.  Eph.  i.  20 — 22 ;  Heb.
i.  3;  X.  12,  13;  Eev.  iii.  21 ;  and  see  Pearson
on  the  Creed,  art.  vi.).  (For  "the  things
above,"  see  vers.  3,  4;  also  oh.  i.  5  and  ii.  18
compared  with  Phil.  iii.  11—14, 20, 21 ;  Eom.
ii.  7  ;  vUi.  17—23 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  42—49 ;  2  Cor.
iv.  16— V.  8;  John  xvii.  24.)  To  "seek"
these  things  is  to  strive  that  they  may  be
ours  in  the  future;  to  "mind"  them  is  to
occupy  our  thoughts  with  them  in  the
present.  (For  the  word  "mjnd"  {ippoviu),
comp.  Phil.  iii.  19  and  Bom.  vili,  5 — 7
{^p6>n\iw.y  minding);  in  Bom,  xjv.  6  it  is
rendered  by  "  regard.")

Ver.  3. — For  ye  died,  and  yonr  life  is  hid,
with  Christ,  in  God  (ch.  ii.  11—13,  20;
Eph.  iv.  22;  Phil.  iU.  20;  Bom.  vi.  1—14;
vii.  1—6 ;  2  Cor.  v.  14, 15 ;  Gal.  ii.  20 ;  1  Cor.
iu.  23;  John  xv.  5;  xii.  26;  Eev.  iii.  21).
In  this  hidden  liff-  of  the  Christian  lies  the
ground  and  tl  e  spring  of  the  more  outward
life  of  thought  aid  endeavour  of  vers.  1,  2.
And  this  life  comes  through  death,  from
that  "dying  with  Christ"  out  of  which  we
"roee  with  him"  (ver.  1;  ch.  ii.  11 — 13,
20 ;  Eom  vi.  3, 4,  8).  "  The  aorigt  kTr^BivfTe
('ye  died')  denotes  the  past  act;  the  per-
fect KfKpvnrai  ('  hath  lieen  and  is  hid ')  the
permanent  effects"  (Lightfoot),  (On  the
nature  of  this  death,  see  notes  to  ch.  ii.
11 — 13.)  "  Died — and  your  life  I "  this  para-
dox is  explained  in  Kom.  vi.  10,  11,  and
repeated  in  Gal.  ii.  20;  2  Cor.  v.  14,  15.
The  Chribtian's  life  is  lodged  in  the  sphere
of  "  the  unseen  and  eternal."  It  centres  in
Christ,  and  as  he  is  hidden — withdrawn  from
the  world  of  sense,  yet  with  us  always  in
his  Spirit  (John  xiv.  16—20 ;  xvi.  16— 22>—
so  our  life  wiih  him.  And  if  "  with  Christ,"
then  "in  God;"  for  "Christ  is  God's"  (I
Cor.  iii.  23);  "lives  to  God"  (Eom.  vi.  10),
•nd  "  is  at  God's  right  hand  "  (ver.  1),  being
"tile  Sop  of  hif  Jove"  (oh.  i.  13;  Jobn  i  18),


The  apostle  says,  "in  God"  ("in  heaven,"
Phil.  iii.  19),  to  empliasize  the  fact  of  the
union  of  Christ  with  God,  or  perhaps  to
deepen  the  reader's  sense  of  the  sacrednesi
of  this  life  in  Christ  (comp.  1  Tim.  vi.
14—16).  "  Is  hid"  (ch.  i.  26,  27 ;  ii.  2,  3);
another  allusion  to  the  fondness  of  the  Colos-
aian  errorists  for  myeleriee.  In  ch.  i.  26
8t.  Paul  spoke  of  the  ancient  mystery  of  a
Christ  for  all  the  world ;  then  of  the  new,
perpetual  mystery  of  a  Christ  dwelling  within
believing  hearts.  But  this  second  mystery  ii
equally  that  of  our  life  in  Christ  as  of  Chrint'i
life  in  us,  lifting  us  to  heaven  while  it  brings
him  down  to  earth.  This  mutual  indwelling
of  the  Head  in  heaven  and  the  members
upon  earth  is  the  most  intimate  and  in-
scrutable of  all  secrets  (John  xiv.  20 ;  xv.
1—7 ;  xvii.  22,  23,  26).  "  The  world  knows
neither  Christ  nor  Christian.^,  and  Christians
do  not  even  know  themselves"  (Beiigel).
But  as  the  old  historic  secret  had  its  mani-
festation at  last  (ch.  i.  26),- so  will  the  new
secret  that  lies  ei^pld«d  within  every  Chris-
tian life —

Ver.  4. — ^When  Christ  shall  be  manifested,
our  (or,  your)  life,  then  shall  ye  also  with
tiiTti  he  manifested  in  glory  (Eom.  viii.
18-23;  PhiL  iii.  21;  1  (3or,  L  7;  iv.  5;
1  Thess.  i.  10;  1  Tim.  vi.  15;  2  Tim.  ii.
10—12;  iv.  8;  Titus  il.  13;  1  John  iij.  2;
ii.  28).  Our  future  destiny,  with  our  present
redemption  (ch.  i.  J  4),  is  wrapped  up  in
Christ.  Our  life  is  not  only  "with  liim"
(ver.  3);  it  is  "himself"  (Phil,  i.  21 ;  John
i.  4;  vi.  50—57;  xjv.  6;  1  John  v.  X2);  he
is  its  source  and  ground,  way  and  rule,
means  and  end — its  all  (ver.  11 :  comp.  ch.
i.  20;  ii.  6—10;  Eph.  i.  3,  23;  ui.  17-19;
iv.  13;  Phil.  iii.  10  ;  iv.  19,  etc.).  From  the
hour  of  his  ascension  he  has  been  hidden
(Acts  i.  9;  iii.  21;  1  Pet.  i.  8);  and  his
nmnifeftation  is  as  much  a  part  of  the
Christian  creed  as  liis  death  and  resurrection
(Acts  xvii.  31;  1  Thess.  i.  XO;  iv.  16;  2
Thess.  i.  10;  ii.  8;  1  Cor.  xv.  23;  PhU.  iii,
20;  2  Tim.  iy,  1;  Jn)in  xiv.  3;  1  John  iij.
2,  3;  Eev.  xxii.  12,  20).  Then  the  Christian
will  have  hit  manifestation  also  with  him,  in
the  "  revelation  of  the  sons  of  God  "  (Eom.
yiii.  19);  who  will  receive  their  second
"  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  their
body"  (Eom.  yiii,  23).  "Seeing  him  as  he
is"  in  his  glory,  "we  shall  be  like  him"
(1  John  iii.  2)  in  glory.  At  last  the  spiritual
life  of  the  soul  will  have  its  due  ori<anio
expression,  in  a  body  perfect  and  heavenly
as  itself  (1  Cor.  xv.  35—49 ;  2  Cor.  v.  1—5).
This  is  already  the  case  with  our  human
nattire  in  Christ  (Phil.  jii.  21);  and  the
change  will  proceed  from  the  Head  to  the
members  (1  Cor.  xv.  23),  who  will  be  con-
formed to  liis  "  body  of  glory,"  as  now  they
I  v^  being  coiifonited  to  his  spiritut^  iuagf


CB,in.l— 25.J         THB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSTANa


149


(Bom.  via.  9—11,  29,  80;  xii.  2;  2  Cor.  ili.
18;  John  xvii.  22-2t};  1  John  iv.  17).
The  textual  change  from  "your"  to  "onr"
b  doubtful  (see  note  on  ch.  ii.  13).  Ob-
serve that  "  Christ"  is  repeated  four  times  in
the  last  four  verses.

Ver.  5.— Make  dead,  therefore,  the  (or,
^<mry  members  that  are  upon  the  earth
(eh.  it  11 ;  iu.  9;  Eph.  iv.  21,  22;  Phil.  Hi.
l»j  Bom.  vi.  6;  viii.  13;  xiii.  14).  "  Your"
li  fflttfitted  by  most  textual  critics,  but
English  idiom  requires  it  in  traoBlation.  In
its  absence  a  stronger  emphasis  falls  on  the
defining  clause, "  that  are  upon  the  earth."
Ae  these  things  may  no  longer  be  pursued
o»  studied  (vers.  1,  2),  the  organs  devoted  to
them  must  be  put  to  death.  These  membert
are  indeed  those  of  the  actual  body  (Rom.
vi.  13,  19;  vii.  5,  23;  viii.  13) ;  but  these
in  00  far  (U  ruled  hitherto  by  sinful  impulse
and  habiti  constituting  the  body  of  "the
old  man  "  (ver.  9 ;  Eph.  iv.  22 ;  Kom.  vi.  6),
"  of  the  flesh  "  (ch.  ii.  11),  "  of  sin,"  and  "  of
death"  (Kom.  vi.  6;  vH.  24),  with  "sinful
passions  working  in  its  members,  bearing
&uit  unto  death  "  (Rom.  vii.  5) :  comp.  note,
eh.  ii.  11.  That  body  is  "  made  dead  "  by  de-
struction of  the  evil  passions  that  animated
ii.  The  body  of  "  the  new  man  "  is  physi-
cally identical  with  it,  but  different  in
Uraial  habit  and  diathesis— a  diflference  that
manifests  itself  even  in  bodily  expression
and  manner  (2  Oor.  v.  17).  Viexp6a  occurs
besides  in  the  New  Testament  only  in  Bomi.
iv.  19  and  Heb.  xi.  12  (in  Rom.  viii  13,  a
still  stronger  word  is  used  of  "  the  practices  "
of  the  body):  as  the  aged  Abraham  had
been  made  dead  in  respect  of  the  natural
possibility  of  fatherhood,  so  the  body  of
the  Christian  is  to  be  dead  for  purposes  of
Bin.  If  there  were  any  doubt  as  to  the
writer's  meaning,  the  next  clanae  removes
it.  His  langaage  has  approached  that  of
the  philosophical  ascetics  (see  ch.  ii.  23,
note  and  quotations);  lience  the  abrupt
explanatory  appoBition  that  follows :  forni-
ostion,  uneleanness,  (sensual)  passion,  e?il
desire,  and  covetonsness,  the  which  is  idola-
try (Eph.  V.  3— 5;  Phil.  iii.  19;  1  Oor.  vi.
9-11;  V.  11;  Rom.  t  29;  1  Tim.  tri.  17;
Matt.  vi.  24,  31,  32 ;  Luke  xii.  2t ;  Ps.  xlix.
6;  Iii.  7).  To  these  vices  the  Colossian
Gentiles  (some  of  them  at  least)  had  been  to
■uch  a  degree  devoted  that  their  membert
had  become  virtually  identified  therewith.
The  first  two  sina  are  related  as  particular
and  general  The  second  pair,  itiSos  and
iitiffunta,  are  combined  in  1  Tliess.  iv.  4  in
contrast  to  "(bodily)  sanotification  and
honour  "  (comp.  ch.  u.  23,  and  "  passions  Of
diahoneiur,"  Bom.  i.  26).  The  former  denoles
a  morbid,  inflamed  condition  of  the  sensual
ftpfietite;  the  latter,  craving  for  some  par-
tioular  gMtlScation  of  it  (see  Trench's


•Synonyms').  Neither  of  these  words  is
etymologioally,  or  invariably,  evil  in  Sense.
The  degradation  of  such  terms  in  all  lan-
guages is  a  sad  evidence  of  the  corruption
of  our  nature.  TlKeoirella  is  both  wider  and
more  intense  in  meaning  than  our  "cove-
toHsness."  It  denotes  radically  the  dispo-
sition to  "have  more,"  "grasping  greed,"
"seltisliness  grown  to  a  passion."  Hence  it
applies  to  sins  of  impurity,  greeilinesa  for
sensual  pleasure  (1  Tliess.  iv.  6;  Eph.  iv.
19);  but  by  the  emphatic  use  of  the  article
("  the  covetousness  "),  and  by  the  words  that
follow,  it  is  marked  out  as  a  distinct  type  of
sin ;  so  in  Eph.  v.  3, 5,  where  "  unoleanness  "
and  "  greed  "  are  stigmatized  as  vile  forms  of
sin.  This  word,  often  used  by  St.  Paul,  is
peculiar  to  him  in  the  New  Testament.
"The  which"  (fi-ns:  comp.  Utiva,  ch.  ii.  23)
gives  a  reason  while  it  states  a  fact  ("  inas-
much as  it  is  idolatry").  For  the  thought,
comp.  Eph.  V.  5  and  I  Tim.  vi.  17,  also
JMatt.  vi.  24;  it  is  a  commonplace  of  reli-
gion, and  appears  in  Phil)  and  Jewish
rabbis  (see  Lightfoot).  Lightfoot  places  a
colon  alter  "  upon  the  earth,"  and  supposes
"  fornication,"  etc.,  to  be  "  proleptic  accusa-
tives," looking  forward  to  some  Verb  unex-
pressed, such  as  "put  off"  (ver.  8).  But
this  is  needless  (see  Winer,  p.  666),  and  the
command,  "  make  dead  your  members,"  re-
quires this  qualifying;  explanation.  The
grammatical  awkwardness  of  the  apposition
is  not  without  rhetorical  effect.

Ter.  6.— Because  of  which  (things)  th*
anger  of  0od  oometh  [upon  the  sons  of  dis-
obedienoe]  (Eph.  ii.  2,  3;  v.  6;  Gal.  v.  21;
Kom.  i.  18;  ii.  5— 9;  v.  9;  1  Thess.  i.  10;
ii.  16;  2  Thess.  i.  5—10;  John  iii.  36;  Rev.
vi.  17;  Mai.  iii.  2).  The  latter  phrase  is
cancelled  by  Tisoliendorf,  Tregelles,  Alford,
Lightfoot,  Westcott  and  Hort ;  but  retained
by  Ellicott  and,  preferentially,  by  the  Re-
visers. The  witnesses  against  it,  though
numerically  few,  are  varied  and  select,  and
the  parallel  (Eph.  v.  6)  would  suggest  inser-
tion of  the  words  if  originally  absent.  "  Th«
anger  of  God  is  coming"  is  a  sentence  com-
ptete  iu  itself  (comp.  Bom.  i.  18).  God's
"  afiger  "  (ipyli)  is  his  settled  punitive  indig-
nation against  sin,  of  whicli  his  "wrath"
(8tf/j(Jf)is  the  terrible  outflamiag(Hev.  xvi.  1;
Xlv.  10) ;  see  Trench's '  Synonyms. '  "Cometh"
implies  a  continuing  fact  or  fixed  principle
(see  Witter,  p.  332);  of  rather,  perhaps,
signifies  that  this  "anger"  is  in  course
of  manifestation,  is  "on  the  way:"  comp.
1  Thess.  i.  10,  "  the  anger  that  is  cftmiug,"
not  "to  come,"  also  the  use  of  $pxofuu  in
John  xiv.  3,  18;  Heb.  x.  37.  The  objects
of  this  anger  ("  cliildren  of  wrath,"  Epii.  ii.
2,  3)  are  "  the  sons  of  disobedience. '  The
expressive  Hebraism  by  which  a  man  is  said
to  be  K  child  or  ton  of  the  dominant  qitalit;f


ISO


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.         [oh.  tn.  1—28.


or  influence  of  his  life  is  frequent  in  the
New  TeBtament.

Ver.  7. — In  which  also  ye  walked  onoe,
when  yon  were  living  in  these  (things)  (Eph.
ii.  3;  T.  8;  Eom.  vi.  19—21;  1  Cor.  vi.  11;
xii.  2;  Titus  iii  3;  1  Pet.  iv.  3).  Even
retaining  "  sons  of  disobedience  "  in  ver.  6,
it  seems  better,  with  Alford,  Lightfoot,  and
the  English  Version,  to  read  oh  as  neuter,
"in  whicli,"  referring  to  the  same  ante-
cedent (ver.  5)  as  "  because  of  which  "in  ver.
6 ;  not  "  amongst  whom  "  (Ellicott,  Meyer).
The  latter  interpretation  is  ugitinst  the
general  usage  of  "walk  in"  with  St.  Paul
(ch.  iv.  5 ;  Eph.  ii.  2, 10;  iv.  17;  v.  2 ;  Rom.  vi.
i ;  2  Cor.  iv.  2),  and  seems  to  condemn  the
more  fuct  of  living  "  amongst  the  sons  of
disobedience  "  (see,  on  the  other  hand,  1  Cor.
V.  9, 10 ;  Phil.  u.  15 ;  John  xvii.  16;  1  Pet.  ii.
12).  The  parallel  "because  of  which"  (ver.
6)  gives  also  its  force :  these  sins  are  visited
with  the  Divine  anger,  and  moreover  are  the
very  sins  in  which  the  Colossians  aforetime
Iiad  lived ;  observe  the  same  connection  in
Eph.  V.  6—8;  1  Cor.  vi.  10, 11.  "Were living"
stands  opposed  to  "  make  dead  "  of  ver.  5,
»nd  to  "  ye  died  "  (ver.  3 :  comp.  ch.  ii.  20 ;
Gal.  ii.  20);  it  marks  the  time  when  "the
old  man  "  (ver.  9),  with  his  "  earthly  mem-
bers "  (ver.  5)  was  alive  and  active  (comp.
Eom.  vii.  5,  9,  "sin  came  to  life").  "In
ihese  things  "  {Toirois,  not  airoh  :  Eevised
Text)  points  to  the  things  enumerated  in
ver.  6,  with  a  mental  gesture  of  contempt.

Ver.  8. — But  now  do  ye  put  away  indeed
all  these  (things)  (ver.  9 ;  ch.  ii.  1 1 ;  Eph.  iv.
22,  25;  Kom,  xiii.  12;  1  Pet.  ii.  1).  The
thought  of  the  death  of  the  old  life  gives
place  to  that  of  the  divesting  of  the  oldhdbit;
the  new  life  wears  a  new  dress.  Mark  the
triumphant  emphasis  in  "  but  now  I "  (opposed
to  the  "  once  "  of  ver.  8),  characteristic  of  the
writer  (comp.  ch.  i.  21,  26 ;  Eom.  iii.  21 ;  vi.
22,-  etc.).  Ta  ircivro  ("all  these  things,"
"the  whole  "  of  them)  summarizes  the  vices
specified  in  ver.  5,  and  forms  the  starting-
point  of  another  series,  in  which  malice  pre-
dominates, as  impurity  in  the  previous  list ;
anger,  wrath,  malice,  evil-spealdng,  fonl
.  speech  from  your  month  (Eph.  iv.  26-— 31 ;  v.
4 ;  Eom.  i.  29—31 ;  1  Cor,  vi.  10 ;  Gal.  v.  20,
21 ;  Titus  iii.  3).  There  is  a  similar  order
and  division  between  these  two  chief  classes
of  sin  in  the  parallel  passages.  In  Eph.
iv.  31,  32  and  v.  3 — 5  the  order  is  reversed.
"  Anger  "  (ipyii)  is  ascribed  to  Grod  in  ver.  6
(comp. Eph. iv. 26;  Heb.x..SO).  (On"anger"
aud  "  wrath  "  (or  "  rage  "),  see  ver.  6.)  The
latter  is  once  ascribed  to  God  by  St.  Paul
(Rom,  ii.  8),  more  frequently  in  the  Apoca-
lypse. In  man  it  is  universally  condemned.
(Kor  KaKta,  malignity,  badness  of  disposition,
oomp.  Eom.  i.  29 ;  1  Cor.  ziv.  20 ;  Titus  iii.
i;  lee  Trenoh'i  '  Synonyins.')    B^wfij/ufa,


in  its  original  sense,  includes  injurious  speech
of  any  kind,  either  against  man  or  God  (see
Eom.  iii.  8;  xiv.  16;  1  Gor.  x.  30;  Titiis  iii.
2).  AiVxpby  in  alaxpoXoyla  (only  here  in  the
New  Testament)  denotes,  like  the  English
"  foul,"  either  "  scurrilous  "  or  "  filthy."  The
former  kind  of  speech  is  suggested  by  the
foregoing  blasphemia ;  but  especially  in  such
an  atmosphere  as  that  of  Greek  city-life,
scurrility  commonly  runs  into  filthiness.
In  Eph.  V.  4,  where  a  slightly  different  word
occur:<,  the  latter  idea  is  prominent.  The
two  last  vices,  being  sins  of  speech,  must  be
put  away  "out  of  your  mouth."  "Your"
bears  the  emphasis  in  the  Greek ;  such  utter-
ance is  quite  unfit  for  a  Christian  mouth
(comp.  Eph.  iv.  29 ;  v.  3,  4 ;  Jas.  iii.  10 ;  and
the  prohibition  of  lying  in  the  next  verse),

Ver.  9. — Lie  not  one  to  another,  having
stripped  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds
(Eph.  iv.  14,  15;  20—25;  1  Tim.  i.  6;  Eev.
xxi.  8;  oh.  ii.  11;  Eom.  vi.  6;  viii.  12,  13;
Gal.  V.  16,  24).  The  imperatives  of  vers.  5
and  8  were  aorists,  enjoining  a  single,  decisive
act;  this  is  present,  as  in  vers.  1,  2,  15,  18,
etc.,  giving  a  rule  of  life.  Only  in  Colos-
sians and  Ephesians  do  we  find  the  apostle
give  a  general  warning  against  lying.  What
reason  there  was  for  this  we  cannot  tell;
unless  it  lay  in  the  deceit  of  the  heretical
teachers  (ch.  ii.  8:  comp.  Eph.  iv.  14,  15;
Acts  XX.  30;  2  Cor.  xi.  13;  1  Tim.  iv.  2;
2  Pet.  ii.  1;  1  John  iv,  1;  Eev.  iL  2;
iii.  9).  The  lying  in  question  is  uttered
within  the  Church  ("  to  one  another  "),  and
is  fatal  to  its  unity  (ver.  1 1 ;  Eph.  iv.  25 ;
Acts  XX.  28 — 30).  The  following  aorist  par-
ticiples, "having  stripped  off"  and  "having
put  on"  (ver.  10),  may,  grammatically, be  part
of  the  commond— "strip  off,"  etc.,  and  "lie
not" — as  e.g.  in  1  Thess.  v,  8;  Heb.  xii.  1;
or  may  state  the  fact  on  which  that  com-
mand is  based.  The  latter  view  is  preferable
(Meyer,  Alford,  Ellicott,  English  Version;
but  see  Lightfoot);  for  the  participles  describe
a  change  already  realized — a  change  ot prin-
ciple, which  has,  however,  still  to  be  more
fully  carried  out  in  practice  (ch.  ii.  11 — 13,
20;  iii.  1,3,7,11;  Eph.  iv.  20— 24  ;  Gal.  iii.
27,  28):  in  ver.  12  the  imperative  mood  ia
resumed  with  an  emphatic  "  therefore,"  im-
plying a  previous  reference  to  fact.  (On  the
double  compound  air-cK-Suca^ei'oi,  "having
stripped  off  (and  put)  awav,"  see  notes,  ch.  ii,
11 ,  16,)  The  ".old  man  ""  is  the  former  self,
the  "  I  no  longer  living  "  (Gal.  ii,  20)  of  the
Colossian  believer,  to  whom  "  the  members
that  are  upon  the  earth  "  (ver.  n)  belonged —
the  entire  sinful  personality  of  "him  who  is
in  the  flesh  "  (Eom.  viii.  8).  His  "  deeds  "
("  practices,"  "  habits  of  doing,"  Rom,  viiL
13;  see  Trench's  'Synonyms'  on  irfjiirira)
are  the  pursuits  of  which  vers,  5, 8, 9  lupplf
example*.


OS.  m.  1-260         tHfi  EP18TLB  fO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


151


Ver.  10. — And  having  pnt  on  the  new  (man),
which  is  being  renewed  nnto  (full)  know-
ledge, after  (the)  image  of  him  that  created
him  (Eph.  iv.  23,  24 ;  ii.  15 ;  Eom.  vi.  4  j
vii.  6;  viii.  1—4 ;  xiii.  12—14 ;  2  Oor.  v.  17;
Gal.  vi.  15 ;  ch.  1.  9 ;  ii.  2, 3 ;  Gen.  i.  26—28 ;
Matt.  V.  48;  Heb.  xii.  10;  1  Pet.  i.  16;
Kom.  viii.  29).  New  (i/e'os)  is  "  young,"  "  of
recent  date"  (compare  the  "once,"  "but
now  "  of  vers.  7,  8  ;  also  oh.  i.  5—8 ;  1  Pet.
ii.  1,  2),  whose  birtli  was  well  remembered,
and  which  presented  so  vivid  a  oontnist  to
the  "old  man  with  his  deeds."  "Being
renewed"  {iwaxaivoilinevoy,  derived  from  the
adjective  kcuvSs)  sets  forth  the  other  side  of
this  newness,  its  tuyoelty  of  quality  and
condition  (compare  "newness  of  life,"  Bom.
vi.  4).  And  this  participle  is  in  the  present
tense  (continuous),  while  the  former  is  in
the  aorigt  (historical).  So  the  notions  are
combined  of  a  new  birth  taking  place  once
for  all,  and  a  new  character  in  course  of
formation.  In  Eph.  iv.  23,  24  these  ideas
are  in  the  same  order  (see  Trench's  '  Syno-
nyms ').  "  Full  knowledge  "  was  one  purpose
of  this  renewal,  the  purpose  most  necessary
to  be  set  before  the  Colossians.  The  nature
and  objects  of  this  knowledge  have  been
already  specified  (ch.  i.  6,  9,  27,  28 ;  ii.  2,  3,
9,  10:  comp.  Eph  i.  18, 19;  iii.  18,  19 ;  Phil,
iii.  8 — 14 ;  1  Cor.  i.  18 — 31 ;  and  on  Myi/axris,
see  note,  ch.  i.  6).  "After  (the)  image"  is
clearly  an  allusion  to  Gen  i.  26 — 28 ;  so  in
Eph.  iv.  24  (  "  after  God  ").  It  is  adverbial
ti)  "renewed,"  not  to  "koowledge."  Man's
renewal  in  Christ  makes  him  what  the
Cr.:atoi  at  first  designed  him  to  be,  namely,
liis  own  image  (compare  iiote  on  "  reconcile,"
ch.  i.  20).  Olirysostom  and  others  take
"Christ"  as  "hiin  that  created,"  in  view  of
ch.  i.  15,  16;  but  then  it  is  said  that  all
things  "  were  created  in  .  .  .  through  .  .  .
for  Christ,"  not  absolutely  that  Christ
created  them.  But  "  the  image  of  God  after
which "  man  was  created  and  is  now  re-
created, is  seen  in  Christ  (Bom.  viii.  29;
2  Cor.  iii  18:  iv.  4;  John  i.  18).

Ver.  11.— Where  there  is  (or,  can  he)  no
Greek  and  Jew,  oiroumoision  and  uncir-
cumcision,  barbarian,  Soythian,  bondman,
freeman  (Gal.  iii.  28;  vi.  15;  Eph.  ii.  14 —
18;  iv.  25;  1  Cor.  xii.  13;  Eom.  xv.  .5—12;
I'hilem.  15,  16;  John  ivii.  20—23;  Luke
xxii.  24—27 ;  John  xiii.  12—17).  That  ^vi
means  "can  be,"  "negativing,  not  merely
the  fact,  but  the  possibility,"  is  doubtful  in
view  of  1  Cor.  vi.  5  (Bevised  Text).  "  In
Christ "  these  distinctions  are  non-existent.
There  is  no  place  for  them.  These  and  the
following  words  indicate  the  sphere,  as
"  unto  knowledge  "  the  end,  and  "  after  the
image  "  the  ideal  or  norm,  of  the  progressive
renewal  to  bo  effected  in  the  Colossian
(j^liever.    It  can  be  carried  on  only  where


and  so  far  as  these  distinctions  are  set  Mide.
The  "new  man"  knows  nothing  of  them.
The  enmity  between  Greek  and  Jew  being
removed,  the  malice  and  falsehood  that  grew
out  of  it  will  disappear  (vers.  8,  9 :  comp.
Eom.  XV.  7 ;  Eph.  iv.  25).  In  Gal.  iii.  28
"Jew"  stands  first,  and  the  distinction  of
tex  is  added.  The  distinctions  here  enume-
rated appear  as  looked  at  from  the  Greek
side.  Only  here  in  the  New  Testament
does  "  Greek  "  precede  "  Jew  "  (comp.  Bom.
i.  10;  1  Cor.  xii.  13,  etc.).  "Barbarian"
(Bom.  i.  14)  and  "Seythian"  (only  here  in
tlie  New  Testament)  are  together  opposed  to
"  Greek,"  and  imply  want  of  culture  rather
than  alien  nationality,  the  Scythian  being
the  rudest  of  barbarians  (see  Lightfoot's  full
note).  Such  terms  of  contempt  would,  in
Asia  Minor,  be  commonly  applied  by  Greeks
to  the  native  population.  The  party  who
affected  philosophic  culture  (ch.  ii.  8,  23)
may,  perhaps,  have  applied  them  to  simple,
uneducated  Christians  (see  note  on  ch.  i.
28).  (On  "circumcision,"  see  ch.  ii.  11 ;  and
for  the  connection  with  ver.  9,  comp.  Gal.  vi.
15.)  For  "  bond  "  and  "  free,"  a  division
then  pervading  society  universally,  comp.
Gulatian  list.  Onesimus  and  Philemon  are
doubtless  in  the  apostle's  mind.  On  this
relationship  he  enlarges  in  the  next  section
(oh.  iii.  22 — iv.  1).  The  four  pairs  of  opposed
terms  represent  distinctions  (1)  of  race,  (2)
of  religious  privilege,  (3)  of  culture,  (4)  of
social  rank.  But  Christ  is  all  things,  and  in
aU  (ch.  i.  15—20;  ii.  9,  10;  iii.  4,  17;  Eph.
i.  3,  K,  22,  23;  ii.  13—22;  iii.  8,  19;  PhiL
i.  21;  iii.  7—14;  iv.  19;  Gal.  u.  20;  v.  2,
4;  Eom.  v.  10;  viii.  32,  39).  "Christ"
stands  at  the  end  of  the  sentence,  with
accumulated  emphasis.  The  Church  re-
gards and  values  each  man  in  his  relation
to  Christ,  and  bids  every  other  consideration
bow  to  tliis.  He  is  "all  things" — our  com-
mon centre,  our  standard  of  reference,  and
fount  of  honour,  the  sum  of  all  we  acknow-
ledge and  desire ;  and  he  is  "  in  all " — ^the
common  life  and  soul  of  his  people,  the
substance  of  all  we  experience  and  possess
as  Christians.  The  second  "  all "  is  mascu-
line (so  most  commentators,  from  Chrysoa-
tom  downwards),  referring  more  specially  to
the  classes  just  enumerated.  Similarly,  in
Eph.  iv.  6:  comp.  ch.  i.  27;  Eph.  iii.  17;
Gal.  i.  15;  ii.  20;  iv.  19.  (While  he  is
"  in  all,"  it  is  equally  true  that  all  are  "  in
him:"  comp.  John  xv.  4;  xvii.  23,  26.)
Just  as  in  the  spiritual  sphere,  and  in  thci
relations  between  God  and  man,  Christ  is
shown  to  be  aU,  so  that  "  principalities  and
powers"  are  comparatively  insignificant  (ch.
I.  16 ;  ii.  9,  10, 15) ;  so  in  the  moral  sphere,
and  in  the  relations  between  man  and  man
All  human  distinctions,  like  all  angelic
ofSces,  must  pay  homage  to  his  lupremac^,


152


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa


|_0H.  m.  1 — 25.


and  sabmit  to  &«  leconeiling  unity  of  hii

kingdnm  (Eph.  i.  10).

Yer.  12. — Put  on,  therefore,  as  elect  of
Ood,  holy,  [and]  beloved  (vers.  9, 14 ;  Eph.  ir.
24 ;  i.  3—5 ;  Gal.  til.  27 ;  Bom.  xiii.  14 ;  1
ThesB.  T.  8 ;  i.  4 ;  2  ThesB.  iu  13  r  Titus  L
1 ;  Bom.  Tiii.  28—39 ;  1  Pet.  i  1, 2 ;  1  John
iii.  1).  The  terms  "  elect,"  "  holy  "  (same  as
"  8siiitB>"  oh.  i.  2 ;  see  note),  '^beloTed,"  ap-
ply alike  aud  separatdy  to  those  addressed.
Bengel,  Meyer,  Alford,  EUicott  prefer  to
read  "  holy  and  beloved  elect  (ones) ; "  but
"holy"  and  "beloved"  are  used  frequently
by  St.  Paul  as  distinct  subs.tantiye  ex-
pieaaions,  and  indicate  conditions  ensu-
ing on,  rather  tlian  determining,  election.
ColoEsian  believers  are  "elect"  in  virtue  of
•n  aatecedent  choice  of  them  to  salvation
on  the  part  of  God,  as  those  who  would
belieTe  on  his  Son  (1  Thess.  i.  4 ;  2  Thess.
ii.  13;  Eph.  i.  4,  5 ;  ii.  8 ;  Bom.  viii.  28— 3ft;
1  Pet  i.  1, 2).  Their  whole  Christian  stand-
ing springs  from  and  witnesses  to  God's
eternal  (Eph.  i.  4)  election  nf  them-  an  elec-
tion .whieb,  however,  presumes  faith  on  their
part  from  begiuning  to  end  (ch.  i.  22,  23;
Bom.  ix.  30—33 ;  xi.  5—10, 17—24).  «  Elect"
and  "  called,"  with  St  Paul,  are  coextensive
trams:  Cdmp.  Eom.  1  7  (B.V.)  with  this
passage,  also  1  Cor.  i.  26,  27.  To  address
the  Coloesian  Christians  as  elect  is  to  remind
them  of  all  that  they  owe  to  God's  grace.
"  Elect "  as  chosen  by  God,  they  are  "holy  "
as  devoted  to  God.  By  the  latter  title  they
were  first  addressed  (ch.  i.  2);  holiness  is
the  essence  of  Christian  character.  That
tiiey  should  gain  this  character  and  appear
in  it  at  tlie  last  judgment  wa4s  the  purpose
of  Christ's  atoniug  death  (ch.  i.  21 ,  22X  as  it
was  the  purpose  of  God's  eternal  election  of
believers  (Epli.  i.  4 ;  2  These,  ii  13 ;  1  Pet
ii.  9).  "And"  is  marked  as  dimhtful  by
Lightfoot,  Westeott  and  Hort;  "it  is  im-
pobsible  not  to  feel  how  much  the  sentence
gains  in  form  by  its  omission  "  (Lightfoot).
"  Beloved  "  (jiyairrifievoi)  is  the  perfect  par-
ticiple passive ;  it  describes  the  position  of
those  who,  carrying  out  by  their  present
holiness  the  purpose  of  their  ps/st  election,
axe  the  objects  of  God's  abiding  love  (1  Thess.
i.  4).  This  love  dic-tated  their  election  and
Bet  at  work  the  means  by  which  it  should  be
secured  (Eph.  i  3 — 14 ;  Hw  4 ;  Bom.  viiL  38
—30,  39 :  1  John  iii.  1 ;  Iv.  9, 10).  As  its
purposes  are  increasingly  fulfilled  in  them,
it  rests  on  them  with  an  abiding  complacency
and  satisfaction  (Eph^  v.  1 ;  John  xiv.  21 —
23).  Christ  is  "the  beloved  One"  (Eph.  i.
6 ;  Matt  iii  17,  etc.),  and  thoso  who  ure
"  in  him  "  in  their  measure  share  the  same
title  (John  xviL  23 — 2G).  But  their  choice
by  God  and  devotion  lO'  Gofl,  who  is  aM  love
to  them  (Bom.  viii.  39  ;  1  John  iv.  16),  must
in  turn  beget  a  loring  hsaztin  them  (1  Jolui


iv.  IIX  A  heart  of  pity,  kindness,  IsirUnest
of  mind,  meekntss,  lang-gnffering  (Eph.  iv.
1,  2,  32— V.  2 ;  PhU.  ii.  1-4 ;  Gal.  v.  22  ;  1
Cor.  xiii.  4;  Titus  iii.  2;  1  Pet  iii.  8,  9;
Matt.  v.  5,  7;  xi.  29;  Luke  vi.  35,  36).
"The  airAiyxva  are  properly  the  nobler
viscera"  rather  than  the  bmoels.  The  use
of  this  figure,  found  three  times  in  Philemon,
is  Hebraistic  (comp.  Luke  i.  78;  2  Cor.  vi.
12;  Philem.  7,  12,  20;  Jas.  t.  11;  1  John
iii.  17),  though  similar  expressions  occur  in
Grec  k  poets.  "  Pity  "  (or, "  compassion  ")  is
an  attribute  of  God  in  Bom.  xii.  1  ;  2  Cor.  i.
3:  comp.  Luke  vi.  38  ("pitiful").  (On
"  kindness,"  or  "kindliness,"  see  Gal.  v.  22;
1  Cor.  xiii.  4 ;  2  Cor.  vi.  6 — ^in  each  case
following  "long-suffering;"  Eom.  li.  22,
where  it  is  opposed  to  "severity"  in  God
(comp.  Bom.  ii.  4) ;  Eph.  ii.  7 ;  Titus  iii.  4,
where  it  is  ascribed  to  God  in  his  dealing
with  men  in  Christ;  also  Matt.  xi.  30.)  It
is  synonymouB  with  "  goodness  "  (Gal.  T.  22;
Eph.  V.  9;  Matt  yii.  11 ;  xii.  35,  etc.);  but
"  goodness  "  louks  chiefly  to  benefit  intended
or  conferred,  "kimdnesa"  to  the  spirit  acd
manner  of  bestowal  (see  Trench's  'Sy-
nonyms'), The  objects  of  "pity  "  are  the
suffering  and  miserable ;  ef  "  kindnras,"  the
needy  and  dependent.  The  "lowliness  of
mind  "  of  ch.  ii.  18, 23  was  something  specious
and  to  be  guarded  againvt ;  here  it  is  the
central  and  essential  element  of  the  true
Christian  temper  (Acts  xx.  19 ;  PhU.  ii.  8 ;
1  Pet  V  5;  Luke  si  v.  11;  xviii.  14),  ita
self-regarding  element  (Bom.  xii.  3).  It  is
linked  with  "  meekness,"  as  in  Eph.  iv.  2
and  Matt  xi.  29.  "  Pity  "  and  "  kiadness,"
preceding  "humility,"  relate  to  the  claims
of  others  upon  ns ;  "  meekness  "  and  "  long-
suffering,"  to  our  bearing  towards  them.
"Meekneae,"  the  opposite  of  rudeness  and
self-assertion  (1  Cor.  xiii.  5),  la  a  delicate
consideration  for  the  rights  and  feelings  of
others,  especiatly  necessary  in  administering
rebuke  or  discipline  (Gal.  vi.  1 ;  2  Tim.  ii.
25;  1  Cor.  iv.  21;  Titus  iii.  2)i  and  con-
spicuous in  Christ  (Matt.  xi.  29 ;  xxi.  5 ;  2
Cor.  X.  1).  St.  Peter  marks  it  as  a  womanly
virtue  (1  Pet  iii.  4).  "Long-suffering"  is
called  forth  by  the  conduct  of  "  the  evS  and
unthankful"  (see  ch.  i.  11,  and  note).  St.
Paul  claims  this  quality  for  himself  (2  Cor.
vi.  6 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  10).  Throughout  Scripture
rt  isi  ascribed  to  God  (Exod.  xxxiv.  6 ;  Bum.  ii.
4;  ix.  22 ;  1  Tim.  i.  16 ;  2  Pet.  iii. »,  15,  elc).
Yer.  13.^ — Zearing  -with  ane  anethsr,  and
fsrgiviag  ea«h  other  (literally,  yourselves),  if
any  one  have  a  complaint  against  any  (Eph.
iv.  1,2,32;  v.  1 ;  1  These,  v.  14;  1  Cot.  vi.
7,  8;  2  Cor.  ii.  10;  Matt.  vi.  14,  1£  •  xyiii.
21—35 ;  Mark  xL  25;  Luke  xvii.  8;  4).  (On
"  bearing  with  "  or  "  forbearing,"  see  1  Cor.
iv.  12;  2  Cor.  xi.  19,  20 ;  Matt.  xvii.  17.)  It
is  weribed  to  Ck>d,  vtth  "  tong-suSering,"


CH.  III.  1—25.]  '      THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


153


eepecially  as  Bbown  in  Ms  dealing  with  the
sins  of  men  before  the  coming  of  Christ
(Horn.  ii.  4 ;  iii.  26 :  comp  Acts  xvii.  30).
Long-ruffering  may  be  shown  towards  all
who  do  us  injury  r  forbtarance  especially
towards  those  frnm  whom  rcgatd  or  obedience
is  due.  It  falls  abort  of  forgiveness,  which
can  only  ensue  on  repentance  (Luke  xvii.  3,
4 :  comp.  Bom.  iii.  25,  26 ;  Acts  xvii.  30).
The  change  of  proDonn  in  the  two  participial
clauses  appears  also  in  Bph.  iv.  2  and  32 :  the
first  is  reciprocal,  but  the  second  is  reflexive,
implying  the  oneness  of  the  forgiving  and
the  forgiven  party.  Forgiving  a  Christian
brother,  it  is  astbongha  man  were  forgiving
himself  (comp.  vers.  H,  15 ;  Gal,  vi.  1 ;  Bom.
xii.  5 ;  rv.  5 — 7 ;  and  the  same  variation  in
1  Pet.  iv.  8—10).  "  Forgive  "  is  literally  "  to
grant  grace,"  used  of  Divine  forgiveness  in
ch.ii.  13(seenote).  Thewnrds, "if anyhave
any  complaint,"  etc.,  would  certainly  apply
to  Philemon  as  against  Uneaimus  (Fhilem.
18,  19 :  comp.  2  Cor.  ii.  5—11 ;  Mark  xi.  25).
Even  ta  the  lord  (or,  Christ)  forgave  you,  so
also  ye  (ch.  ii.  13;  Eph.  iv.  32  ;  i.  7 ;  Rom.
iii.  24—26;  2  Cor.  v.  19;  Acts  xiii.  38;  v.
31 ;  1  John  i.  9 ;  Matt,  ix,  1—8 ;  xviii.  27 ;
Exod.  xxxiv.  6, 7;  Psi  ciH.  3).  This  argument
ts  latent  in  the  appeal  to  the  "elect"  and
"  beloved  "  of  ver.  12.  The  evidence  for  the
alternative  readings,  "  Lord  "  and  "  Christ,"
is  nearly  equal  in  weight.  In  any  ease^  the
"Lwd"  is  "Christ"  in  this  passage  (ck  ii.
6 ;  iii.  17, 24):  and  that  he  forgive  (comp.  oh.
i.  20,  note)  is  quite  eonsistent  with  the  asser-
tion, that  God  forgave  (ch.  ii.  13),  for  God  for-
gave "  in  Christ "  (Eph.  iv.  32).  So  "  God  in
Christ  reconciled"  (2  Goi;  v.  19);  and  yet
"  Christ  reconciled  us  "  (ch.  i.  20,  21 ;  Eph.
ii.  16).  **  Forgiving,"  supplied  in  thought
from  previons  context,  completes  the  sense  of
"so  also  jet"  (Meyer,  Alford,  EUioott).  To
suppose  an  ellipsis  of  the  imperative,  with
Lightfoot  and  Uie  English  Version  ("do  ye"),
ia  needleelBly  to  Inresk  the  structure  of  the
(entunae.  Vex.  14  shows  that  the  leading
imperative,  "  put  on,"  of  ver.  12  is  still  in
the  writer's  mind.  For  the  reciprocal  double
Kal  ("  even  , . .  also  "),  oiunip.  ch.  i.  6  or  Bom.
i.  13;  it  is  eharacteiietie  of  the  writer.

Yer.  14. — And  over  all  these  things  (pat
on)  love,  whieh(thing)  isthe  bond  of  perfect-
ues8(ch.ii.  2;  Eph.lv.  2,3;  v.  1;  Phil.  ii.
2;  1  Cor.  xiii^;  GaL  v.  13—15,  22;  Bom.
xiii.  8— ID ;  2  Pet.  i.  7 ;  1  John  iv.  7—21 ;
John  xiii.  34,  35).  In  1  Cor.  xiii.  "  lore  "  is
the  substance  or  substratum  of  the  Christian
virtues ;  in  GaL  v.  22  it  is  their  head  and
beginning ;  here  it  is  that  which  embraces
and  completes  them.  They  imply  love,  bnt
it  is  more  than  them  all  together.  They  lie
within  its  circumference ;  wanting  it,  they
fall  to  pieces  and  are  nothing.  (For  (rufSeir-
^^Sr  (fisaA"  Of  "band"),  eomf>  oh.  U.  19.)


In  Bph.  iv.  3  we  have  the  "  bond  of  peace  "
(see  next  verse).  Love  is  the  bond  in  th»
active  sense,  as  that  wherewith  the  con-
stituents of  a  Christian  character  or  the
members  of  a  Oliuich  are  bound  together:
peace,  in  a  passive  sense,  as  th:it  wherein
the  union  consists  (comp.  1  Cor.  i.  10 ;  2  Cor.
xiii.  1 1).  "  Love  "  (compare  "  oovetousness,"
ver.  5)  is  made  conspicuous  by  the  Greek
definite  article — being  that  eminent,  essential
grace  of  Christian  love  (ch.  i.  4,  8 ;  ii.  2 ;  1
Cor.  xiii.;  1  John  iv.  16,  etc.).  "Perfect-
ness  "  ia  genitive  of  object,  not  of  quality  :
love  unifies  the  elements  of  Christi.in  good-
ness and  gives  them  in  itself  their  "  perfect-
ness  "  (Bom.  xiii.  10).  (For  "  perfectness,"
see  note  on  "  perfect,"  ch.  i.  28 ;  and  comp.
iv.  12.)  Against  Galatian  teacljers  e>f
circumcision,  aud  Coriuthian  exalters  of
knowledge,  the  apostle  had  magnified  the
supremacy  of  love  (Gal.  v.  6 ;  1  Cor.  viii.  1 —
3);  and  so  against  the  Colossian  mysticism
and  asceticism  be  sets  it  forth  as  the  crown
of  spiritual  perfection,  the  goal  of  human
excellence  (comp.  Eph.  iv.  15,  16).

Yer.  15.— And  let  the  peace  of  Christ  be
umpire  in  your  hearts  (ch.  i.  14,  20 — 22;
u.  18  ;  Eph.  ii.  13—18;  Bom.  v.  1, 10;  2  Cor.
V.  18—21;  Acts  x.  36;  Heb.  xiu.  20;
Phil.  iii.  14).  "  Of  God,"  the  reading  of  the
Beoeived  Text,  is  borrowed  from  Phil.  ir.  7,
where,  however,  "  in  Christ  Jesus  "  follows
(comp.  ver.  13  6,  and  Eph.  iv.  32).  "  The
peace  of  Christ "  is  that  which  he  oifects  in
rejouciling  men  to  God,  and  to  himself  as
their  Lord  (ver.  135;  ch.  i.  20,  tee  note;  Bom.
V.  1).  Here  is  the  source  of  inner  tranquillity
and  health  of  soul  (see  note  on  "  peace,"  ch.
i.  2  ;  Rom.  viii.  6 — 9 ;  John  xvi,  33) ;  and  of
the  outward  union  and  harmony  of  the
Church,  the  body  of  Christ  (Eph.  ii.  16;  iv.
2,  3 ;  Kom.  xiv.  15—19 ;  xv.  7).  In  John
xiv.  27,  on  the  other  hand,  Christ's  peaee,  his
"legaiy,"  is  that  which  he  possessed  and
exemplified — an  idea  foreign  to  this  context.
This  "  peace"  is  to  " act  as  umpire  "  in  the
Christian's  heart.  The  compound  Kara-fifm-
fieva  ("  act  as  umpire  against  you ")  has
already  been  used  in  ch.  ii.  18  (see  note ;  also
PhiL  ui.  14,  cognate  ^po/SeioK)  of  the  false
teacher  who,  in  condemning  the  faith  of  the
Colossian  Christians  as  insufficient  for  the
attaining  of  "  perfectness."  (ver.  14)  without
angel-worship,  etc.,  virtually  took  away,  their
prize  and  judged  them  "  unworthy  of  eternal
life:"  Tii«  Greek  eommentatols  seem,  there-
fore, to  be  right,  as  against  moat  moderns  (but
see  Klopper  -on  the  other  side),  in  retaining
the  primary  sense  of  the  verb  instead  of
generalizing  it  into  "  rule "  or  tlie  like.  It
stands  in  precise  antithesis,  both  of  sense  and
sound,  to  ch.  ii.  18 :  "  Let  not  the  deceivers
decide  againat  you,  but  let  th»  peace  of
Cfaciat  deeid»  ia  your  heatt»"  (fitan»\


1S4


THE  KPDm>B  To  TUK  WL  .3»1A»8.         [««.  m.  I— 25.


•Catena*).  "The  peace  of  Chrifsfdwcllfr,);
within  the  heart  is  to  be  the  security  of  the
Coloasiau  believer  agaiuet  the  threats  of  [siUe
teachers :  "  They  teek  to  rob  you  of  your
piize ;  let  this  assure  you  of  it."  Present,
conscious  peace  with  God  is  a  warrant  of
the  Christian's  hope  of  everlasting  life  (Bom.
V.  1—11 ;  viii.  31—39 ;  iv.  13 ;  Eph.  i.  13,
14;  1  Thess.  t.  23;  Titns  iii.  7).  This
assurance  is  identical  with  "  the  witness  of
the  Spirit"  (Bom.  viit  15,  16;  Gal.  iv.  6,
7:  Eph,  i.  13, 14).  The  apostle  argued  in
ch.  i.  4,  5  from  the  present  faith  and  love  of
his  readers  lo  "the  hope  laid  up  for  them  in
heaven;"  here  he  bids  them  find  in  the  peace
which  Christ  has  brought  to  tlieir  souls  the
eam&st  of  their  future  bliss.  It  is  but  a
generalizing  of  the  same  idea  when  he
gpeiiks  in  Phil.  iv.  7  of  "  the  peace  of  God  "
us  "garrisoning  the  heart  and  thoughts"
against  fear  and  doubt.  TTuto  which  also  ye
were  called,  in  one  body  (ch.  i.  12, 18 ;  ii.  2 ;
Eph.  iv.  14-18,  1—6;  Phil.  i.  27,  28;
1  Oor.  X.  17;  lii.  12, 13;  Bom.  xii.  5).  So
this  "peace"  is  to  be  at  once  their  inward
safeguard,  and  the  ground  of  their  outward
union.  They  are  to  stand  together  in  its
defence  (Phil.  i.  27, 28).  Error,  which  blights
the  Church's  hope,  destroys  her  unity.  So
the  maintenance  of  that  "one  hope  of  our
calling,"  assured  by  a  Divine  peace  within
the  soul,  unites  all  Christian  hearts  in  a
common  cause  (compare  the  connection  of
vers.  18  aTid  19  in  oh.  ii.).  With  St.  Paul,  the
peace  of  God's  children  with  him  and  with
eacli  other  is  so  essentially  one  that  lie
speaks  almost  indistinguishably  of  both
(Eph.  ii.  15,  16;  2  Cor.  xiii.  11 ;  2  Tliess.  iii.
16).  He  adds,  and  be  ye  thankful  (ch.  1.  3
— 5,  12;  ii  7;  iii.  17;  iv.  2;  Eph.  v.  20);
viz.  "for  this  assurance  of  your  future
blessedness  afforded  by  the  peace  of  Christ
within  your  hearts,  vrith  its  outward  evi-
dence in  your  Christian  unity."  The  apostle
gave  thanks  for  them  on  like  grounds  (ch.
i.  3—5 :  comp.  i.  12 — 14).  Tlie  command  to
give  thanks  prevails  in  this  Epistle,  as  that
to  rejoice  in  Philippians.  "Be  "  is  the  Greek
ylvoiiai  ("  become  ") ;  so  in  Eph.  iv.  32 ;  v.  1,
17,  It  implies  "  striving  after  an  aim  as  not
yet  realized  "  (Meyer :  comp.  John  xv.  8) —
rather,  therefore,  "to  be  in  act,"  "to  prove"
or  "show  one's  self  thankful "  (see  Grimm's
'Lexicon;'  and  comp.  Bom.  iii.  4;  Luke
X,  36).

Ver.  16. — Let  the  word  of  Christ  dwell  in
yon  richly,  in  all  wisdom  (ch.  i.  5,  9,  27,
28 ;  ii.  2, 3 :  iv.  5,  6 ;  Eph.  i.  17, 18 ;  iii.  8,
9 ;  1  Cor.  i.  5, 6 ;  2  Tim.  iii.  15).  The  "  word
of  Christ "  is  the  Christian  doctrine,  fhe  gospel
in  the  widest  sense  of  the  term  (ch.  i.  5),  as
proceeding  from  Christ  (Gal  i.  11, 12;  Heb.
ii.  3;  Matt  xxviii  20;  2  Cor.  xili.  3).  This
pzeoiw  pbiase  occurs  only  here,  wnere  the


Mirne  rtf  Chrifl  i«  empKuized  in  so  many
ways  (eomp.  1  Thea^.  i  8 ;  2  Theas.  iii.  1).
The  afOistlfc,  it  may  be,  alludes  primarily  to
the  per=onal  teaching  of  Christ  himself
(comp.  Acts  XX.  35 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  10).  "You"
is  understood  collectively  by  Meyer  and
others  ("amongst  you");  but  the  verb
"  dwell-in  "  (Bom.  viii.  11 ;  2  Tim.  i.  5,  14)
requires  the  stronger  sense,  suggested  also  by
the  "  in  your  hearts  "  of  ver.  15  (comp.  note
on  "  in  you,"  ch.  i.  27).  As  "  the  word  "  is
rich  in  the  Divine  wealth  stored  in  it  (ch.  i.
27;  Eph.  i.  7,  18  ;  ii.  4,  7;  iii.  8 ;  Titus  iii
6),  so  it  is  to  dwell  "  richly  "  in  those  who
possess  it.  "In  all  wisdom"  God's  grace
abounded  (Epii.  i.  8),  and  St.  Paul  himself
taught  (oil,  i.  28) ;  so  with  the  richly  indwells
ing  word  in  the  minds  of  the  Colossians,
especially  as  they  were  beset  by  intellectual
forms  of  error  (ch.  i.  9 ;  ii  2 — 4,  8, 23 :  comp.
ch.  iv.  5 ;  Eph.  v.  15).  In  this  connection  of
thought,  the  phrase  appears  to  belong  to
the  previous  sentence ;  so  English  Version
and  Lightfoot.  Bengel,  Meyer,  Alford,  and
Ellicott,  however,  attach  it  to  the  words
which  follow.  Teaching  and  admonishing
each  other  [or,  yourselves:  comp.  ver.  13,  note]
(ch.  i.  28;  Rom.  xv.  14;  Heb.  v.  12;  x.  24,
25;  Eph.iv.  15, 16).  (For  this  absolute  par-
ticipial nominative,  so  marked  a  feature  of
St.  Paul's  style,  comp.  ch.  i.  10 ;  ii.  2 ;  Eph.
i.  18 ;  iv.  2 ;  Phil.  i.  30 :  iii.  10 ;  2  Cor.  vii.  5 ;
Winer,  p.  716.)  Wljat  he  is  doing  in  his
own  ministry  and  by  writing  this  letter,
he  bids  the  Colossians  do  for  each  other.
"Teaching"  precedes,  being  suggested  by
"wisdom."  With  psalms,  hymns,  spiritual
songs  (Eph.  V.  19;  1  Cor.  xiv.  26).  These
are  to  be  a  chief  means  of  mutual  edification.
The  repeated  "and,"  also  the  singular
"heart,"  and  "Lord"  in  place  of  "Uod"
in  the  sequel  of  the  verse,  are  borrowed  by
the  Eeceived  Text  from  Eph.  v.  19.  The
Greeks,  the  Asiatic  Greeks  in  particular,
were  devoted  to  the  arts  of  music.  Song
and  jest,  stimulated  by  the  wine-cup,  were
the  entertainment  of  their  social  hours  (Eph.
v.  4,  18,  19).  Their  Christian  intercourse
is  still  to  be  enlivened  by  the  varied  use
of  song,  and  by  the  play  of  wholesome  wit
(ch.  iv.  6 ;  Eph.  iv.  29) ;  but  both  song  and
speech  are  to  be  "  in  grace,"  stamped  with
a  spiritual  character  and  governed  by  a
serious  Christian  purpose.  A  "  psalm  "  (from
tfidwa,  to  play  an  instrument)  is  "  a  song
set  to  music ; "  but  this  name  was  already
in  the  LXX  appropriated  to  its  present  use.
Whether  its  application  here  is  restricted  to
the  psalms  of  the  Old  Testament  is  doubtful
(comp.  1  Cor.  xiv.  15,  26).  "Hymn"  (B/ti-oj)
denotes  a  solemn,  religious  composition,  of
song  of  Divine  praise.  The  word  "song"
(ode,  cfSif)  is  wider  in  sense ;  hence  is  qualified
by  "  spiritual,"  equivalent  to  "  with  [or,  •  ia.  "J


•*.m.  1—25.5         THE  Ei'lSTLB  TO  TBE  COLOSSIAKS.


IM


the  Spirit"  (Eph.  v.  18) — ^"eongsof  a  spiritual
nature,  inspired  by  the  Holy  (jhoat"  (comp.
"spiritual  wisdom,"  ch.  i.  9).  Such  Bongs
would  echo  the  varied  sentiments  and  ex-
periences of  the  Christian  life.  In  Eph.  v.
14  and  2  Tim.  ii.  11 — 13,  very  possibly,  we
have  fragments  of  early  Christian  song.
St.  Paul's  own  language,  in  more  exalted
moods,  tends  to  assume  a  rhythmic  anil  lyrical
sirain  (see  introductory  note  on  ch.  i.  15 — 20).
In  grace  singing,  in  your  hearts,  to  God
(oh.  iv.  5 ;  Eph.  v.  19 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  2, 15, 28 ;
Rom.  viii.  27 ;  1  John  iii.  19 ;  Kev.  ii.  28 ;
1  Sam.  xvi.  7 ;  1  Chron.  xxviii.  9).  "  The
correct  reading  is  iv  r^  xipm  U"  the  grace);"
so  Lightfoot.Tisohendorf,  Tregelles,  VVestcott
and  Hort  in  margin,  rejected  by  the  Keviseru.
The  tendency  to  omit  the  article  in  preposi-
tional phrases  should  be  taken  into  account
in  its  favour  here.  And  the  article  helps  the
sense  by  giving  "  grace  "  a  definite  Christian
meaning  (so  "the  love,"  ver.  Ii).  Other-
wise, ev  x'^P'''^'  ^^7  mean  no  more  than
"gracefully,"  "pleasantly;"  comp.  ch.  iv.  6.
"  The  (Divine)  grace  "  is  the  pervasive  ele-
ment and  subject-matter  of  Christian  song.
Its  constant  relrain  will  be, ''  to  the  praise  of
the  glory  of  his  grace  I  "  (Eph.  i.  6, 12, 14 :
comp.  Eev.  i.  5,  6).  "  In  your  hearts  "  (ver.
15) — the  inner  region  of  the  soul — there  is
the  counterpart,  audible  "  to  God,"  of  the
song  that  vibrates  on  the  lips.  •  In  Eph.  v.  19
we  read, "  with  your  hearts" — the  instrument
(here  the  region)  of  the  song.  (For  the  con-
nection of  "in  your  hearts"  and  "to  God,"
comp.  vers.  22, 23;  Luke  xvi.  15 ;  Acts  i.  24 ;
XV.  8 ;  Bom.  viii  27 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  4 ;  1  John
iu.  19.)

Ver.  17. — And  everything,  whatever  ye  be
doing  in  word  or  deed,  (do)  all  in  the  name
of  (the)  Lord  Jesus  (I  Cor.  x.  31;  v.  4;
Uph.  V.  20;  2  Thpss.  ii.  17).  Ver.  16
speaks  of  "  word  '  only  ;  to  it  is  added  the
"  deed,"  which  stands  for  all  the  practical
activities  of  life.  Both  meet  in  the  following
"all."  "The  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus"  is
the  expression  of  his  authority  as  "Lord"
(oh.  i.  13,  15,  18;  ii.  6;  Phil.  ii.  9—11;
Eph.  i.  21—23;  1  Cor.  xii.  3;  Kom.  xiv.  9  ;
Acts  X.  36),  and  of  his  personal  character
and  relation  to  us  as  "  Jesus  "  (Matt.  i.  21 ;
Acts  iv.  12 ;  xvi.  31,  Revised  Text).  (On
tlie  prominence  of  the  title  "Lord"  in  this
JEpistle,  see  note  on  ch.  ii.  6.)  (For  the
emphatic,  absolute  nominative  van  at  the
head  of  the  sentence,  comp.  John  vi.  39;
XV.  2 ;  xvii.  2 ;  Matt.  x.  32 ;  Luke  xii.  10.)
Giving  thanks  to  God  (the)  Father  through
him  (ver.  15;  oh.  i.  12—14;  ii.  7;  iv.  2).
Again  thanlcsgiving  is  urged  on  the  ColoB-
eians.  It  is  to  be  the  accompaniment  of
daily  talk  and  work — to  be  offered  to  God  in
hia  oliaracter  as  "Father"  (see  notes  on
ch.  i.  a,  8,  12),  and  "through  the  Lord


Jesus"  (Bom.  i.  8;  vii.  25),  by  whom  we
have  access  to  the  Futlier  (Kph.  ii.  18 ;  iiL
12;  Bom.  v.  1,  2;  Heb.  x.  19-22)  and
receive  from  him  all  the  benefits  of  redemp-
tion (oh.  i.  14;  Eph.  ii.  5—10;  Rom.  iii.  24
—26;  Titus  iii.  4— 7).

Ver.  18— ch.  iv.  1.— Section  VIII.  Tbb
Christian  View  op  Family  Duties.  We
note  that  in  each  of  the  three  family  rela-
tions here  dealt  with,  the  subordiunte  party
is  first  addressed,  and  tlieduty  of  submission
is  primarily  insisti  d  upon  (vers.  18,  20.  22  •
comp.  1  Pet.  ii.  18, 18  ;  iii.  1 — 6).  So  iu  Eph.
V.  21—24;  vi.  1—3,  5—8.  There  may  have
been  some  special  reason  for  this  in  the
state  of  the  Asiatic  Cliurolies  or  of  Greek
society  in  that  region.  But  other  indications
show  (1  Cor.  vii.  24;  xi.  3—16;  xiv.  34,  35;
Gal.  V.  13;  1  Thess.  iv.  11 ;  2  Thess.  iii.  II,
12 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  1 1, 12 ;  vi.  1, 2 ;  Titus  ii.  5, 9 ;
10;  iii.  1)  that  the  apostle  perceived  and
sought  to  check  the  danger  of  unsettlement
in  the  natural  order  of  family  and  social  life
which  often  attends  great  spiritual  revolu-
tions, especially  when  they  are  in  the  direc-
tion of  religious  liberty.  As  in  the  case  of
Luther,  the  apostle's  later  teaching  is
largely  directed  against  the  antinomianism
which  resulteil,  by  way  of  perveisiou  and
abuse,  from  the  preaching  of  salvation  by
grace  and  of  the  sanctity  of  the  individual
believer  (comp.  introductory  note  to  this
chapter).  Observe  how  the  Lord  and  his
authority  are  made  to  furnish  a  higher
sanction  for  each  of  these  natural  duties.

Ver.  18. — ^Ye  wives,  be  in  subjeotion  to  your
husbands,  as  is  fit  in  the  Lord  (Eph.  v.
22—24 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  11—15 ;  Titus  ii.  5 ;  1  Cor.
xi.  3;  xiv.  34,  35;  1  Pet.  iii.  1—6  ;  Gen.ui.
16).  On  this  duty  the  apostle  dilates  in  the
Ephesian  letter,  in  illustration  of  its  teach-
ing respecting  "Christ  and  the  Church"
(comp.  tlie  very  different  treatment  of  it  in
1  I'et.  iii.  1 — 1).  The  use  of  the  article  (ai
yiyaiKcs')  in  the  nominative  of  address  is
frequent  in  New  Testament,  though  not  in
classical  Greek.  Lightfoot  thinks  it  Hebra-
istic. "Ayijufi/  stands  in  the  imperfect  tense
(literally,  it  was  fit),  denoting  a  normal  pro-
priety (comp.  Eph.  v.  4,  Westcott  and  Hort ;
and  for  the  general  expression,  1  Cor.  xi.  13,
14;  Philem.  8;  Eph.  v.  3;  1  Tim.  ii.  10:
Phil.  iv.  8  ;  Rom.  i.  29).  Like  all  men  of  n
sound  moral  nature,  St.  Paul  has  a  strong
sense  of  natural  propriety.  The  adjunct "  in
the  Lord  "  belongs  to  "  was  fit,"  not "  be  sub-
ject" (comp.  ver.  20).  The  constitution  o(
nature,  as  we  have  learnt  iu  ch.  i.  15 — 18,
is  grounded  "in  the  Lord."  In  Eph.  v.  22
— 33  St.  Paul  shows  that  this  inherent  pro-
priety has  a  deep  spiritual  siguificance;  aud
he  makes  the  subjection  of  the  Church  to
her  heavenly  Lord  a  new  reason  for  wife'ii'
lubmissiou,  ''


156


THE  EHSTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSlANS.        [ob-  m.  1—26


Ver.  19.— Ye  hnstands,  love  yonr  wivei,
and  be  not  bitter  against  them  (Eph.  t.  25
—  31 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  7).  "  Love  "  is  ayavda,  the
word  wbieh  expreeses  the  highest  spiritual
affection — "  even  as  Christ  loved  tlie  Gburch"
(Eph.  V.  25).  Here,  first  and  most  of  all,  the
"  new  corumandment "  of  Jobn  xiii.  34  applies.
St.  Paul  only  uses  the  verb  nKfaiva  ("  to
make  bitter")  here,  but  he  has  the  noun
iriKpla.  ("  bitterness  ")  in  a  wider  application
in  Eph.  iv.  31.  It  denotes  "  exasperation,"
piompting  to  hasty  severity.  Bengel  defines
itas"odiumamorimixtum" — hatred  infused
into  love.

Ver.  20. — ^Te  children,  be  obedient  to  your
parents  in  all  things ;  for  this  is  well-pleating
in  the  Lord  (Eph.  vi.  1,  2;  Exod.  xx.  12;
Deut.  V.  16;  Lev.  xix.  3;  Prov.  xxiii.  22;
Luke  ii.  51,  52).  In  Eph.  vi.  1,  2  "in  all
things"  (jcwri.  ■nitrra,  "in  regard  to  all
things")  is  wanting;  and  not  the  extent,
but  I  he  intrinsic  rightness  of  the  command
as  it  is  found  in  the  Decalogue  is  insisted
on.  But  here,  where  "  Christ  is  all  and  in
all"  (ver.  11),  it  is  "iu  the  Lord"  (Revised
Text)  that  the  child's  obedience  is  declared
to  be  "well-pleasing."  There  is  something
especially  pleasing  in  the  behaviour  of  a
lovingly  obedient  child,  that  wins  "favour"
both  "  with  God  and  man "  (Luke  ii.  52).
The  law  of  filial  obedience  has  its  creative
ground  "in  him"  (ch.  i.  16),  and  is  an
essential  part  of  the  Christian  order  of  life,
which  is  the  natural  order  restored  and
perfected.  "  Well-pleasing  "  is  a  favourite
word  of  St.  Paul's  (comp.  oh.  i.  10;  Eph.  v.
10 ;  Phil.  iv.  8 ;  Eom.  xiv.  18 ;  Titus  ii.  9,  etc ;
used  also  in  Hebrews).

Ver.  21. — Ye  fathers,  do  not  irritate  your
children,  lest  they  be  disheartened  (Eph.
vi.  4).  "E/)efliCu  ("irritate  "  or  "provoke")
St.  Paul  uses  once  besides  (2  Cor.  ix.  2),  in  a
good  sense.  It  implies  a  use  of  parental
authority  which,  by  continual  exactions  and
complaints,  teaches  the  child  to  look  on  the
father  as  big  enemy  rather  than  his  friend.
The  synonymous  rapopji^u  of  Eph.  vi.  4,
found  here  in  many  copies,  is,  more  definitely
"  to  rouse  to  anger."  'ASviniat  (only  here  in
the  New  Testament)  means  "  to  lose  heart,"
to  have  the  confidence  and  high  spirit  of
youth  broken;  "fractus  animus  pestis
juventutis"  (Bengal).  In  place  of  this
treatment,  "  the  discipline  and  admonition
of  the  Lord  "  are  recommended  in  Eph.  vi.  4.
Ver.  22. — ^Ye  servants  (literally,  landineiC),
be  obedient  in  all  things  to  your  lords  accord-
ing to  the  flesh  (Eph.  vL  5 — 9 ;  1  Tim.  vi.
1,  2 ;  Titus  ii.  9,  10 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  21—24 ;
Rom.  xiii.  1,  5;  1  Pet.  u.  18—25).  The
duties  of  tervwnta  and  masters  are  prominent
lieie  (ver.  22 — ch.  iv.  1),  in  view  of  the  em-
phasis thrown  upon  the  lordship  of  Christ;
Md  partly,  no  doubt,  with  reference  to  the


case  of  the  runaway  slave  Onesimns  (oh.  iv,
9;  Epistle  to  Philemon).  "Servant"  i«
SovKos,  hondman,  as  in  ch.  L  1  and  commonly
in  St.  Paul.  In  1  Pet.  ii.  18  we  have
the  milder  ower^i,  domedie.  The  vast
majority  of  servants  of  all  kinds  at  this
time  in  the  Greek  and  Roman  world  were
tlaves.  In  most  districts  the  slaves  were
much  more  numerous  than  the  free
population.  And  they  were  undoubtedly
numerous  in  the  early  Church.  The
gospel  has  always  been  welcome  to  tlie
poor  and  oppressed.  The  attitude  of  St.
Paul  and  of  Christianity  towards  slavery
claims  consideration  under  the  Epistle  to
Philemon;  on  this  point  see  Lightfoot's
'Introduction.'  Here  and  in  Eph.  vi.  S
(comp.  vers.  7,  8)  the  apostle  calls  the
master  xipios  ("  lord  ")  ™  reference  to  "  the
Lord  Christ "  (vers.  22  6,  24) ;  elsewhere  in
the  Xew  Testament,  as  in  common  Greek,
the  opposite  of  Sov\os  is  SeiriroT^s  (1  Tim.  vi.
1,  2;  2  Tim.  ii.  21,  etc.).  "According  to
flesh,"  that  is,  "  in  outward,  earthly  relation-
ship" (comp.  Bom.  iv.  1):  Christ  is  the  Lord
in  the  absolute  and  abiding  sense  of  the
word  (similarly,  "  in  the  flesh  "  and  "  in  the
Lord,"  Philem.  16).  Not  with  acts  of  eye-
service  (literally,  not  in  eye-aeridoes),  as  man-
pleasers,  bnt  in  singleness  of  heart,  fearing
the  Lord  (Eph.  vi.  6 ;  v.  21 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  4 ;
Gal.  i.  10 ;  Matt.  vL  22 ;  Luke  xi.  34 ;  Jas.
i.  5 — 8 ;  Ps.  cxxiii.  2 ;  Isa.  viii.  13 ;  Eev.  ii.
23).  "  Eye-service  "  is  plural  here,  accord-
ing to  Revised  Text;  singular  in  Eph.  vi.
6.  Here  the  word  6<l>da\fioSov\eia  first
occursin  Greek,  like  iSf\o6pv(tKela  (ch.  ii.  23).
It  strikes  at  the  besetting  sin  of  servants  of
all  kinds.  'A^Bpieiriipea-Kos  ("  man-pleaser  ")
occurs  in  the  LXX,  Pa.  Iii.  6  (comp.  1  Tiiess.
ii.  6 ;  Gal.  i.  10).  The  servant  whose  aim  it  is
to  )ilease  his  earthly  master  in  what  will
catch  his  eye,  plays  a  double  part,  acting  in
one  way  when  observed,  in  another  when
left  to  himself ;  with  this  duplicity  it  con-
trasted "singleness  of  heart"  (comp.  Rom.
xii.  8;  2  Cor.  xi.  3;  i.Tr\6nis  in  2  Cor.  viiL
2  and  ix.  11,  13  has  a  different  application).
"  Fearing  the  Lord "  more  than  the  eye  of
his  earthly  lord,  the  Christian  servant
will  always  act  in  "  singleness  of  heart; "  for
"the  eyes  of  the  Lord  are  in  every  place."
In  the  same  manner  the  apostle  ("bond-
man of  Christ  Jesus,"  ch.  i  1)  speaks  of  his
own  relations  to  men  and  to  the  Lord  Christ
respectively  (1  Cor.  iv.  3—5 ;  2  Cor.  v.  11 ;
Gal. i.  10;  1  Thess.  ii.  4 — 6,  etc.:  comp.
John  V.  37—44).  The  reading  "God"  of
Received  Text  is  a  copyist's  emendation,  a
sample  of  a  large  class  of  corruptions  of  the
text,  where  a  word  more  &miliar  in  any
given  connection  is,  more  or  less  un-
consciously, (ubstituted  fox  the  original
woicL


BH.  in.  1—25.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANSw


15/


Ver.  23. — ^Whatever  ye  ta  doing,  work
(therein)  from  (the)  sonl,  as  to  the  Lord,  and
not  to  men  (ver.  17 ;  Eph.  vi.  6,  7 ;  1  Gor.
vii.  21—23).  (On  the  first  clause,  see  ver.
17 .)  In  the  Revised  Text,  however,  the  turn
of  expression  differs  from  that  of  ver.  17,
ircLf  being  cancelled.  The  writer  is  think-
ing, not  so  much  of  the  variety  of  service
possible,  as  of  the  spirit  which  should
pervade  it.  "Do"  is  replaced  in  the
second  clause  by  tl:e  more  en.rgetic  "  work,"
opposed  to  indolent  or  useless  doing  (comj)

1  ph.  iv.  28 ;  2  Thess.  iji.  10 ;  John  v.  17  ;
ix.  4).  "From  [ek,  out  of]  the  soul  "indi-
cates the  spring  of  their  exertions — inioard
principle,  not  outward  com^itlsion ;  the
s>  rvant  must  put  his  soul  into  his  worh.
"  Suul "  implies,  even  more  than  "  heart,"
the  engagement  of  the  man's  best  Individual
powers  (comp.  Phil.  i.  27,  as  well  as  Eph.
vi.  e).  The  slaves'  daily  taskwork  is  to  be
done,  not  only  in  sight  and  in  fear  of  the  Lord
(ver.  22  6  ;  Eph.  v.  21),  but  as  actually  "  to
tlie  Lord."  Him  they  are  serving  (ver.
24  6),  who  alone  is  "  the  Lord  "  (ch.  ii  6) ;
every  mean  and  hard  task  is  dignified  and
sweetened  by  the  thought  of  being  done /or
him,  and  the  commonest  work  must  be  done
with  the  zeal  and  thoroughness  that  his
service  demands  (comp.  Eph.  vi.  7,  "  with
good  will  doing  bond-service").  The
word  "  not "  (ou  instead  of  /iii)  implies
that  their  service  is  actually  rendered  to
One  other  and  higher  than  "  men  "  (1  Cor.
vii.  22  ;  Gal.  i.  10).

Ver.  24.— Knowing  that  from  (the)  Lord
yon  will  receive  the  just  recompense  of  the
inheritance  (Eph.  vi.  8;  Bom.  ii.   6 — 11;

2  Cor.  v.  10;  Eev.  xxii.  12;  Ps.  Ixii.  12).
"Knowing"  (€iS<iT€s)— that  of  which  one
is  aware,  not  merely  learning  or  "getting
to  know"  (yipdxTKm):  see  both  words  in
Eph.  V.  6  and  John  xiv.  7,  Revised  Text ;
also  Rom.  vi.  6  and  9;  1  John  t.  20.
"  The  absence  of  the  definite  article"  before
Kvplov  "  is  the  more  remarkable,  because  it
is  studiously  inserted  in  the  context "
(Lightfoot).  St.  Paul  virtually  says,
"There  is  a  Masttr  who  will  recompense
yoTi,  if  your  earthly  masters  never  do"
(comp.  ch.  iv.  1).  "  Just "  renders  the  ovtI
in  a.vTaTr6So(!ui  (a  word  common  in  LXX),
implying  "equivalence"  or  "correspond-
ence "  (comp.  i,vTavtxTrXi]pS>  in  ch.  i.  24;
also  Rom.  xi.  35  ;  xii.  19 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  9 ;  2
Thess.  i.  6 ;  Luke  vi.  38 ;  xiv.  12,  14)— «
reward  in  the  case  of  each  individual,  and  in
each  particular,  answering  to  the  service
rendered  to  "  the  Lord  "  (comp.  Matt.  xxv.
14 — 30).  The  opposite  truth  is  asserted  in
ver.  25;  Eph.  vi.  8  combines  them  both.
The  recompense  of  the  faithful  Christian
slave  ii  nothing  less  than  "  the  inheritance  "
of  Go4'»ohildien(ch.  i.  12;  Eph.  i  5, 11, 1*;


iii.  6 ;  t.  5 ;  Rom.  viii.  17 ;.  Gal.  HI  29 ;  1
Cor.  vi.  9,  10;  xv.  50;  Titus  Hi.  7;  1  Pet
i.  4),  which  the  apostle  has  so  often  undei
other  terms  assured  to  his  readers  (ch.  i.  5,
23,  27 ;  ii.  18 ;  iii.  4,  15).  For  a  time  to  be
heir  was  "  a  paradox  "  (Lightfoot) :  see  GaL
iv.  1,7 ;  Rom.  viii.  1 5 — 17.  No  form  of  pro-
mise could  be  more  cheering  and  ennobling
to  the  despised  slave  than  this.  "In  Christ,"
Onesimus  is  "no  longer  as  a  slave,  but  a
brother  beloved"  (Ptjilem.  16),  and  if  a
broiher,  then  a  joint-heir  with  liis  master
riiilc>monintheheavenlyinheritance(oh.  iii
11).  Yo  serve  the  Lord  Christ  (vers.  22,  2.'5 ;
ch.ii.  6;  Eph.  vi.  6;  Itnm.  xiv.  8,  9;  1  Cor.
vi.  19,  20 ;  vii.  21, 23  ;  J.ihn  xiii.  13)  ;  thtit  id,
Christ  is  the  Lord  whom  bondmen  ye  are.
"  For  "  is  probably  a  ooiTeet  gloss,  thou','h
a  corrupt  reading.  Its  insertion  indicates
that  the  sentence  was  rear!  iiidicntively
(Lightfoot,  and  R.V.);  not  imperatively
("serve  the  Lord  Christ"),  as  Meyer.  Alford,
ElHcott,  with  the  Vulgate,  construe  it.  The
verse  amounts  to  this  :  "  Work  as  for  the
Lord :  he  will  repay  you ;  you  are  his
servants."

Ver.  25.— For  he  that  doeth  wrong  shall
receive  again  that  he  did  wrong ;  and  there
is  no  respect  of  persons  (Eph.  vi.  8,  9 ;
Phil.  L  28 ;  2  Thess.  i.  5—7  ;  1  Pet.  i.  17 ;
Rom.  U.  11 ;  Gal.  ii.  6).  "  For  "  is  replaced
by  "  but "  in  the  same  inferior  copies  which
insert  it  in  the  last  sentence.  Here  we
have  the  other  side  of  the  recompense
promised  in  ver.  24  a,  to  which  tlie  explan-
atory "for"  points  back.  The  impartial
justice  which  avenges  every  wrongguarantees
the  reward  of  the  faithful  servant  of  Christ.
So  the  Old  Testament  saints  rightly  argued
(Ps.xxxvii.9— 11 ;  Iviii.  10, 11 ;  Ixiv.  7—10)
that  the  punishment  of  the  evil-doer  affords
hope  to  the  righteous  man.  This  warning
is  quite  general  in  its  terms,  and  applies
alike  to  the  unfaithful  servant  and  to  the
unjust  master  (comp.  Eph.  vi.  8).  At  the
judgment-seat  of  Christ  there  will  be  no
favouritism;  all  ranks  and  orders  of  men
will  stand  on  precisely  the  same  footing
(oh.  iii.  11).  The  word  aSiKea.,  twice
employed  here,  denotes  a  legal  wrong  or
injurjr  (1  Cor.  vi.  7,  8);  e.g.  the  conduct  of
Onesimus  towards  Philemon  (ver.  18).  The
verb  "receive"  (^KOfilCof^iii)  carry  off,  gain;
Eph.  vL  8 ;  2  Cor.  v.  10 ;  1  Pet.  v.  4 ;  Matt.
xxv.  27)  looks  more  to  the  receiver,  whereas
kiroXim^eaBe  vmi  (ver.  24)  points  to  the  giver.
Tlpo(rwiroKrin^la  (literally,  accepting  of  tha
face)  is  a  pure  Hebraism,  found  in  St.  James
twice,  and  four  times  in  St.  Paul.

The  apostle  turns  from  the  slave  to  address
bis  master.

(Jh.  Iv.  1. — ^Te  lords,  show  jnst  dealing  and
fairness  to  your  servants  [bondEmen]  (Eph.
vj.  8,  9 ;  Matt.  xTiii.  23—35  ;  Luke  vL  31).


168


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [ch.  m.  1— 26.


The  verb  "  show  "  (irapexf(r6(,  afford,  render)
IB  middle  in  voice,  and,  as  in  Luke  vii.  4  and
Titus  ii.  7,  implies  spontaneity — "  show  on
youi  part,"  "of  yourselves."  Tb  Bf/toiov
("  the  just "),  a  concrete  expression,  denote*
the  justice  of  the  master's  dealing  (comp.
ri  xp''!"'''^"  ™  Eom.  ii.  4,  "  the  kind  dealing
of  God  ").  Tj)*  io-(iTT)Ta  gives  the  principle
by  which  he  is  to  be  guided,  that  of  equity,
fairness  (so  Alford,  EUicott,  Lightfoot).
"  Equity  is  the  mother  of  Justice  "  (Philo,
'  On  the  Creation  of  Magistrates,'  §  14 ;
gee  other  illustrations  in  Lightfoot).  Meyer
confeuds  for  the  stricter  sense,  "  equality  "
(2  Cor.  viii.  13,  14) — i.«.  of  Church  status
and  brotherhood  (Philem.  16  ;  ch.  iii.  11).
But  the  context  suggests  no  such  special
reference ;  it  deals  with  the  family  and
social  relationship  of  master  and  servant.
"  Equity  "  is  a  well-established  sense  of  the
Greek  word.  The  law  of  equity  bearing  on
all  human  relations  Christ  has  lai  I  down
in  Luke  vi.  31.  Here  is  th^-  geriuiiial
priuciple  of  the  abolition  of  alavery.    Mural


equity,  as  realized  by  the  Christian  con
sciousness,  was  sure  in  course  of  time  to
bring  about  legal  equality.  Knowing  that
ye  also  have  a  Lord  in  heaven  (ch.  ii.  6 ;  Eph.
vi.  9 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  22 ;  Phil.  Ii.  11 ;  Eom.  xiv.
9;  Eev.  ivii.  14;  xix.  16).  (On  "knowing,"
see  ver.  24  a.)  "  Ye  also,"  for  Christ  is  "  both
their  Lord  and  yours  "  (Epii.  vi.  9,  Eevised
Text).  The  lordship  of  Christ  dominatea
the  whole  Epistle  (ch.  i.  15, 18;  ii.  6, 10, 19,
etc.).  The  assertion  that  the  proud  master
who  deemed  his  fellow-man  his  chattel  is
himself  a  mere  slave  of  Christ,  sets  Christ's
authority  in  a  vivid  and  striking  light.
This  consideration  makes  the  Christian
master  apprehensive  as  to  his  treatment  of
his  dependents.  He  is  "  in  heaven  "  (ch.
iii.  1 ;  Eph.  i.  21 ;  vi.  9;  iv.  10  ;  Phil.  iii.
20;  1  'I'hess.  i.  10;  2  Thess.i7;  Acts  iii.
21;  John  iii.  13;  viii.  23;  Heb.  ix.  21),  the
seat  of  Divine  authority  ami  glory,  wlience
he  shall  soon  return  to  judgment  (comp.  P».
Ixxvi.  8 :  Bom.  L  18).


H0MILETIC3.

Vers.   1 — ^17. — Sect.  7.     The  true   Christian  life.    From  above  only  can  we  be

raised.  There  is  no  salvation  in  mere  antipathy.  Disgust  at  the  vanities  of  life,
repulsion  from  earthly  things,  will  of  itself  never  lift  us  beyond  them ;  it  needs  the
superior  influence  of  heavenly  things  to  do  that.  This  the  Ctolossiau  errorists  did  not
rightly  understand ;  or  they  could  not  have  made  ceremonial  purifications  and  bodily
austerities  the  way  of  holiness,  the  means  of  reaching  spiritual  perfection.  "  Touch  not,
taste  not  "  (ch.  ii.  20,  21), — these  were  their  chief  commandments.  The  physical  life
was  their  great  aversion,  and  to  reduce  and  harass  it  was  the  leading  object  of  their
moral  endeavours.  In  the  last  two  sections  of  his  letter  (ch.  ii.  8 — 23)  the  apostle  has
denounced  their  system  as  false  and  mischievous,  to  be  rejected  by  Christian  believers,
since  it  is  not  according  to  Christ,  but  is,  in  spite  of  its  high  pretensions,  essentially  base
and  earthly.  He  now  proceeds,  by  way  of  command  and  appeal,  to  delineate  tlie  true
Christian  character,  the  working  of  Christian  principles  of  life,  as  contrasted  with  the
mystico-ceremonial  and  ascetic  ideal  of  the  Gnosticizing  teachers.  'J'he  Christian  be
desciibes  is  one  whose  "life  is  Christ" — a  life  derived  from,  and  animated  and  governed
by,  "  the  Lord  from  heaven,"  and  not  by  "  the  tradition  of  men  and  the  rudiments  of
the  world  " — "  the  things  upon  the  earth  "  (comp.  John  vi.  31—33,  41,  42,  47 — 59).

I.  The  hidden  life.  (Vers.  1 — 4.)  1.  The  vital  spring  of  a  practical  Christian  life
is  personal  union  with  Christ.  "  Ye  were  raised  with  Christ ;  your  life  is  hid  zvilh
Christ ;  ye  shall  be  manifested  with  him ;  Christ  is  your  life  "  (vers.  1 — 4).  (1)  Not
only  must  the  principle  of  a  perfect  and  all-sufficing  life  for  men  be  heavenly ;  it  must
be  personai.  "  We  live  by  admiration,  hope,  and  love."  All  really  commanding  and
sovereign  influences  acting  on  human  nature  contain  a  personal  element.  We  cannot  sus-
tain ourselves  on  abstract  laws,  or  great  universal  ideas,  or  "  streams  of  tendency ; "  on  a
"  something  not  ourselves  that  makes  for  "  this  or  that ;  on  formulas  or  generalizations  of
any  kind,  however  grand  and  comprehensive,  however  true  and  useful  in  their  place.
In  spite  of  all  plausible  argument  and  eleo;ant  raillery,  and  underneath  the  changing
modes  and  fashions  of  polite  or  scientific  thought,  it  yet  remains  a  constitutional  and
fixed  necessity  of  the  human  soul  to  find  in  that  which  is  higher  than  itself  Some  One
to  reverence  and  to  obey.  Against  this  necessity,  Alexandrine  theosophy  and  modern
scepticism  equally  contend  in  vain.  Men  want  a  living  Ood,  One  who  knows,  who
loves  and  liates,  who  wills  and  acts — a  just  Qod  and  a  Saviour ;  and  they  will  not  have
tbese  terms  exflained  away.    We  aj-e  not  to  te  frightened  or  (Jiscompos!"d  by  being


CH,  m.  1—25,]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIAUS.  168

told  that  our  God  is  "  a  magnified,  non-natural  Man,"  and  that  our  notions  nre  groisl;
" anthiopomorphio."  We  cannot  believe  that  the  Power  which  is  infinitely  greater
than  ourselves  is  kss  than  a  Person.  "  That  which  may  be  known  of  God  is  "  so  far
-'  manifest  in  ourselves"  (Rom.  i.  19),  that  what  we  find  there  of  highest  and  most  dis-
tinctive— in  tliought,  in  will,  in  affection,  in  moral  self-consciousness — must  needs
be  an  index,  the  surest  and  directest  that  reason  furnishes  (for  it  is  given  by  the  very
being  of  reason  itself),  to  the  nature  of  that  Power  which  made  and  governs  us.  To  this
first  principle  we  are  compelled  to  hold,  notwithstanding  the  metaphysical  difficulties
old  as  human  thought,  which  surround  those  indications— difficulties  which  meet  every
interpretation  of  them  alike.  The  Incarnation  has  confirmed,  while  it  has  corrected,
this  universal  assumption.  In  the  mind  of  Christ,  in  the  love  of  Christ,  in  the  huly
will  that  says, "  Father,  I  will  .  .  .  nevertheless,  not  what  I  will,  but  what  thou  wilt "
(John  xvii.  24 ;  Mark  xiv.  36),  we  behold  in  its  purest  and  most  satisfying  form  that
which  may  he  known  of  Ood,  and  the  relations  in  which  as  men  we  stand  thereto.  How
much  God  is  beyond  and  behind  all  that,  we  cannot  guess ;  bat  he  is  all  that,  he  is
nothing  less  than,  nothing  different  from,  that  which  we  see  "  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ "
(ch.  i.  15;  2  Cor.  iv.  4 ;  John  i.  18).  (2)  The  man  whose  " life  is  hid  with  Christ"  is
"joined  in  one  spirit"  (1  Cor.  vi.  17) — ^in  a  sympathy  of  love  and  fellowship  of  thought
and  aim  the  most  complete  of  which  the  human  soul  is  capable — ^with  a  living  Person
in  heaven.  He  is  "  joined  to  the  Lord,"  who  has  "  all  authority  in  heaven  and  in  earth  "
(ch.  i.  13, 15, 18  ;  Bom.  xiv.  9 ;  John  xvii.  2 ;  Matt,  xxviii.  13 ;  Bev.  i.  5),  with  the
wisdom  that  touches  on  the  one  side  the  resources  of  omniscience  and  on  the  other
the  everyday  experience  of  human  infirmity  and  suffering  (ch.  ii.  3 ;  1  Cor.  i.  24 ;
John  ii.  25 ;  xvi.  30 ;  Matt.  xi.  27 ;  Heb.  ii.  17, 18 ;  iv.  15 ;  Rev.  ii.  23),  and  the  claims
on  our  devotion  of  One  who  "  loved  us  and  gave  himself  for  us  "  (ch.  i.  14,  20 — 22 ;
Eph.  ii.  13,  14 ;  Gal.  ii.  20 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  9 ;  John  x.  15 ;  xv.  13 ;  Bev.  i.  5  ;  v.  12).  In
hira  we  recognize  personal  being,  personal  worth,  and  personal  rights  in  relation  to
ourselves,  the  highest  conceivable  both  in  kind  and  degree.  To  have  a  life  hid  with
Christ  is  to  dwell  in  an  inward  communion  of  heart  with  One  whom  we  can  perfectly
trust,  perfectly  love,  and  absolutely  obey.  (3)  This  is  life  indeed  (Jqhn  vi.-  53 ;  1
John  V.  12).  This  fellowship  supplies,  as  nothing  else  can  do  in  the  nature  of  things,
the  means  of  moral  culture,  the  influences  by  which  men  may  be  "  redeemed  from
all  iniquity"  (Titus  ii.  14;  GaL  L  4;  John  xv.  3),  by  which  a  Divine  character
is  formed  in  the  soul  (Gal.  iv.  19)  and  it  is  trained  for  the  life  of  heaven  (ch.  i.  27 ;
Phil.  i.  6).  The  Christian  life  is  nothing  less  than  a  Divine  friendship  (John  xv.  12 —
15 ;  Isa.  xli.  8  ;  Exod.  xxxiii.  11 ;  Gen.  v.  24 ;  xviii.  17).  To  gain  this  life  one  may
gladly  consent  to  die  to  all  that  is  alien  from  the  life  of  Christ  (ver.  3 ;  oh.  ii.  11,  20 ;
Phil.  iii.  7 — 12 ;  Rom.  vi.  2,  11 ;  viL  4 — 6).  2.  A  true  union  with  Christ  lifts  our
aims  ahive  this  world.  "Ye  were  raised  with  Christ,  seek,  mind,  the  things  above,
where  Christ  is,  for  (from  the  things  on  the  earth)  ye  died  "  (vers.  1 — 3).  Christ  has
gone  to  heaven,  and  he  is  our  Life.  Thither  he  has  carried  with  him  our  desires  and
hopes  (Phil.  i.  23 ;  2  Cor.  v.  6 — 8).  To  be  where  he  is,  is  the  deepest  longing  of  the
Christian  heart;  and  its  attainmeat  is  the  supreme  reward  of  faithful  service  (John  xii.
26  ;  xiv.  1 — 6 ;  Bev.  jiL  21 ;  xiv.  4).  Heaven  is  the  Christian's  home,  because  he  is
there.  And  he  has  gone  thither,  not  simply  as  to  "  the  place  where  he  was  before  "
(John  vi.  62),  and  to  which  he  properly  belongs  (John  iii.  13),  but  as  our  "  Fore-
runner "  (Heb.  vi.  20),  the  "  Firstborn  among  many  brethren  "  (ch.  i.  18 ;  Bom.  viii.
29).  He  aven  is  the  goal  which  he  has  marked  out  for  his  followers,  the  "  Father's
house,"  the  native  city  of  all  the  members  of  his  body,  the  Church  (Eph.  i.  18 — ^23 ;
Phil.  iii.  20 ;  John  xiv.  2 ;  Heb.  xi.  10, 13—16).  "  The  prize  of  our  high  calling  "  (t^j
itiit  KKriffeas,  "  that  calls  us  above  ")  is  bestowed  at  "  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  "  (Phil,
iii.  9 — 21).  (1)  As  workmen,  as  tradesmen,  as  citizens,  our  aims  terminate  with  the  things
upon  the  earth ;  as  Christians,  we  seek  the  things  that  are  above.  The  present  in  our
view  is  the  seed-time,  the  training  school  for  the  immortal  future ;  and  its  value  lies  in
what  it  leads  to  rather  than  in  what  it  is.  Our  present  spiritual  life,  the  knowledge  of
Christ  and  communion  with  him  we  now  enjoy,  is  but  "  the  earnest  of  our  inheritance,"
"the  firstfiuits  of  the  Spirit"  (Eph.  i.  14;  Bom.  viii.  23;  Phil.  iii.  12—14).  "By"
this  "  hope  we  are  saved  "  (Bom.  viii.  17 — 25) ;  for  this,  most  of  all,  do  we  give  thanki
(cb,  I  a-6,  23;  Phil  i.  6;  1  Cor.  i.  7,  8;  I  Pa.  j.  3—7    comp.  bomiletigs,  sect,  I,


160  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oh.  in.  1—25

II.  1  (3).)  (2)  Yet  tliis  minding  of  the  things  above  involve!  no  diiparagement  tf  fh*
interests  and  daims  of  secular  life.  For  this  present  is  the  pathway  to  that  future.
How  seriously  important,  how  carefully  to  be  studied  and  appraised,  how  diligently  to
be  improved,  are  the  "  few  things  "  of  our  earthly  stewardship,  if  by  a  right  manage-
ment of  them  we  may  become  "  lords "  of  the  "  many  things "  of  the  everlaeting
habitations  (Matt.  xxv.  14 — 30 ;  L\ike  xvi.  9 — 12 ;  1  Oor.  vii.  31) !  But  we  must  keejj
our  thoughts  and  aims  above  the  world,  taking  care  not  to  be  overcharged  with  "  cares
and  pleasures  of  this  life"  (Luke  viii.  14;  xxi.  34),  "declaring  plainly  that  we  seek
a  country"  (Heb.  xi.  14),  turning  earth  at  every  step  into  "a  scale  to  heaven,"  making
Christ  all  in  all  in  family  and  social  life,  in  business  and  in  politics.  3.  ITie  Christian
life  it,  therefore,  in  its  essence  a  mystery.  "Your  life  is  hid"  (vex.  3).  (1)  "The  world
knoweth  us  not "  (1  John  iii.  1).  As  to  the  life  of  the  children  of  this  world,  and  of
the  Christian  man  so  far  as  he  is  a  man  of  the  world,  everything  is  plain.  The
principles  and  motives  of  the  man  of  business,  the  politician,  or  the  scientist  are  easily
stated  and  generally  intelligible.  And  the  influences  which  govern  the  depraved,
ungodly  man  are  all  too  plain ;  "  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest "  (Gal.  v.  19).
But  the  man  whose  "citizenship  is  in  heaven,"  who  "walks  by  faith,  not  by  sight,"
who  is  "  looking  for  and  hasting  unto  the  coming  of  the  day  of  Gfod,"  whose  life  it  is  to
love  and  serve  a  Master  who  was  crucified  eighteen  hundrsd  years  ago,  and  whcim  he
expects  to  see  only  after  he  himself  is  dead, — such  a  person  is  an  enigma  to  natural
men  born  only  of  this  world;  he  is  "judged  of  uo  man"  (1  Cor.  ii.  14,  15).  Political
economy,  experimental  psychology  with  its  "  analysis  of  the  human  mind,"  fail  to
account  for  him;  and  the  philosopher  haply  will  pass  him  by  as  a  pretence  or  an
abnormity.  He  is  like  a  planet  deflected  from  its  course  by  some  unknown  body  out
of  telescopic  reach,  whose  magnitude  and  position  it  is  impossible  scientifically  to  deter*
mine.  (2)  Our  life  is  hidden,  because  he  who  is  owr  Life  it  hidden.  "  Ye  see  me  no
more,"  said  Jesus  ;  and  again,  "  The  world  seeth  me  no  more ;  but  ye  see  me :  because  I
live,  ye  shall  live  also"  (John  xvi.  10;  xiv.  19).  "  Therefore  the  world  kuoweth  ug
not,  because  it  knew  him  not"  (1  John  iii.  1).  Our  life  is  wrapped  up  in  One  "  whom
we  have  not  seen  "  (1  Pet.  i.  8,  9),  with  whom  we  can  have  no  kind  of  sensible  com-
munication ;  ill  a  Christ  who  indeed  was  "  manifested  in  the  flesh,"  but  was  scornfully
disbelieved  and  put  to  death,  "justified"  only  "in  the  Spirit,"  seen  only  "  of  angels  "
(1  Tim.  iii,  16).  A  mystery  to  the  world,  the  Christian  life  is  a  mystery  also  to  its
possessor  as  respects  the  methods  by  which  it  is  bestowed  and  sustained  on  God's  part.
"  The  things  of  God  none  knoweth,  save  the  Spirit  of  God,"  and  though  we  receive  this
Spirit,  "  we  know  "  but  "  in  part "  his  operation!  (1  Cor.  ii.  11 ;  xiii.  12).  "  Thou
hearest  the  voice  thereof" — that  is  all  (John  iii.  8).  There  is  a  supernatural  something
that  defies  analysis  and  measurement  in  the  experience  of  every  Christian — a  Divine
life  as  distinct  from  the  natural  soul-life,  as  that  is  from  mere  animal  vitality ;  and  this
is  just  the  sovereign  creative  factor  of  his  religion,  the  principle  of  his  new  birth  and
new  manhood :  his  life  is  "  hid  in  God."  But  while  this  life  itself  is  hidden,  itsfruits  are
not  (ver.  6— ch.  It.  6 ;  Bph.  v.  8—14 ;  Phil.  ii.  15, 16 ;  Titus  ii.  H,  12 ;  Matt.  v.  1-4—16 ;
John  xiii.  35  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9,  12,  15 ;  iii.  1,  2,  15,  16).  4.  But  the  mystery  of  the
Christian  life  is  to  have  its  revelation.  "  When  Christ  shall  be  manifested,  then  shall
ye  also  be  manifeated  with  him,  in  glory"  (ver.  4).  This  riddle  of  life  must  be  solved
(1  Cor.  liiL  12,  R.V.  margin) ;  "  the  things  shaken  "  must  be  removed, "  that  the  things
unshaken  may  remain"  (Heb.  xii.  27);  appearance  must  give  place  to  reality;
"  mortality  "  must  be  "  swallowed  up  of  life ; "  Gtod  has  "  wrought  us  for  this  very  thing"
(2  Cor.  V.  4,  5).  Faith  is  the  virtue  of  education,  and  must  have  its  reward  in  sight ;  if
there  is  nothing  to  be  seen,  then  (hose  are  not  "blessed,"  but  only  mistaken,  "who
have  not  seen  and  yet  have  believed  "  (John  xx.  2y).  Hope  must  be  crowned  with
fruition,  or  it  will  "  put  us  to  shame  "  (Rom.  v.  5).  And  love,  content  now  to  "  see
him  not "  (1  Pet.  i.  8),  is  only  so  content  on  the  assurance  that  "  we  shall  see  him  even
as  be  is"  (1  John  iii.  3 ;  Acts  i.  11 ;  John  xiv.  3).  (1)  Christ  shall  bemanifestid.  He
has  pledged  himself,  both  to  his  friends  and  to  his  foes,  to  return  (John  xiv.  3 ;  Matt.
xxvi.  63, 64).  That  pledge  he  gave  in  the  most  puMic  and  solemn  manner  possible,  in
assertion  of  his  Divine  sonship  and  Messiahship,  His  second  coming  is  the  goal  of  New
Testament  prophecy,  and  of  the  Church's  hope  and  longim;  through  the  ages  (Matt.  xxv.
19,  31;  Acts  iii.  21;  xvii.  31;  X  Thess.  iv.  14—18;  Phil,  iii  20;  Titus  iL  13}  Heh


CH.  HL 1—25.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  Ml

ii.  28 ;  1  Pet.  L  7 ;  1  John  ii.  28  ;  Eev.  1.  7;  xxii.  20,  etc.).  It  is  the  constunmation  of
human  history,  the  denouement  of  the  great  time-drama,  "  the  one  far-off  Divine  event,
to  which  the  whole  creation  moves."  But  he  waits  till  "  the  guspel  of  the  kingdom  is
preached  to  all  the  nations,"  "  till  his  enemies  be  made  his  footstool,"  till  "  the  harvest
of  the  earth  is  ripe,"  till  the  hour  has  struck  appointed  in  the  Father's  eternal  counsels
(Mark  xiii.  10,  32 ;  Heb.  x.  12,  13 ;  Rev.  xiv.  15, 18).  Then  he  will  appear  in  that
glory  (Matt.  XXV.  31;  xxvi.  64;  Titus  ii.  18),  something  of  which  the  three  saw  "in
the  holy  mount "  (2  Pet.  i.  16 — 18),  which  dying  Stephen  beheld  as  he  fell  asleep,  and
Saul  of  Tarsus' as  he  journeyed  to  Damascus,  and  John  in  Patmos  (Acts  vii.  56;
ix.  3 — 6;  Rev.  i.  13 — 18);  of  which  in  entering  upon  his  earthly  estate  he  had
"  emptied  himself,  taking  the  form  of  a  servant"  (Phil.  il.  6,  7).  "  We  shall  see  him
even  as  he  is — the  Lord  of  glory  "  (1  John  iii.  3 ;  Jas.  ii .  1).  (2)  Christ's  glory  his  saints
will  share.  They,  too,  will  be  manifested.  There  will  be  an  "  unveiling  of  the  sons  of
-  God  "  (Eom.  viti.  18^5)*  "  In  this  tabernacle  we  do  groan,  being  burdened  "  (2  Cor,
V.  4),  Our  life  is  "  cribbed,  cabined,  and  confined."  The  body,  virtually  "  dead
because  of  sin,"  oppresses  and  conceals,  while  it  contains,  the  immortal  "  spirit,  which
is  life  because  of  righteousness"  (Eom.  viii.  10,  11).  "Now  we  see  through  a  glass,
darkly  "  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12).  We  move  about  as  if  under  a  heavy,  muffling  cloak.  "  We
are  spirits  in  prison,  able  only  to  make  signals  to  each  other."  But  we  shall  then
enjoy  "  the  liberty  of  the  glory  of  the  children  of  God  "  (Rom.  viii.  21).  This  "  natural
body  "  will  become  a  "  spiritual  body,"  in  which  the  spirit;  will  be  perfectly  expressed
and  for  ever  at  home,  (3)  Then  Chrisfs  glory  will  be  manifest  in  us.  He  will  be  "  glori-
fied in  his  saints,"  and  they  glorified  in  him  (2  Thess.  i.  10 ;  Ps.  xc.  16, 17).  Like  some
Bculptor'a  work,  prepared  in  concealment  and  with  long  labour,  carved  out  of  the
rough,  unshapely  block  by  many  a  painful  stroke  of  hammer  and  of  chisel,  till  the  artist's
glorious  ideal  is  wrought  out,  and  on  some  public  day  the  finished  master-piece  is  at
last  Unveiled ;  so  the  man,  perfect  in  Christ,  will  be  "presented  faultless  before  the  pre-
sence of  his  glory  with  exceeding  joy"  (ch.  i.  22,  28 ;  Jude  24).

II,  The  death  or  the  old  self,  (Vers.  5 — ^9.)  Impurity,  greed,  malice,  falsehood, —
these  are  the  leading  features  of  the  former  life  of  sin  which  the  apostle  represents  his
readers  as  having  followed  before  they  became  Christians,  He  does  not,  of  course,
charge  all  of  them  equally  and  alike  with  these  offences.  But  then,  as  now,  these  four
types  of  vice  were  prevalent  amongst  the  great  mass  of  ungodly  men  (ver.  7  ;  1  Cor.
vi.  9 — W).  Such  statements,  when  applied  to  men  living  under  the  influences  of
Chiistian  society,  must  be  applied  with  discrimination,  and  in  the  light  of  our  Lord's
teaching  addressed  to  the  moral  Jews  in  Matt,  v,  17 — 48,  e*c.  These  vices  are  native
to  the  soil  of  the  human  heart  (Mark  vii.  20 — 23).  By  habitual  practice  they  take
possession  of  the  man,  so  that  his  "members"  are  made  "slaves  to  uncleanness
and  iniquity"  (Rom,  vi.  19;  John  viii.  34),  and  his  body  becomes  a  "  b(jdy  of
sin"  and  "of  death"  (Rom.  vi.  6;  vii.  23 — 26;  ch.  ii.  11).  They  become  virtually
his  "members  that  are  upon  the  earth"  (ver,  5).  Under  the  sway  of  sensual  apjie-
tite  and  worldly  desire,  ungoverned  by  any  influence  from  "the  things  abuve,"  his
person  becomes  more  and  more  completely  ore  incarnation  of  sin  (Rom.  vii.  5,  20,
23).  These  "  members,"  then,  individually  and  collectively,  must  be  "  put  to  death  ; "
this  "  body  of  the  flesh,"  as  a  "  body  of  sin,"  must  be  "  stripped  off"  and  "  done  away  "
(oh.  iL  11 ;  Kom.  vL  6),  Christ  cannot  dwell  in  the  soul  while  "  sin  reigns  in  the
mortal  body"  (Rom.  vi.  12).  He  has  no  "concord  with  Belial,"  or  with  Mammon
(2  Cor.  vi.  15 ;  Mntt.  vi.  24).  "  The  old  man  "  must  be  "  so  buried,  that  the  new  man
may  be  raised  up"  in  us  (oomp.  Bph.  iv.  17 — 24).  1.  Unchastity  was  the  most  conspicuous
sin  of  the  Gentile  world  in  which  St.  Paul  moved.  There  it  prevailed  in  the  grossest
and  most  shameless  forms;  and  its  prevalence  is  a  fearful  warning,  as  he  points  out
(Rom.  i.  18 — 27),  of  the  outcome  of  a  godless  civilization.  The  society  of  the  populous
Greek  cities  of  that  day  was  one  in  which  "  fornication,  uncleanness,  lustful  passion,
evil  desire"  (ver.  5),  had  free  course,  and  its  moral  condition  was  only  less  abanduned
than  the  "reeking  rottenness"  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrha.  Adultery,  indeed,  was  con-
demned as  a  civil  crime  by  pagan  moralists ;  but  fornication  they  held,  as  a  rule,  to  be
an  innocent  and  almost  a  necessary  thing.  It  was  in  writing  to  Corinth,  perhaps
the  most  licentious  city  in  that  licentious  age,  that  the  apostle  launched  his  sternest
and  most  vehement  interdict  against  this  crime,  which  is  a  moral  leprouy  and  peati-
ooLOBSiAtn.  ■


182  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oh.  ni.  1—25

lence.  There  he  marks  it  out  as  peculiar  from  all  other  sins  in  being  a  sin  against  a
man's  own  body,  and  an  especial  insult  and  outrage  to  the  Holy  Rpiiit  who  claims  the
human  body  fur  his  temple  (1  Cor.  vi.  13 — 20 :  cdmp.  1  Thess.  iv.  2 — 8).  There  are  too
many  ovideuces  in  the  state  of  modern  society,  both  in  high  quarters  and  in  low,  that  as'
Christian  sentiment  grows  weak  and  religious  faith  dies  down,  in  the  same  proportion  the
perversion  of  the  sexual  passions  follows,  with  its  invariable  result. in  the  relaxation  of
moral  fibre,  the  destruction  of  social  confidence,  and  the  physical  decay  of  the  corrupted
race.  Man  begins  by  denying  his  Maker,  and  ends  by  degrading  himself.  There  are
times  and  places  where  plain  speaking  on  this  subject  is  needful,  and  no  prudery  or
sentimt-atal  delicacy  should  prevent  it.  The  tempted  must  be  warned ;  the  guilty
rebuke'l ;  bodily  self-respect  must  be  tauatht  in  good  time.  The  pure  will  know  how
to  do  this,  like  the  apostle  himself  and  like  his  Master,^' in  all  purity."  When  once
inward  chastity  has  been  lost  and  unoleanness  spots  the  soul,  the  stain  is  not  easily
effaced.  Evils  of  this  kind  flourish  in  the  dark  and  love  to  be  ignored.  2.  Covetous-
ness  is  idolatry.  (Ver.  5.)  It  is,  obviously  and  directly,  "  worshipping  and  serving  the
creature"  (Rom.  i.  25).  While  it  appears  to  be  self-love,  it  is  really  the  sacrifice  of
self  to  the  world,  offered  at  the  shrine  of  wealth,  or  fame,  or  pleasure.  The  man  seeks
to  gain  power  over  other  men  or  things  ;  but  if  this  becomes  his  supreme  desire,  or  if
he  seeks  to  attain  it  by  evil  means,  then  from  that  moment  the  object  of  his  guilty
pursuit  gains  power  over  him,  and  begins  to  entangle  and  enslave  him  (John  viii.  34 ;
Eom.  vii.  23).  His  passion  becomes  his  tyrant,  his  ambition  an  insanity,  his  pursuit
of  pleasure  an  infatuation.  Even  the  thirst  for  knowledge,  the  noblest  of  natural
desires,  may  grow  into  a  selfish  greed,  jealous  and  grasping,  eating  out  the  best
affections,  and  producing  an  accomplished  scholar,  a  master  of  science,  void  of  all
goodness  of  heart  and  human  worth.  All  croaturely  things,  regarded  out  of  God,  are
but  "  passing  shows"  (etSaiXo,  idols)  of  the  absolute  and  enduring  goodness  that  belongs
to  him  (Matt.  xix.  17).  The  homage  rendered  to  them — whether  by  the  savage  to  his
fetish,  by  the  civilized  worldling  to  his  wealth  or  rank,  or  by  the  scientist  to  his  laws
and  farces  of  nature — is  idolatry,  the  worshipping  of  shams  and  shows,  in  so  far
as  it  is  a  departing  from  the  living  God  (Heb.  iii.  12;  Exod.  xx.  3;  Isa.  xliii.  10;
1  Cor.  viii.  4 — 6).  And  with  life  thus  perverted  at  its  fountain-head,  it  becomes  a
mere  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit.  3.  Mdice  is  universally  denounced.  Moralists
of  all  schools  and  all  ages  agiee  in  proscribing  this  vice,  though  in  little  else.  The
malicious  man  is  instinctively  dreaded  ;  he  is  a  peril  to  every  one.  Sins  of  malice  and
of  falsehood  strike  directly  at  the  existence  of  society,  while  the  two  former  classes  of
offence  threaten  it  more  gradually  and  indirectly.  (1)  Yet  it  can  scarcely  be  denied  that
cCnger,  wrath,  malice,  railing,  shameful  speaking,  are,  to  a  large  extent,  congenital  to
human  nature.  It  is  true  that  there  is  an  instinctive  benevolence,  a  fellow-feeling  for
one's  kind,  only  exceptionally  wanting ;  but  at  the  same  time  there  exists  a  proclivity,
that  is  often  terribly  strong  even  in  its  earliest  manifestations,  in  the  opposite  direction.
"  Cain  was  of  that  wicked  one,  and  slew  his  brother ;  .  .  .  because  his  own  works  were
evil,  and  his  brother's  righteous  "  (1  John  iii.  12).  It  is  a  weak  and  fatal  delusion  to
rely  on  natural  benevolence  as  an  effective  and  commanding  moral  force,  a  stable
foundation  for  a  system  of  practical  ethics.  Nor  is  it  possible  in  the  nature  of  things
that  enlightened  self-interest  or  any  combination  of  prudential  or  utilitarian  considera-
tions should  ever  teach  men  to  love  their  neighbours  as  themselves,  or  should  succeed
in  suppressing  rage  and  jealousy  and  the  murderous  passions  slumbering  in  the  blood
of  the  race.  We  must  be  "taught  of  God  to  love  one  another"  (1  Thess.  iv.  9;  see
1  John  ii.  7—11 ;  iii.  13—24 ;  iv.  7—21).  (2)  The  love  of  Christ  will  at  last  subdue  the
fratricidal  passions  of  mankind,  will  "  make  wars  to  cease  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth ; "
and  one  day  will  brin<^  men  of  the  most  distant  climes  and  hostile  interests  to  clasp
each  other's  hands  and  look  into  each  other's  eyes  and  say,  "Beloved,  if  God  so  loved
us,  we  ought  also  to  love  one  another! "  Here  lies  the  only  hope  of  the  fraternization  of
mankind.  4.  If  impurity  dishonours  the  body,  falsehood  dishonours  the  mind.  This
sin  at  once  degrades  the  man,  wrongs  by  deceiving  his  fellow,  and  insults  his  God,  the
ever-present  Witness  and  Guardian  of  truth  (Acts  y.  4;  Rom.  ix.  1;  1  Thess.  ii.  5;
Ps.  cxxxix.  4 ;  Jer.  v.  3).  Here  the  apostle  points  out  (1)  its  inconsistency  with  the
Christian  character  of  the  man  (vers.  9,  10) ;  and  (2)  its  contradiction  to  the  Christian
view  of  society  (ver.  11).    Similarly  in  Bph.  iv.  25:  "For  we  are  members  one  ol


tm.  m.  1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa  1«S

another.''  For  a  man  to  deceive  his  neighhour  by  word  or  deed,ia  as  if  the  eyes  should
coDspire  to  trick  the  ear  or  misguide  the  hand.  The  ancients  condemned  falsehood
between  men  of  the  same  community,  but  generally  regarded  it  as  a  lawful  weapon
to  use  against  enemies  or  strangers;  although  the  Stoics,  with  their  wider  views  o/
humanity,  taught  on  this  point,  as  on  others,  a  higher  morality.  The  "  Greek  "  mig)it
deceive  the  "  barbarian,"  the  "  bondman  "  might  lie  to  his  master,  and  have  no  sense
of  moral  wrong.  And  so  it  has  been  too  commonly  in  the  dealing  of  servants  nr
schoolboys  with  their  masters,  of  civilized  men  with  savages,  of  libertines  in  their  con-
duct towards  the  other  sex.  Witness  the  immoral  maxim, "  All's  fair  in  love  and
war.'  One  chief  cause  of  deceit  would  be  removed  if  men  would  understand  that  the
instinct  of  honour  which  bids  them  be  truthful  to  their  equals  and  comrades,  requires
the  same  honesty  in  dealing  with  every  man  as  man.  The  Christian  acts  on  this
principle ;  he  will  not  in  any  sense  "  hold  the  faith  of  our  Lord  Jesus  with  respect  o/
persons  "  (Jas.  ii.  1).  (a)  Many  men  who  would  resist  the  temptation  to  utter  a  lie  in  sc
many  words,  will  silently  act  it ;  especially  in  a  continued  course  of  action,  where  the
deception  lies  not  in  any  single  definite  act,  but  in  the  general  construction  which  they
lead  others  to  put  on  their  proceedings.  Such  deception  is  no  less  culpable  in  itself,
and  as  a  rule  still  more  disastrous  in  its  effects,  than  a  palpable  lie.  (V)  And  again,  men
find  it  easy  to  lie  collectively  who  would  not  do  so  singly.  Though  men  of  [irobity
in  their  private  affairs,  they  will  put  their  hands  to  documents,  they  will  consent  with
others  to  acts,  which  they  know  to  be  misleading,  or,  at  least,  which  they  do  not  know
to  be  true.  And  now  that  busiDcss  is  becoming  more  and  more  a  matter  of  "limited
liability,"  the  perils  of  divided  responsibility  in  this  direction  should  be  well  under-
stood. 5.  "Because  of  all  these  things  God's  anger  is  coming  on  the  sons  of  dis-
obedience" (ver.  6).  Every  act  or  thought  of  any  of  these  kinds  is  a  disobedience,
a  breach  of  "  the  holy  and  just  and  good  Law "  under  which  man  was  first  cjeated  in
his  Maker's  image  (ver.  10).  This  "Law  worketh  out  wrath,"  inexorably  and  per-
petually, against  "every  soul  of  man  that  doeth  evil"  (Rom.  ii.  9;  iv.  15).  And  that
anger  of  God  is  coming  (Isa.  xxx.  27,  28).  There  is  a  day  appointed  for  its  "  revela-
tion" (Rom.  ii.  5,  16;  Mai.  iv.  1),  even  as  for  "the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of
God  "  (ver.  4 ;  Rom.  viii.  19).  It  is  already  "  revealed  from  heaven  "  (Eom.  i.  18),  and
gives  forewarning  of  its  advent  in  many  a  personal  and  public  calamity  (Isa.  xxvi.  9 ;
Mai.  iii.  5 ;  Matt.  xxiv.  3 — 42 ;  1  Cor.  v.  3 — 5 ;  xi.  30—32).  On  every  account,  the
Christian  must  have  done  with  the  old  life  of  sin.  He  sees  it  to  be  inoonipatib'e  with
fellowship  with  Christ,  to  be  hateful  to  God,  to  be  ruinous  to  himself  and  to  his  fellou-
men.  No  return  to  it,  no  renewal  of  it,  no  dallying  or  temporizing  with  it  in  any  kind
or  degree,  can  be  tolerated.    It  must  die  if  he  is  to  live.

III.  The  nNiTT  of  mankind  in  Chbist.  (Vers.  10, 11.)  This  truth  belonged,  at  least
in  St.  Paul's  time,  to  the  more  advanced  Christian  knowledge,  "unto  which"  the
believer  was  "being  renewed"  (ver.  10);  and  the  Church  still  comes  far  short  of  its
full  apprehension.  1.  The  gospel  of  Christ  reveals  the  spiritual  unity  of  mankind.
To  make  this  known  was  a  part  of  the  apostle's  mission,  and  of  the  special  "  mystery
God"  entrusted  to  him  (ch.  i.  25—28;  Eph.  iii.  1—6;  Rom.  iii.  9—30;  xv.  5—
12).  Its  manifestation,  and  the  consequent  "  breaking  down  of  the  middle  wall  of
partition ''  (Eph.  ii.  14),  were  necessary  to  a  complete  Christian  virtue,  the  proper
virtue  of  man  as  man,  carried  out. in  all  his  relations  to  God  and  to  his  felluwa;  and  for
the  regeneration  of  tmman  society,  the  salvation  of  the  world.  There  was  a  jireparation
for  this  belief  in  the  breaking  down  of  the  old  nations  into  the  unity  of  the  Roman
empire,  in  the  decay  of  local  and  ancestral  religions,  and  in  the  advance  of  philosophy
from  the  narrower  and  more  political  ethics  of  Plato  and  Aristotle  to  the  moral  system
of  the  Stoics,  which  was  at  once  more  inward  and  more  humane.  But  there'was  want-
ing that  conception  of  a  living.  Divine  centre  of  the  human  race,  given  iu  Christ,
which  alone  could  make  the  sentiment  of  universal  humanity  a  creative,  organic  force.
2.  'JTiis  unity  lias  been  realized  in  the  Christian  Church.  It  appears  in  the  beautiful
simplicity  of  its  childlike  beginning,  in  the  communism  of  the  infant  Church  of
Jerusalem  (Acts  ii.  44 — 47).  It  was  set  forth  in  a  larger  and  fuller  way  by  the
Apostle  Paul  in  addressing  the  mixed  Churches  of  the  great  cities  where  he  laboured ;
and  was  actually  put  into  practice  there  in  a  good  degree.  Jew  and  Greek  (Gal.  ii.  12),
rich  and  poor  (1  Cor.  xi.  20 — 22 ;  t/it  exception  proves  the  rule :  comp.  Jas.  iL  1 — i),


H4  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa  [oh.  in.  1—28.

master  and  slave  (Philem.  16,  17),  met  at  the  same  table  of  the  Lord,  mingled  as  eqnali
in  tlie  sariif  ("linstian  society,  distinguished  only  by  the  measure  of  "grace"  and
"  Riiiiitualgiii  ■  b.stuvvudoneach  (Uoin.xii.  6  ;  lCor.xii.7 — 11).  And  the  reoordg  of  the
first  ibree  Cliiistiari  centuries  show  how  faitiilnlly,  on  the  whole,  this  principle  waa
niaiiJtaiuuil,  and  how  nobly  the  Church  held  herself  superior  to  temporal  distinctions
of  woaltli  and  rank.  Far  indeed  has  she  subsequently  departed  from  this  rule;  and
lost  l)i)w  much  thereby  in  spiritual  dignity  and  power]  We  admire  it  now  as  a
proof  of  special  humility  if  the  titled  or  cultured  man  forgets  amongst  Christian
brethren  his  worldly  eminence ;  if  the  employer  of  labour  is  glad  to  sit  at  the  feet  of
his  Workman,  when  that  workman,  as  may  often  be  the  case,  is  bis  spiritual  superior;
if  the  wi  altby  contributor  to  a  Church  fund  does  not  expect,  on  that  account,  to  dictate
in  its  managemi.'nt.  3.  The  Church  is  destined  to  gather  mankind  into  a  spiritual
eommonwealth.  In  it  there  is  to  be  no  "strife  as  to  who  shall  be  greatest;  but  in
huniility  and  self-forjietfulnesa  "the  greater  shall  be  as  the  younger,  and  the  chief  as
he  that  doth  serve"  (Luke  xxii.  24 — 26).  Tliere  "all  are  bretliren,  with  one  Master
even  Christ "  (Matt,  xxiii.  8 — 12).  All  authority  and  office  are  derived  from  him,  and
attested  by  his  Spirit  in  his  people  (1  Cor.  xii.  1 — 11;  Acts  1.24;  xiii.  1 — 4;  Gal.
i.  1 ;  John  xx.  21).  The  Church  is  his  body,  complete  in  him — a  unity  in  itself  and  in
its  action,  because  in  every  limb  it  draws  its  life  and  gets  its  direction  from  the  Head.
And  as  the  Church  becomes  a  greater  and  more  pervasive  power  in  the  world,  the
spiritual  brotherliood  it  creates  will  work  appeasingly  on  the  "  wars  and  fightings,"
on  the  aristociatic  exclusiveuess  and  haugljtiness,  the  democratic  bitterness  and
jealousy,  the  invincible  prejudices,  the  clashing  interests,  by  which  society  is  distiaoted
and  its  bonds  are  strained  almost  to  rending,  and  the  nations  are  kept  in  arms  and
hurled  repeatedly  against  each  other  in  deadly  conflict.  When  mankind  recovers  its
unity  in  him  in  whom  it  was  created  and  redeemed,  when  it  is  reconciled  to  God  and
bows  its  every  knie  "at  the  name  of  Jesus," — then  at  last  there  will  be  "peace  on
earth."    Where  "  Christ  is  all  and  In  all "  antipathy  must  cease.

IV.  The  NEW  Chkistian  CHARACTER.  (Vcrs.  12— 17.)  We  have  traced  the  principle
of  the  Christian  life  in  its  inner  ground  and  aim,  as  "hid  with  Christ"  and  seeking  its
home  in  heaven  (vers.  1 — 4);  in  its  uncompromising  and  mortal  warfare  with  the  old
life  of  sin  (veis.  5 — 9) ;  in  its  purpose  to  form  a  new  humanity  in  the  individual  soul,
and  in  the  world  at  large  (vers.  10,  11).  We  are  now  to  follow  its  practical  working,
to  see  how  the  "  new  man  "  is  to  show  himself  in  a  new  habit  and  style  of  living,  how
the  "  hidden  life "  is  to  blossom  out  into  its  fragrance  and  beanty,  and  its  "  celestial
fruit "  to  "  grow  on  earthly  ground."  We  note  that  the  Christian  character  is  one
derivtd/rom  Ood  and  that  refers  to  Ood  in  everything.  It  is  as  "God's  elect,  his
holy  nnd  beloved  ones "  (ver.  12),  that  we  are  called  to  assume  the  new  habits  of
Chri'.tian  grace  and  gondness.  Knowingwliat  the  Divine  Father  is,  and  what  he  has  done
for  us  (ch.  i.  12 — 14),  and  what  he  in'  ends  us  to  be  (Bph.  i.  4 — 6),  sensible  of  our  filial
relation  to  him  (Rom.  viii.  15 — 17  ;  Gal.  iv.  1 — 7;  1  John  iii.  1,  2),  loyally  embracing
his  will  (Rom.  vi.  22)  and  seeking  to  be  conformed  to  his  nature  as  that  is  translated
for  us  into  "  the  image  of  his  Son"  (Rom.  viii.  29  ;  2  Pet.  i.  4 ;  1  John  iv.  17),  we  shall
be  "  holy  in  all  maimer  of  conversation."  But  God  is  known  to  us  through  Cnrist.
And,  therefore,  m  the  formation  of  the  Christiau  character  "  Christ  is  all  aud  in  all "
(ver.  13;  1  Cor.  xi.  1;  Rom.  xv.  3;  Phil.  ii.  5;  1  Pet.  ii.  1:2;  1  John  ii.  6;  John
xiii.  15).  It  is  nothing  else  than  Christ  formed  in  us  (Gal.  iv.  19).  In  the  perfect
Chri.^titm  character,  then:  1.  Ohiisf slave  rules.  (Vers,  i:^,  1 1 ;  2Cor.  v.  14;  1  John  iii.
23  ;  John -xiii.  34.)  'J  he  tender  heart  of  compassion,  the  gentle,  sympathetic  kimihness,
the  lowliness  of  mind,  the  uncomplaining  meekness,  the  patient  long-suffering,  the
forlieara'ioe  and  forgivingncss  (vers.  12,  13)  of  the  Christian  nature,— these  centre  in
the  all-perlect  and  all-peifecting  grace  of  Christ-like  love  (1  Cor.  xiii. ;  1  John  iv.  7 —
21 ;  lloin.  xiii.  9,  10).  He  in  whose  heart  dwells  the  love  ol  Christ  caimot  "  shut  up
his  compassion  "  from  any  within  reach  of  help  whonecd  it  (1  John  iii.  17) ;  cannot  be
rude  and  uiigraeious,  or  hard  and  unforgiving;  (Kph.  iv.  31,  'M;  2  Cor.  ii.  5 — 11);  can-
not be  self-asserting;  clamorous,  overbearing  (2  (.:or.  x.  1;  Phil.  ii.  6,  R.V.  mar;.;in;
M»tt.  .\ii.  19);  cannot  be  passionate  and  re-sentful,  irritable  and  faiilt-findmg,  obstinate
in  prejudice,  intolerant  oi  opposition.  The  love  of  Christ  will  assimilate  his  whole
disposition  and  make  it  sweet,  gracioui,  uuselfish,  loving,  and  lovable  as  that  of  an


OB.  m.  1— 2S.]         THE  EPISTLE  fO  tHfi  OOtOSStA^fS.  166

Innocent  child  (Matt,  xviii.  1 — 4).  And  the  Christian  man  who  in  the  spirit  of  this  love
can  "()ossess  his  soul  in  piilieuro"  through  all  the  strenuous  endeavours  and  paiiiTul
collisions  and  vexing  wrongs  of  life,  wears  "  the  girdle  of  perfrctness,"  and  has  attained  tlie
perfect  Christian  temper.  2.  Christ'speacegnards.  (Ver.  15.)  TheChristian's  rnitli  and
nope  are  assailed  by  a  thousand  enemies.  Sometimes  amid  the  common  iuciilents  of
life,  sometimes  in  "the  heavenly  places  "of  his  richest  experience  and  most  exalted
communion  with  spiritual  things  (Kph.  vi.  12) — sometimes  brought  about  by  open  and
palpable  causes,  sometimes  by  strange  influences  shadowing  the  inner  life  and  coruing
we  know  not  whence  or  how — sometimes  through  the  rugg<dn(-ss  and  <:l'om  of  his
providential  path,  sometimes  through  mental  perplexities  and  the  cliilliiit:  and  confused
intellectual  atmosphere  around  him, — in  any  or  in  all  of  these  ways  "the  trial  of  his
faith"  comes — comes,  in  one  shape  or  other,  to  every  man  who  has  a  faith  worth  tiial.
And  then,  whatever  be  the  form  which  the  assault  takes  or  the  quarter  from  which  it
is  directed,  he  may  find  in  "  the  peace  of  Christ"  his  strcns;  tower  of  defence  and
harbour  of  refuge.  His  difficulties  may  not  disappear  under  this  influence ;  his  doubts
may  not  be  at  once  dispelled ;  the  conflict  may  stdl  rage  furiously  aroimd  and  within  him  ;
but  he  will  be  kept,  the  fortress  of  his  heart  will  not  be  sunendered  (1  Pet.  i.  5.;  I'tiil.
iv.  7).  So  long  as  "  we  have  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  and  "  his
love  18  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts"  (iloni.  v.  1 — 5),  nothing  can  shake  our  essential
faiih  or  rob  us  of  our  immortal  hope  (Ps.  xxvii. ;  xlvi. ;  Luke  xii.  32  ;  Rev.  i.  17).
Neither  sophistry  (ch.ii.  4)  nor  threatening  (ch.  ii.  18)  will  take  from  us  "  the  prize  of  our
high  calling."  "  One  thinu',"  at  any  rate, "  we  know  "  (John  ix.  25) ;  and  to  it "  we  have
the  witness  in  ourselves  "  (1  John  v.  10),  in  "  the  peace  of  God,  which  jiasseth  all  under-
standing," "to  which  we  were  called,"  in  the  "new  heart  and  right  spirit"  he  has  "  put
withiu  "  us,  in  the  moral  victory  attained  over  self  and  the  world  (1  John  v.  4, 5) :  "  we
knew  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life  "(1  John  iii.  14).  And  we  safely  infer
that  he  "  who  has  begun  a  good  wbrk  in  us  "  will  carry  it  through  (Phil.  i.  6) ;  that  ho
will  keep  that  which  we  commit  to  him,  and  "  none  shall  pluck  us  out  of  his  hand  "
(2  Tim.  i.  12;  John  x.  27—29;  Rom.  viii.  31—39).  So,  unitedly  and  thankfully,  we
"  hnld  fast  the  beginning  of  our  confidence,  and  the  glorying  of  our  hope,  firm  unto  the
end"(Hib.  iii.  6,  14).  3.  ChrisPs  word  inspires.  (Ver.  Ki.)  It  is  to  "dwell  in  the
heurt  richly  " — t<i  be  the  welcome  visitant  and  constant  inhaliitant  of  the  mind ;  to  be
listened  to  and  diigently  learned  ;  to  be  cherislied  and  pondered  in  inward  meilitation,
not  as  an  ol  jict  of  theoretic  stmly  only,  but  as  the  power  which  is  to  shape  the
characier  and  guide  the  life  of  the  Christian  (Deut.  vi.  6 — 9 ;  Ps.  cxix.  105 ;  John  xvii.
17),  as  the  soul's  daily  nutriment — the  bread  of  God,  "  wliich  strengtheneth  man's
heart,"  "the  word  of  eternal  life  "  (Deut.  viii.  8  ;  Jer.  xv.  16  ;  Mait.iv.4;  John  vi.  63,  68).
(1)  This  werd  gives  all  wisdom — best  of  God's  gifts  to  man,  which  instructs  the  mind
and  prompts  the  tongue  and  guidis  the  action  of  its  possessor  (ch.  ii.  2,  3 ;  iv.  5,  6).
So  furnished,  every  Christian  (ch.  i.  28)  is  able  to  minister  something  to  his  fellows  of
that  which  God  has  taught  him  by  his  own  study  of  the  Word  and  its  iiraetice  in  his
experience  of  life  (JTatt.  xiii.  52 ;  Rom.  xv.  14 ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  31).  Thus  the  members  of
the  Church  are  able, ''in  the  meekness  of  wisdom,"  to  "teach  and  admonish  one  another,"
"  being  knit  together  in  love,  and  led  into  all  the  riches  of  the  full  assurance  of  the
understanding,  into  the  knowledge  of  the  mystery  of  God  "  (ch.  ii.  2).  (2)  And  it  stirs  in
the  heart  an  ardour  of  holy  feeling  that  finds  expression  in  Christian  song,  "  The  word
of  Chiist,"  cherislied  in  thought,  kindles  the  emotions  and  wakens  all  the  music  of  the
soul.  The  early  Christians  were  a  singing  people,  for  they  were  a  chieriul  and  thaiik-
ful  people.  And  subsequent  revivals  of  religions  life,  as  a  rule,  have  been  attended  with
fresh  outbursts  of  sacred  song  (Ps.  xl.  3).  The  singing  of  a  people — its  heartiness,
and  simplicity,  and  the  care  and  pains  taken  in  its  cultivation,  are  a  good  test  of  their
spiritual  state.  "  Psalms,  hymns,  spiiitual  songs" — hymns  old  and  new,  narrative,  didac-
tic, lyriial ;  in  every  measure  and  every  tone  of  expression— songs  of  ]iraise,  (jf  ctmfes-
siou,  of  wailicir  sorrow,  of  ecstatic  joy;  for  the  congregation,  the  household,  oi  the  private
chamber; — all  find  a  i  lace  in  the  diapason  of  the  Cliureh's  music.  4.  Christ's  name
hallows  everything.  (Ver.  17.)  Our  eating  and  di  ink  jug — acts  which  seem  the  most
ordinary  and  jiurely  jihysical,  and  quite  remote  frohi  the  interests  anil  sentiments  of  the
ppii itual  life — these  are  to  be  "  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God  and  prayer  " (1  Tim.  iv.  5),
by  the  mention  of  Christ's  name  in  thanksgiving  to  the  Father,  who  through  him  sends


16«  THE  EPISTLE  "tO  THE  C0L0SSIAN3.         [oh.  m.  1—^5,

us  all  life's  blessings.  And  if  our  mere  animal  necessities  of  life  are  capable  of  lioin^
thus  hallowed,  there  is  nothing  in  family  relations,  or  secular  employments,  or  social  or
civil  duties,  which  may  not  receive  and  does  not  demanfl  the  same  consecration.  We
may  associate  Christ  with  everything  we  do,  doing  all  as  his  servants  and  under  his  eye,
and  in  such  a  way  that,  by  every  part  of  our  work,  he  may  be  glorified  in  us.  And
this  will  be  a  safeguard  to  the  Christian  man.  If  he  is  to  do  everything  in  Christ's
name,  he  must  do  nothing  unworthy  of  that  name,  nothing  with  which  he  cannot
associate  it.  Nowhere,  in  any  company  or  on  any  business,  must  he  forget,  "  either  in
word  or  deed,"  that  this  "  worthy  name  "  is  the  name  which  he  bears,  and  whose  honour
is  in  his  keeping.  This  is  the  seal  that  marks  the  true  Church  of  Christ,  which
every  Christian  wears  upon  his  heart :  "  Let  every  one  that  na/meth  the  name  of  the
Lord  depart  from  unrighteousness  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  19).

Ver.  18 — ch.  It.  1 — Sect.  8.  The  Christian  view  of  family  duties.  Certain  general
considerations  bearing  on  the  family  and  social  constitution  of  life  may  be  drawn  from
the  teaching  of  this  section.  1.  We  note  that  the  apostle  brings  each  of  the  three
primary  relationships  of  which  he  speaks  into  connection  with  "  the  Lord."  The
natural  order  of  human  life  is  grounded  in  Christ.  If  "all  things  were  created  and  do
consist  in  him  "  (ch.  i.  16,  17),  then,  amongst  the  rest,  this  also  and  in  chief.  For  man
in  his  relation  to  the  world  around  him  is  "  the  image  of  Gol,"  even  as  Christ  Is  to  the
whole  universe  (1  Cor.  xi.  7 ;  Jas.  iii.  9 ;  Gen.  i.  26 ;  Ps.  viii.).  And  man  is  not  a
solitary  individual ;  he  is  a  social  being,  a  race-unity.  And  those  relations  which  are
essential  and  fundamental  to  human  society— marriage,  sonship,  service — have,  most  ol
all,  their  spiritual  type  and  creative  ground  iu  Christ.  This  is  obvious  in  the  case  of  the  two
latter  relations  ;  as  to  the  first,  see  Eph.  v.  22 — 32.  2.  The  intrinsic  fitness  of  a  right
discharge  of  natural  duties  is  affirmed  in  the  first  case  (ver.  18),  and  injplied  in  the
other  two.  The  apostle  recognizes  and  appeals  more  than  once  to  the  sense  of  ethical
propriety,  that  which  "  nature  itself  teaches "  (1  Cor.  xi.  14),  which  belougs  to  the
universal  conscience  surviving  in  our  nature  though  fallen  and  debased.  All  true
sentiments  of  natural  morality  the  Christian  revelation  reaffirms  and  supports  with  its
efiectual  sanctions,  "  as  is  fit  in  the  Lord  "  (comp.  Phil.  iv.  8).  Their  consciousness  of
the  right  as  the  beautiful  (rb  KdK6v)  was  a  sound  and  valuable  element  in  the  teaching
of  the  best  Greek  moralists.  They  regarded  conduct  as  a  work  of  art,  in  which  grace
and  fitness  were  to  be  studied,  and  the  perfection  of  an  ideal  beauty  to  be  the  aim  of  life.
While  men  may  have,  as  a  rule,  a  stronger  sense  of  the  right,  women  better  understand
the  fitting ;  and  it  is  in  regard  to  the  place  and  duties  of  woman  that  St.  Paul  appeals
to  convictions  of  moral  fitness  and  decorum  (comp.  1  Cor.  xi.  13 ;  1  Tim.  ii.  10).  3.
We  are  taught,  indirectly!  to  cherish  a  pleasant  and  cheerful  temper  in  domestic  life.
Bitterness  (ver.  19)  and  harshness,  with  the  distrust  and  timidity  which  they  engender
(ver.  21),  and  a  sullen  or  constrained  obedience  (ver.  23),  are  forbidden ;  and  these  are  the
common  elements  of  domestic  unhappiness.  Where  the  husband  is  gentle,  and  the  father
tender  though  strict,  and  the  master  considerate,  and  the  servants  willing  and  honestly
anxious  to  please,  there  all  goes  well.  Whatever  storms  may  beat  upon  that  house
from  without,  there  is  peace  and  sunshine  within.  And  this  is  "  well-pleasing  in  the
Lord."  4.  2%e  principle  of  authority  is  steadfastly  maintained  throughout.  (Vers.  18,
20,  22.)  In  every  house  that  is  not  to  be  "  divided  against  itstlf,"  there  must  be  a
single  head,  a  ruling  will,  a  definite  centre  of  power  and  direction.  And  that  power
God  has  placed,  as  a  solemn  trust,  in  the  hands  of  the  husband,  father,  master,  who  is
in  his  prerogative  within  his  own  house  an  image  of  Christ  in  the  Church  (Eph.  v.  23 ;
cb.  iv,  1),  of  God  himself,  the  Father  of  men  (Heb.  xii.  9).  This  principle  is  the-
corner-stone  of  order  in  human  society.  Here  is  "  pure  religion  breathing  household
laws  "  (Wordsworth).

I.  Hdsband  and  wife,  (Vers.  18,  19.)  The  marriage  relation  stands  first,  being
the  basis  of  the  family,  which  again  is  the  basis  of  society  and  of  the  community  of
mankind.  "  He  which  made  them  from  the  beginning,  made  them  male  and  female  "
(Matt.  xix.  4 — 6).  Marriage  is  to  he  "  had  in  honour  among  all "  (Heb.  xiii.  4 ;  1  Tim,
iv.  1 — 3) ;  and  not  merely  the  criminal  act,  but  any  impure  word,  thought,  or  look
which  offends  against  its  sanctity,  "  defiles  the  man  "  from  whom  it  proceeds,  offends  in
fta  especial  way  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  and  brings  down  his  wrath  upon  Uie  offeudei


0H.in.  1— 25.]        THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  167

(Matt.  V.  27,  28;  Mark  vii.  20— 23;  1  Thesa.  iv.  3— 8 ;  1  Cor.  vi.  13— 20).  The
degree  of  honour  and  reverence  in  which  it  is  held  in  any  society  largely  determines
tlie  degree  of  soundness  in  its  moral  condition.  Where  the  op]  osite  vices  prevail,
whether  secretly  or  openly  practised,  general  moral  corrnption  and  decay  set  in  (see
homiletics,  sect.  7,  II.  1).  1.  On  the  one  side,  there  is  to  be  submission.  The  apostle
says, "  Children, . . .  servants,  obey  "  (vers.  20,  22) ;  but  not "  Wives,  obey  your  husbands:"
"  Be  in  subjection  "  (ver.  18)  is  a  gentler  and  fitter  teim  to  use.  Obedience  implies  a
certain  distance  and  inferiority  that  has  no  place  here.  There  is  something  wrong  on
one  side,  or  on  both,  when  the  husband  gives  formal  orders  to  his  wife.  There  should  be
such  an  intimacy  of  mutual  understanding  and  sympathy  between  them,  that  they
seem  to  have  but  one  mind  and  will  in  all  common  matters.  And  while  to  that  single
mind  the  wife  contributes  the  queenly  influence  of  her  insight  and  persuasion,  she
will  feel  and  show  that  resolve  and  direction  belong  to  him  and  not  to  her.  'J'he  final
res])onsibility  for  the  business  of  the  house  devolves  on  the  husband,  by  the  ordinance
of  God  and  by  the  nature  of  things,  which  are  but  two  expressions  of  the  same  laut
(1  Cor.  xi.  3 — 15).  It  is  his  part  to  "  rule  well  his  own  house  "  (1  Tim.  iii.  4).  2.  It
was  not  so  needful  to  say,  "  Wives,  tore  your  husbands ;  "though  the  apostle  once
enjoins  this,  in  speaking  of  "  the  younger  women  "  in  Titus  ii.  4.  For  failure  on  the
wife's  side  in  this  respect  is  comparaiively  rare.  But  the  man,  full  of  business,  often
absent,  and  with  his  more  exacting  nature,  is  more  liable  to  fall  into  some  disloyally.
He  allows  other  company  to  become  more  agreeable  to  him ;  seeks  amusements  and
pursuits  in  which  his  wife  cannot  join ;  no  longer  makes  her  his  confidante  and  the
sharer  of  his  inner  life ;  and  allows  home  to  become  little  more  to  him  than  a  selfish
convenience.  And  with  this  selfishness  and  the  uneasiness  of  conscience  that  attends
it,  there  supervenes  often  an  irritableness  of  temper  that  chafes  over  every  dumestic  care
or  trouble,  and  makes  no  allowance  for  infirmities  in  others;  that  magnifies  every
trifling  mistake  or  mishap  into  an  injury,  and  ignores  the  wife's  patient  affection  and
eagerness  to  please.  How  different  is  all  this  from  the  exalted  ideal  that  St.  Paul  holds
lip  to  the  Ohribtian  husband! — "Love  your  wife  even  as  Christ  loved  the  Church,  and
gave  himself  for  her  "  (Eph.  v.  25).  Bengel's  shrewd  and  caustic  remark  on  this  passage
is  too  often  verified :  "  There  are  many,  who  out  of  doors  are  civil  and  kind  to  all ;
when  at  home,  towards  their  wives  and  children  whom  they  have  no  need  to  fear,  they
freely  practise  secret  bitterness."

II.  Fathee  and  child.  (Vers.  20, 21.)  1.  Prom  children,  obedience  to  their  parents
»n  all  things  is  required,  and  therefore  in  many  things  contrary  to  their  inclination
and  opinions.  Childhood  means  dependence  and  ignorance.  It  is  only  under  the
shelter  of  parental  oversight  that  the  incipient  faculties  and  plastic  nature  of  the
child  can  be  formed  to  the  strength  of  judgment  and  firmness  of  character  which  will
enable  him  to  meet  the  tasks  and  the  perils  of  adult  life.  And  for  this  discipline  to  be
effective,  the  submission  of  the  child  must  be  absolute.  Only  when  a  parental  com-
mand plainly  contradicts  the  Law  of  God  and  violates  the  child's  conscience,  can  any
kind  of  disobedience  be  justified.  In  that  case,  obedience  cannot  be  "  well-pleasing  in
the  Lord."  But  even  the  worst  of  parents  will  rarely  be  found  to  have  so  little  respect
for  the  conscience  of  childhood  as  to  enforce  such  an  injunction.  The  requirement
addressed  to  the  child  presumes  that  the  parent  exMts  obedience.  This  is  his  inalien-
able prerogative.  Instaut,  unmurmuring  obedience  should  be  made  the  habit  of  the
child's  life,  and  as  a  law  of  nature  to  it.  To  have  this  understood  from  the  first  is  the
simplest  and  easiest  course.  If  the  child  be  allowed,  through  passion  or  persistence,  once
successfully  to  rebel,  a  mischief  is  done  uot  easily  to  be  repaired.  His  own  self-mastery,
and  the  sense  of  law  and  of  duty  which  aie  to  attend  him  through  the  whole  of  life,
largely  rest  on  this  basis  of  ingrained  obedionce.  For  this  purpose,  children  should  be
in  their  earliest  years  as  much  as  possible  under  the  direct  influence  of  their  parent*
presence  and  authority.  The  parental  ofBce  cannot  be  discharged  by  proxy.  And
there  must  be  unity  of  parental  administration,  as  well  as  harmony  between  precept
and  practice,  if  a  true  and  reverent  obedience  is  to  be  possible.  In  no  State  was  the
authority  of  the  father  (patria  potestas)  so  strict  and  absolute  as  in  ancient  Eome.
And  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  this  stern  maintenance  of  family  discipline  largely
helped  to  form  the  Roman  character  with  its  extraordinary  vigour  and  teuacity,  and  to
preserve  that  rigid,  firmly  knit  order  and  devoted  loyalty  which  were  the  secret  of


l«d  *rHa  EPISTLB  TO  THE  OOLOSStANS.        [ea.tn.1-26,

Home's  invincible  strength.  2.  On  the  other  hanri,  the  father  must  heware  lest  hi»
authority  should  wear  a  n^edhss  aspect  of  severity.  His  rigiiteous  desire  to  "  command
his  children  and  his  houseiiold  after  him  "  (Gen.  xviii.  19),  and  his  anxious  sense  ol
responsibility,  may  occasion  this,  if  not  relieved  by  more  genial  influences.  The  inno-
cent liveliness  and  the  many  unintended  offences  of  childhood  must  not  provoke  him  to
ill  temper.  He  must  learn  by  patience  and  tenderness  to  win  the  child's  affection  and
open-hearted  trust,  without  impairing  its  submissive  reverence.  A  mechanical,  unsym-
pathetic strictness,  or  an  angry  and  unequal  discipline,  will  fatally  alienate  the  sensitive
heart  of  the  child,  which  in  that  case  either  sinks  down  Into  a  dull,  spiritless  apathy,
or  prepares  for  a  passionate  revolt  when  the  hour  of  its  strength  shall  coine.  Too  often
those  mast  anxious  to  commend  religion  to  their  children  have  made  it  odious  by
presenting  it  in  forms  unintelligible  to  the  young  mind,  and  associating  it  with  tasks
unsuited  to  its  powers,  and  burdens  that  it  found  "  grievous  to  be  borne."  As  the
child  should  find  in  the  child  Jesus  Its  pattern  and  model  (Luke  ii.  40 — 52)^  so  the
parent  should  seek  to  be  to  his  children  an  image  of  "our  Father  in  heaven."

UI.  Master  and  servant.  (Ver.  22-^h.  iv.  1.)  This  third  relationship  is  one
which  we  may  be  sure  will  continue  to  exist,  however  varied  the  forms  it  may  take,  so
long  as  the  world  stands.  And  what  the  apostle  says  here  is  of  universal  application,
though  slavery  has  happily  given  place  to  free  service.  Even  when  our  lower  classes
shall  have  become  so  far  raised  in  intelligence  and  independence  that  co-operation  iu
industrial  labour  will  become  the  rule  instead  of  the  exception,  still  there  must  be
some  to  command,  others  to  obey;  Indeed,  the  more  extended  and  complicated  the
operations  of  trade  and  manufacture  become,  the  more  thoroughly  labour  needs  to  be
organized  and  authority  graduated,  and  the  more  entirely  success  depends  on  manage-
ment and  discipline  and  on  a  right  adjustment  of  the  relations  of  master  and  servant.

1.  From  servants  Christianity  demands,  what  conscienc«  demands,  an  honest  obedience,
that  serves  as  well  behind  the  master's  back  as  to  his  face  (ver.  22).  As  a  mere  matter
of  commercial  advantage,  the  uniform  presence  of  this  quality  would  be  an  incalculable
economy  and  enrichment  of  the  community.  And  religion  secures  this,  directly  and
of  necessity.  The  man  who  doe's  his  work  In  God's  sight — "  as  ever  in  his  great
Taskmaster's  eye  " — and  as  for  the  judgment-day,  cannot  scamp  any  part  of  it.  He  Is
serving,  not  a  man  like  himself,  but  a  heavenly  Lord,  whose  searching  eye  is  always
upon  him,  who  understands  and  can  judge  every  man's  work  (ver.  24  ;  1  Pet.  i.  17),
and  who  has  promised  infinite  rewards  for  faithfulness  in  the  "few  things"  of  our
earthly  probation  (Matt.  xxv.  21,  23).  These  convictions  form  the  best  guarantee,
with  the  mass  of  men  the  only  suflBcient  and  effectual  guarantee,  for  good  work  and
thorough  workmanship  in  every  department  of  life.

"  A  servant  with  this  clause.

Makes  drudgery  divine ;
Who  sweeps  a  room  as  for  thy  lawa,
Makes  that  and  the  action  fine."

(George  Herbert.)

2.  And  the  Christian  master,  whether  at  the  head  of  a  farm  or  a  factory,  of  a  commer-
cial house  or  a  private  family,  will  remember  that  he  has  his  duties  along  with  his
rights  as  a  master.  He  is  dealing  with  human  beings,  not  with  machines.  The  lawg
of  iwlitical  economy  are  not  to  be  his  only  guide.  "  The  nexus  of  cash- payments  "  can
never  be  the  sole  link  that  associates  any  two  men  together.  Woe  be  to  him  if  he  says,
with  Cain,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ?  "  (Gen.  iv.  9).  "  Just  dealing  and  fairness  "
(ch.  IV.  1)  must  rule  In  the  relations  of  master  and  man,  if  they  are  to  be  on  a  moral  and
righteous  footing.  He  will  not  take  a  hard  advantage  of  his  servant's  necessity ;  or
allow,  if  he  can  help  it,  his  dealings  with  him  to  degenerate  into  a  mere  struggle
between  capital  and  labour  for  every  inch  of  vantage.  The  cruel  greed  that  grasps  at
immediate  gain  at  whatever  cost  of  toll  and  poverty  toothers,  and  that  "grinds  the
faces  of  the  poor  "  (Isa.  iii.  15),  may  enrich  th*  individual,  but  in  the  long  run  is  fatal
to  the  class  or  the  trade  which  practises  it.  And  the  rich  oppressor  will  have  to
appear  at  a  tribunal  where  "  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  "  (ver.  25).  Political  economy
itself  teaches  that  ill-paid  labour  Is  the  most  expensive  and  wasteful.  The  man  who
has  want  and  fear  gnawing  at  his  heart  cannot  be  a  good  workman,  even  if,  in  spite  of
extreme  temptation,  he  be  an  honest  one.    Injustice  and  over-reaching  on  the  part  of


en.  m.  1—26.]        THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  1«9

the  rich  »nd  governing  classes,  political  and  social  institutions  that  favour  "  the  fat  and
the  strong  "  at  the  expense  of  the  weak  and  poor  (lilzek.  xxxiv.  IG — 27),  are  sure  ol
God's  heavy  judgment.  They  generate  in  the  hatred  excited  in  those  subject  to  tlierii
an  explosive  force  which,  with  a  suitable  train  of  circumstances,  will  burst  forth,  as  in
the  French  Revolution,  in  some  volcanic  upheaval  that  the  strongest  social  fabric  will
be  unable  to  resist,  Christ's  golden  rule  of  equity  (Luke  vi.  31)  is  the  only  safe,  as  it
is  the  ouly  righteous,  basis  lor  the  dealings  of  man  with  man,  of  class  with  classy  or  of
nttion  with  nation  in  the  world's  great  polity.


HOMILIES  BY  VARIOUS  AUTHORS.

Ver.  1. — The  obligations  of  the  risen  life.  We  have  here  a  transition  to  the  practical
part  of  this  Epistle.  "  If  ye  then  were  raised  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  which  are
above,  where  Christ  is,  seated  on  the  right  ImnJ  of  God."

I.  OuB  BESURHEOTioN  WITH  CHRIST.  We  are  not  only  "  dead  with  Christ,"  but
"  risen  with  him ; "  "  not  only  planted  in  the  likeness  of  his  death,  but  pbmted  together
in  the  likeness  of  his  resurrection ;  " — "  tliat  we  may  walk  in  newness  of  life  "  (Rom  vi.
2 — 4).  This  translation  has  altered  our  standpoint.  We  are  "  quickened  togetlier
with  Christ,  and  raised  together  with  him''  (Eph.  ii.  5,  6).  We  have  now  an  entirely
new  sphere  of  intellectual  concejition  and  moral  aspuation.  "Old  things  have  passed
away ;  behold,  all  things  have  become  new  "  (2  Cor.  v.  17).

II.  The  puaotioal  duty  involved  in  this  resukkection.  "Seek  those  things
which  are  above."  1.  "  T/ie  things  above  "  are  all  things  pertaining  to  our  true  home
— "  the  new  Jerusalem  "  and  "  tlie  heavenly  citizenship,"  in  contrast  to  "  the  things
upon  the  earth."  They  include  (1)  the  vision  ol  Christ  (John  xvii.  24) ;  (2)  the  enjoy-
ment of  God,  which  is  promoted  (a)  by  our  fuller  knowledge  of  him  (John  xvii.  3),  (6)
by  our  growing  love  to  him  (1  John  iv.  10),  and  (c)  by  the  manifold  expressions  of  his
love  to  us  (Zeph.  iii.  17);  (3)  the  society  of  angels  and  saints.  2.  Tlie  excellejice  of
"  the  things  above."''  They  are  (1)  satisfying,  as  things  on  earth  are  unsatisfying ;  (2)
certain,  as  thiufis  on  earth  are  uncertain ;  (3)  perpetual  and  everlasting,  as  things  on
earth  are  transient  and  decaying ;  (4)  suitable,  as  things  on  earth  are  unsuitable  to  an
immortal  spirit.  3.  TJiey  are  to  be  sought,  implying  (1)  our  knowledge  of  them ;  (2)
our  longing  for  them  ;  (3)  our  anxious  effort  to  realize  ihem  (Matt.  vi.  33).

III.  An  argument  to  incite  and  encourage  us  to  this  dutt.  "  Where  Christ  is,
seated  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  There  are  two  facts  here  stated.  1.  Christ  our  Head
is  in  heaven.  Therefore  heaven  must  be  the  objective  point  of  our  thoughts  as  well
as  our  hopes.  We  look  up  because  he,  who  is  our  Hope,  is  there — "  within  the  vail."
The  thought  of  Christ's  presence  gives  deliniteness  to  our  ideas  of  heaven.  "  Where
our  treasure  is,  there  will  be  our  heart  also."  2.  Christ  is  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of
Ood.  This  implies :  (1)  His  intercessory  work ;  for  he  has  entered  into  "  heaven  itself,
now  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us  "  (Heb.  ix.  24  ;  1  John  il.  1).  (2)  His  medi-
atorial dominion  and  power  (Phil.  ii.  10).  (3)  Our  sitting  with  him — "he  raised  us  up
and  made  us  to  sit  in  heavenly  places  in  Jesus  Chri>st."  These  places  are  those  he
promised  to  prepare  for  his  people  (John  xiv.  2).  "  He  that  overcometh,  to  him  will  I
give  to  sit  with  me  in  my  throne  "  (Rev.  iii.  21). — ^T.  C.

Vers.  2,  3. — Heavenly  things  the  true  object  cf  Christian  contemplation.  "  Set  your
mind  on  the  things  that  are  above,  not  on  the  things  that  are  upon  the  earth ;  for  ye
died,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  We  must  not  only  seek  things  above,
but  think  them.

I.  The  object  of  Christian  contemplation.  1.  Not  things  upon  the  earth,
because  (1)  they  are  below  us  (Phil.  iii.  H,  19);  (2)  unsatisfying  (Luke  viii.  18;
Prov.  xxiii.  5 ;  Hos.  xiii.  13 ;  Ps.  Ixxviii.  89) ;  (3)  full  of  anxieties  (M.itt.  xiii.  22 ;  Job
xxiviii.  22);  (4)  unnecessary  to  our  hapjiiness  (Job  xxviii.  14);  (5)  transient  and
uncertain  (Prov.  xxiii.  5 ;  Luke  xii.  19,  20).  2.  "  Things  there  are  above."  (See  hints
on  previous  verse.)  We  ought  to  set  our  mind  upon  them,  because  (1)  they  are  satis-
fying ;  (2)  suitable ;  (3)  because  our  treasure  is  there — of  riches  (Matt.  vL  19 — 21),  of
honour*  (1  Sam.  ii.  30),  of  pleasures  (Ps.  xvi.  11).


170  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.         [oh.  m.  1—26,

II.  The  DXTTT  of  setting  the  mind  upon  right  objects  of  THOnOHT  AND  AFFEC-
TION. This  is  the  secret  of  heavenly  mitidedness.  "  Tell  me  what  a  man  thinks,  and  1
will  tell  you  what  he  is."  1.  It  is  our  duty  not  to  set  our  mind  on  things  on  the  earth,
because  (1)  God  may  give  them  to  you  as  your  entire  portion  (Ps.  xvii.  14);  (2)
you  may  provoke  him  to  take  them  away  (Ps.  Ixxviii.  5 — 7);  (3)  they  will  turn
away  your  thoughts  from  heaven  (Ps.  x.  3,  4) ;  (4)  they  will  distract  you  in  duty
(Ezek.  xxxiii.  31);  (5)  they  involve  the  guilt  of  idolatry  (ver.  5).  2.  It  is  our  duty
to  tel  our  mind  on  things  above,  because  (1)  there  is  nothing  else  worth  our  serious
thought  (1  John  ii.  15) ;  (2)  thby  will  keep  you  from  over-anxiety  about  the  affairs  of
this  life  (Phil.  iv.  11,  12) ;  (3)  the  thought  of  them  will  increase  your  fitness  for  duty
(Acts  XX.  24);  (4)  they  will  make  the  thought  of  death  more  pleasant  in  anticipation
(Phil.  i.  23).

III.  The  reason  for  oub  selecting  sttch  objects  of  believing  contemplation.
"  For  ye  died,  and  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  The  thought  is  twofold — it
refers  to  a  past  act  and  to  a  continuous  state.  1.  Our  death  in  Christ.  This  involves
(1)  our  death  to  sin  (Rom.  vi.  2)  and  (2)  onr  death  to  the  world  (Qui.  vi.  14).  We  are,
therefore,  cut  loose  from  "  things  on  the  earth."  2.  Our  hidden  life  in  Ood.  "Your
life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  (1)  Christian  life  is  a  hidden  life,  (a)  in  its  origin
(John  iii.  8) ;  (6)  it  is  hid,  as  an  experience,  from  the  world ;  (c)  it  is  hid  from  the
believer  himself  in  times  of  spiritual  desertion;  (d)  the  full  glory  of  this  life  is  hidden
even  from  the  believer  (1  John  iii.  1).  (2)  Christian  life  has  its  hidden  source  and  abid-
ing strength  "  with  Christ  in  God."  Christ  is  now  hid  in  heaven  and  our  life  is  hid  with
him.  (o)  It  is  hid  with  him  as  our  Representative ;  tliis  marks  its  security ;  this  is
the  sheet-anchor  of  our  spiritual  existence.  (V)  It  is  hid  with  him  as  its  constant
source ;  "  For  he  is  our  Life,"  in  whom  we  realize  a  growth  in  all  the  graces  of  the
Spirit  (Gal.  v. 22) ;  " Because  1  live,  ye  shall  live  also ; "  "I  am  come  that  ye  may
have  life  .  .  .  more  abundantly."  (3)  God  is  himself  the  "  sphere  or  element  in  which  our
life  is  hid.  It  is  "  with  Christ  in  God."  The  Soii  is  "  in  the  bosom  of  the  Father,"
and  thus  we  have  fellowship  witli  both  the  Father  and  the  Son  (1  John  i.  3).  Thus
the  believer  is  doubly  secure.  He  is  not  ordy  hidden  in  God's  home ;  he  is  hidden  in
God's  heart.  Therefore  we  can  understand  the  import  of  the  phrase,  "  And  ye  are
Christ's,  and  Christ  is  God's"  (1  Cor.  ui.  23).— T.  C.

\rer.  4. —  The  believer's  final  manifestation  with  Christ.  "When  Christ,  who  ia
our  Life,  shall  be  manifested,  then  shall  ye  also  with  him  be  njanifested  in  glory."
The  believer's  life  wnll  not  be  always  hidden,  an\  more  than  the  believer's  Lord.
There  will  be  a  period  of  nianifesiation  for  both.  Tliis  marks  the  last  stage  of  spiritual
life.

I.  Christ  is  thf  ttshescb  or  our  spiRirtrAL  life.  This  is  more  than  saying  that
our  life  is  hid  ''  ^  him  or  that  he  is  ihe  Author  of  it.  "  He  that  hath  the  Sun  hath
life  "  (1  John  v.  12  ;  Gal.  ii.  20 ;  Phil.  i.  21).  We  possess  this  life  in  virtue  of  our
union  with  him  and  his  resurrection  (John  xiv.  19).

II.  AVe  shall  share  with  him  in  his  final  manifestation.  1.  7^e  manifesta-
tion of  Christ  is  the  "  blessed,  hope  "  of  the  saints.  (Titus  ii.  13 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  14 ;  2  Tim.
i.  10;  iv.  1 — 8.)  He  will  then  be  seen  as  he  is  (1  John  iii.  2),  though  mockers  may  ask,
"Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coming?"  (2  Pet.  iii.  4).  He  will  then  appear  glorious
in  his  person,  glorious  in  his  retinue  of  angels,  glorious  in  bis  authority.  2.  We  shall
sliare  in  that  manifestation.  "  It  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be,  but  we  know
that  when  he  shall  appear,  we  shall  be  like  him,  for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is"  (1  John-
iii.  1,  2) ;  "  We  wait  for  the  Saviour  "  (Phil.  iii.  21) ;  "  The  glory  thou  hast  given  me
I  have  given  them  "  (John  xvii.  22) ;  "  If  so  be  that  we  suffer  with  him,  that  we  may
be  also  glorified  together"  (Rom.  viii.  17).  We  shall  be  manifested  with  Christ  in  the
gloiy  ol  our  complete  marihood,  when  the  conjunction  of  soul  and  body  shall  be  perfect
and  indissoluble.  We  may  well  set  our  mind  on  things  above  in  view  of  such  a
glorious  prospiict. — T.  0.

Vers.  6 — 7. — The  duty  of  mortifying  the  old  man.  The  apostle  proceeds  to  deduce
the  practical  consequences  of  our  "  death  in  Christ"  in  the  mortifying  of  tendencies  to
impurity,  covetousness,  malice,  and  falsehood.     "Mortify  therefore  your  mumberi


OH.iii.  1— 25.]        THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  171

which  are  upon  the  earth;  fornication,  uncleaaness,  lustfulness,  evil  desire,  and  core-
tousness,  which  is  idolatry."

I.  The  nature  and  dutt  of  kostifioation.  1.  Its  nature.  It  is  to  resist  tlie
Bolicitations  of  sin,  to  suppress  its  first  motions,  to  weaken  iis  power.  (1)  It  is  a
gradual  process — it  is  "  to  crucify  the  flesh,"  implying  a  lingering  process ;  it  is  a  destruc-
tion that  goes  on  daily,  for  the  remains  of  th§  old  life  still  abide,  though  not  in  power,
in  the  believer.  (2)  The  word  "  moitify  "  implies  that  sin  is  not  to  be  allowed  to  die
out  of  itself ;  we  must  kill  it.  (3)  It  is  a  painful  process.  2.  2'he  duly  of  mortifica-
tion. (1)  It  is  commanded.  We  are  to  show  no  more  mercy  to  the  "old  man"  than
to  the  "  right  eye  "  or  the  "  right  hand  "  that  offends  us  (Matt.  v.  29).  (2)  It  is  done  in
the  power  of  the  Spirit.  "  For  if  ye  through  the  Spirit  do  mortify  the  deeds  of  the
body,  ye  shall  live  "  (Rom.  viii.  13).  Therefore  it  becomes  not  only  possible,  but  actual.
Thus  "our  instruments  of  unrighteousness  "  are  turned  into  "  instruments  of  righteous-
ness unto  God "  (Rom.  vi.  13).  (3)  It  is  the  true  consequence  of  our  "  death  in
Christ ; "  for  the  apostle  says,  "  Mortify  there/ore  your  members,"  in  allusion  to  this
death  (ch.  ii.  20 ;  iii.  3).  We  must  carry  out  this  principle  of  death  to  sin,  to  the
flesh,  to  the  world.

II.  The  sphere  of  this  mortification.  "  Your  members  which  are  upon  the  earth.''
He  refers;  1.  To' the  instruments  of  sinfulness.  They  are  called  members  in  allusion  to
the  apost  le's  figure  of  sin,  as  a  body  of  sin  (ch.  iL  11),  and  in  allusion  to  the  necessity  of
the  bodily  organization  to  their  action.  They  are  "  upon  the  earth,"  because  they  belong
to  our  body  or  our  earthly  condition,  or  tend  to  mere  earthly  gratification.  But  they
are  to  be  turned  into  "instruments  of  righteousness  unto  God."  2.  To  the  various  mani-
festations of  this  sinfulness.    (1)  Sins  affecting  our  personal  life,   (a)  Sins  of  impurity.

(a)  Fornication,  (i.)  It  is  God's  will  we  should  ab.stain  from  it  (1  Thess.  iv.  3,  4).  (ii.)
It  is  one  of  the  works  of  the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  19).  (iii.)  It  ought  not  once  to  be  named
among  Christians  (Bph.  v.  12).  (iv.)  It  takes  away  the  heart  (Hos.  iv.  11).  (v.)  It
brings  dishonour  and  shipwreck  of  character  (Prov.  vi.  27 — 29 ;  xxiii.  28).  (vi.)  The
body  was  made,  not  for  a  harlot,  but  for  the  Lord  (1  Cor.  vi.  15,  16).  It  is  a  sin
against  our  own  bodies,  (vii.)  The  promises  of  the  gospel  ought  to  engage  us  to  "  cleanse
ourselves  from  all  filthiness  of  the  flesh  and  spirit,  perfecting  holiness  in  the  fear  oi
God  "  (2  Cor.  vii.  1).  (/3)  Uncleanness.  This  is  a  generic  product,  as  fornication  is  a
specific  ]iroduct,  of  "  the  earthly  members."  The  observations  in  the  one  apply  to  the
other.  Those  who  commit  such  sins  are  "  alienated  from  the  life  of  God  through  their
ignorance  and  hardness  of  heart"  (Eph.  iv.  17),  and  are  "delivered  up  to  a  reprobate
mind  "  (Rom.  i.  24,  26).  (7)  Lustfulness  and  evil  desire.  These  point  to  "  the  lust  of
concupiscence"  (1  'Thess.  iv.  5),  which  is  of  the  devil  (John  viii.  44),  which  wars  against
the  soul  (1  Pet.  ii.  11),  which  drowns  men  in  destruction  and  perdition  (1  Tim.  vi.  9),
and  keeps  men  from  "  coming  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  7).  These
various  sins  of  impurity  are  to  be  mortified  :  how  ?  (o)  We  can  only  cleanse  our  hearts
by  taking  heed  to  the  Word  (Ps.  cxix.  9).  (fl)  By  prayer,  as  the  apostle  did  with  the
thorn  in  his  flesh  (2  Cor.  xii.  9).  (t)  By  watchfulness  (Prov.  xxiii.  26,  27).  We  ought
to  guard  against  idleness  (Ezek.  xlvi,  49),  fulness  of  bread,  evil  company  (Prov.  i.  20).
(5)  We  must  not  "  fulfil  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,"  but  "  put  on  Christ "  (Rom.  xiiL  14).

(b)  The  sin  of  covetousness.  The  apostle  here  introduces  a  new  type  of  sin  by  the  use
of  the  definite  article,  as  if  he  thus  exhausted  the  full  catalogue  of  sin  in  the  world.
It  is  curious  to  find  it  linked  with  sins  of  impurity.  Yet  it  is  so  elsewhere  (1  Cor.  v.
11 ;  Bph.  v.  3 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  14).  There  is  a  likeness  between  these  two  classes  of  sins.
They  IJoth  imply  an  unlawful  direction  of  desires  not  in  themselves  unlawful,  and
they  both  grow  by  indulgence.  Covetousness :  (a)  Issues,  as  a  defiling  thing,  "  out  of
the  heart  of  man  "  (Mark  vii.  22).  (;8)  It  implies  a  greedy  and  distracting  care  (Luke
xii.  15).  (7)  It  exposes  to  many  a  piercing  sorrow  (1  Tim.  vi.  10).  (8)  It  is  a  trouble
to  a  man's  own  house  (Prov.  xv.  27).  («)  It  argues  little  dependence  or  faith  ui  the
Lord  (Luke  xii.  30).  Therefore  "  let  us  have  our  conversation  without  covetousness
and  he  content  with  such  things  as  we  have"  (Heb.  xiii.  5).  (Q  Its  heinousness
— "  seeing  it  is  idolatry."  It  sets  up  another  object  of  worship  b(  sides  God.  We
cannot  "  serve  both  God  and  mammon"  (Matt.  vi.  24).  Covetousness  is  base,  because
it  sets  up  self  in  the  heart.  It  is  odious  to  God  (Ps.  x.  3),  turns  our  hearts  away
from  him  (1  John  iL  15),  and  grudges  the  time  spent  in  God's  worship  -(Amot


Vrt  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANS.         ton.  m.  1—25.

riii.  6).     Sins  of  impurity  are  the  sins  of  youth  as  the  da  of  covetouBness  is  the  sin  of
olii  age.

III.  Aeotjmbnts  to  encouragb  vs  to  this  duty  op  mortification.  "  For  which
things'  sake  cometh  the  wratli  of  God  upon  the  sons  of  disobedience :  in  the  which  ye
also  walked  aforetime,  when  ye  lived  in  these  things."  1.  2'Ae  consideration  of  ike
wrath  of  Ood.  (1)  There  is  wrath  in  Ood  against  all  sin.  It  is  the  displeasure  of  a
personal  God,  the  moral  Governor,  against  sin,  and  the  moving  cause  of  the  punish-
ment he  inflicts.  It  is  not  identical  with  the  lunishment,  which  is  only  the  effect  of
it.  It  is  a  first  principle  in  natural  theology  (Bom.  L  32);  it  has  its  root  in  the  moral
excellence  of  God ;  and  is  inseparable  from  the  attitude  of  God  toward  moral  evil  (Heb.
iii.  11 ;  Bom.  vs..  22).  (2)  It  is  an  enduring  fact  of  God's  moral  government^-"  the
wrath  of  God  doth  come."  Nothing  has  occurred  to  treak  the  connection  between  sin
and  Gud's  anger,  exce[jt  in  the  case  of  those  whom  Christ  has  "  delivered  from  the  wrath
to  come  "  (1  Thess.  L  10).  (3)  It  is  directed  against  the  sons  of  disobedience,  who
disngard  alike  the  piinciples  of  Law  and  gospel.  2.  A  consideration  of  the  former
state  of  the  Colossians.  "  In  the  which  ye  also  walked  aforetime,  when  ye  lived  in  these
things."  It  is  good  to  be  reminded  of  our  past  sin,  (1)  because  it  recalls  the  misery
and  guilt  of  our  former  state  and  makes  as  shrink  from  the  thought  of  a  return  to  it;
(2)  because  it  humbles  us  under  a  sense  of  our  personal  unworthiness;  (3)  because  it
quickens  our  sense  of  God's  mercy  that  drew  us  out  of  it.— T.  C.

Vers.  8,  9. — A  warning  against  social  sins.  The  sins  already  noticed  are  personal ;
the  Bins  now  to  be  specified  arise  in  connection  with  man's  social  relationships.  "  But
now  put  ye  also  away  all  these :  anger,  wrath,  malice,  railing,  shameful  speaking  out
of  your  mouth.  Lie  not  one  to  another."  These  sins,  again,  divide  themselves  into
two  elapses — thiee  of  each  :  (1)  sins  of  inward  feeling;  (2)  sins  of  outward  expression.

I.  SiNB  OP  INWARD  FEELING.  "  Anger,  Wrath,  mRlioe."  1.  Anger  and  wrath.
There  is  an  anger  that  is  righteous.  "  Be  angry  and  sin  not "  (Eph.  iv.  26).  Even
our  Lord  was  angry  as  he  looked  upon  the  Pharisees  (Mark  iii.  5).  But  the  anger
here  condemned  is  sinful.  It  is  a  settled  feeling  of  hatred  as  distinguished  from  wrath,
which  is  more  passionate  and  transient.  (1)  We  are  warned  against  both.  "  Cease
from  anger,  leave  off  wrath,  fret  not  thyself  to  do  evil "  (Ps.i  xxxvii.  8).  We  are  not  to
give  place  to  them  (Bom.  xii.  19).  "  Be  not  hasty  in  thy  spirit  to  be  angry  "  (Eccles.
vii.  11).  We  ought  to  be  "  slow  to  wrath"  (Jas.  i.  19).  We  ought  not  "  to  let  the
sun  go  down  upon  it."  (2)  They  lay  the  heart  open  to  the  devil  (Eph.  iv.  17).  (3)
They  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God  (Eph.  iv.  30,  31).  (4)  They  intercept  prayer  (1  Tim.
ii.  8).  2.  Malice.  This  is  the  vicious  habit  of  mind  that  delights  in  injury  to  others.
(1)  It  is  the  sign  of  an  unrcgenerate  nature  (Titus  iii.  3  ;  1  John  ii.  9).  (2)  It  springs
from  pride  and  envy  (Prov.  xiii.  10).  (3)  It  is  entirely  opposed  to  that  love  that
'  worketh  no  ill  to  his  neighbour "  (Bom.  xiii.  10).    (4)  It  grieves  the  Holy  Spirit

(Kph.  iv.  30,  31).

II.  Sins  of  outward  expression.  "Railing,  shameful  speaking  out  of  your  mouth.
Lie  not  one  to  another."  1.  Railing.  This  is  "  the  strife  of  words."  (1)  It  is  speak-
ing evil  of  mea,  and  springs  from  envy  or  malice.  The  tongue  of  the  railer  is  compared
to  the  sting  of  adders,  to  a  sharp  sword,  to  arrows.  (2)  It  leads  to  reprisals ;  for  "  if
ye  bite  and  devour  one  another,  take  heed  lest  ye  be  consumed  one  of  another"  (Gal.
V.  15).  (3)  The  Judge  will  condemn  the  railer  (Jas.  v.  9).  (4)  It  hinders  the  success
of  the  Word  (1  Pet.  ii.  1,  2).  We  ought,  therefore,  to  "  put  far  from  us  a  froward
mouth  and  perverse  lips  "  (Prov.  iv.  24).  2.  Shameful  speaking.  This  applies  to  foul
abuse,  not  to  obscene  language.  While  railing  is  che  expression  of  angry  and  mali-
cious feeling,  tliis  is  the  expression  of  coarse  contempt  and  insolence.  3.  Falsehood.
This  lialiit  is  to  be  put  off;  lor:  (1)  It  is  that  of  the  devil,  who  is  the  father  of  lies  (John
viii.  44).  (2)  God  hates  it  (Piov.  xii.  22).  (3)  It  is  a  breach  of  the  social  contract
(E|ih.  iv.  25).  (4)  It  shuts  out  from  hiaven  (Hev.  xxii.  15).  Let  us  pray  God  to
remove  far  from  us  vanity  and  lies  (Prov.  iiL  8). — T.  C.

Vers.  9,  10. — The  ground  of  these  practical  precepts.  "Seeing  that  you  have
put  ©ff  the  old  man  with  his  dJeeds,  and  have  put  on  the  new  man,  which  is  being
renewed  unto  knowledge  after  the  image  of  him  who  created  him."    W«  have  here


OH.  in.  1-25,]         rHK  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  178


fhe  negative  and  the  posttive  aspects  of  the  great  spiritual  change  effected  in  con-
version.

I.  The  neoative  aspect  of  oonvehsioh.  "  Ye  have  put  off  the  old  man  with  his
deeds."  1.  The  old  man  is  the  old  unconverted  self,  strong  in  his  deeds  of  sin.  His
deeds  are  catalogued  among  the  "  works  of  the  flesh"  (Gal.  Vw  22,  23),  as  well  as  in  the
context.  He  is  to  be  discerned.  Indeed,  by  his  works  like  a  tree  by  its  fruits.  2.  The
putting  off  of  the  old  man  is  twofold,  namely,  at  conversion  and  in  the  gradtuU  process
of  sanctiflcation.  Some  teach  that  the  old  man  is  an  unchanged  and  unchangeable  being,
and  that,  as  he  has  been  crucified  in  Chiist  (Bom.  vi.  6),  we  have  nothing  more  to  do
with  him.  In  that  case,  if  we  have  put  on  the  new  man,  we  are  perfectly  sinless.  (1)
There  ia  a  putting  olf  of  the  old  man  at  our  justification.  (2)  There  is  a  gradual  putting
off  likewise — a  "  mortifying  your  members  which  are  upon  the  earth,"  which  is  (o  con-
tinue till  we  get  rid  of  all  his  deeds.  The  counsel,  therefore,  to  put  off  the  old  maa
and  put  on  the  new  man  is  like  the  similar  counsel, "  Put  ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ"
(Rom.  xiii.  14),  addressed  to  those  who  had  already  "  put  on  Christ "  (Gal.  iii.  27).

II.  The  positive  aspect  op  conversion.  "  And  have  put  on  the  new  man."  This
is  the  regenerate  man.  He  is  a  "new  creation^  (2  Oor.  v.  17;  Gal.  vi.  15).  1.  The
nature  of  this  newness.  (1)  He  has  a  new  nature-—"  born  from  above  "  (John  iii.  3).  He
has  "a  new  heart."  ^2)  He  has  a  new  obedience,  both  as  to  its  spirit,  its  matter,  and
its  end  (Rom.  xii.  1).  (3)  He  has  a  new  citizenship  (Phil.  iii.  20).  (4)  He  has
new  desires  (Ps.  li.  2 ;  Matt.  v.  6;  1  Tim.  iv.  8).  i.  It  is  a  nature  constantly  renewed
unto  full  knowledge.  "  Which  is  being  renewed  unto  knowledne."  It  is  not  at  once
complete,  but  in  a  state  of  constant  develn|)ment  by  the  Holy  Spiiit.  Knowledge  is  a
principal  part  of  the  new  grace  of  the  believer.  (1)  It  is  the  beginning  of  eternal  life
(John  xvii.  3).  (ii)  It  has  transforming  power  (2  Cor.  vii.  18).  (8)  It  is  necessary  to
Dur  understanding  the  wiles  of  the  devil  and  resisting  the  temptations  of  the  world  (1
Pet.  V.  0).  3.  Its  renewal  is  after  a  Divine  'pattern.  "  After  the  image  of  hira  who
created  him."  The  allusion  is  to  Gen.  i.  26.  The  image  of  Christ  in  the  believer  is
analogous  to  that  of  the  image  of  God  in  the  original  man,  but  will  be  far  more  glorious,
as  the  second  Man  is  more  glorious  than  the  first  man.  Thus  we  see  the  process  of
putting  on  the  new  man  in  its  beginning!  (Gal.  iii.  27),  in  its  continuance  (Eom.  xiii._14),
and  in  its  completeness  (1  Cor.  xv.  53,  54). — T.  0^

Ver.  11. — Ml  distinctions  obUtemted  in  Christ.  "  Where  there  cannot  be  Greek  and
.Tew,  circumcision  and  unciroumcision,  barbarian,  Scythian,  bondman,  freeman !  but
Christ  is  all,  and  in  all."  The  old  distinctions  which  separated  man  from  man  can  have
no  existence  in  the  new  spiritual  life.

I.  National  distinctions  ahe  abolished  iw  Christ,  "Greek  and  Jew."  The
peculiar  privilege  of  Abraham's  natural  seed  is  gone.  Mercy  is  shown  on  exactly  similar
terms  to  Jew  and  to  Gentile.  Thus  is  manifest  that  catholicity  of  the  gospel  which  the
Gnostics  repudiated.

II.  HiTUALisTio  DISTINCTIONS  ARE  ABOLISHED.  "Circumcislon  and  uncifcnmcision."
The  errorists  in  Galatia  would  have  imposed  circumcision  on  the  Gentile  Christians,
but  neither  circumcision  nor  the  want  of  it  availed  anything  in  Christ's  kingdom,  but
"  a  new  creation  "  (Gal.  vi.  15).  Thus,  while  it  was  an  advantage  to  be  bom  a  Jew
rather  than  a  Gentile,  it  was  none  to  become  as  a  Jew  by  conforming  to  its  ritual
(I  Cor.  vii.  19).

III.  No  DISTINCTION  IS  BECOGNIZED  AB  TO  CIVILIZATION  OR  BEFINEMBNT.  "Bar-
barian, Scythian."  The  barbarian  was  the  foreigner,  the  Scythian  the  savage.  The
gospel  turns  the  barbarian  into  a  brother,  and  lifts  even  the  Scythians — ^the  lowest  type
of  barbarians^ — into  the  dignity  of  Christian  fellowship.

"  IV.  Social  distinctions  are  abolishedl    "Bondman,  freeman."    The  gospel  has
placed  them  on  one  levi-1  of  religious  privilege.

V.  Christ  has  obliterated  all  these  distinctions.  "  But  Christ  is  all,  and  in
all."  Ho  has  absorbed  them  all  into  himself,  tilling  the  whole  sphere  of  human  life  in
its  widest  varieties  of  development.  He  dwells  in  all,  their  true  Centre ;  for  the  life  of
all  believers  is  "hid  with  Christ  in  God."  This  fact  places  the  saints  under  immense
obligations.    They  must  consecrate  all  to  Christ  and  resign  all  to  his  wise  and  lovina

will— T.  a  e  s


174  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIAN&         [oh.  m.  1—25,

Vers.  12 — 14. — The  duty  of  putting  on  all  the  characteristic  qualities  of  the  mew  man.
We  must  not  only  "  cease  to  do  evil "  in  putting  off  the  old  man,  we  "  must  learn  to  do
well."  "  Put  on  therefore,  as  God's  elect,  holy  and  beloved,  a  heart  of  compassion,
kindness,  humility,  meekness,  long-suffering."

I.  The  obligations  of  the  Christian  position.  "  As  God's  elect,  holy  and
beloved."  They  are  chosen  unto  holiness  that  they  should  he  without  blame  befoie
him  in  love  "  (Eph.  i.  4).  The  saints  are  :  1.  The  tltct  ones  of  Qod.  They  are  chosen
to  final  salvation  (Matt.  xxiv.  22,  24,  31;  Rev.  xvii.  14;  Titus  i.  1;  Kom.  viii.  33).
2.  The  elect  are  (1)  holy — (o)  consecrated  to  God,  (J)  subjectively  holy  (2  Cor.  vii.  1) ;
(2)  beloved — (a)  the  election  is  connected  with  God's  love  (Eom.  xi.  28) ;  (6)  it  is  a
free  love  (Hos.  xiv.  5),  a  tender  love  (Joel  IL  13),  an  everlasting  love  (Zeph.
iii.  17).

II.  The  discharge  of  these  Christian  obligations.  We  are  to  put  on :  1.  ^
heart  of  compassion ;  not  a  head  of  high  knowledge,  after  Gnostic  perception.  The
apostle  begins  with  the  natural  and  universal  instinct  of  pity,  which  is  here  more  an
act  of  grace  than  of  nature,  for  it  springs  from  love  to  God.  We  ought  to  cultivate  it,
(1)  because  the  Father  of  mercies  is  merciful  (Luke  vi.  33) ;  (2)  because  those  who
need  it  are. our  own  flesh  (Isa.  Wiii.  7);  (3)  because  it  wiU attest  the  reality  and  worth
of  our  religion  (Jas.  i.  27) ;  (4)  because  we  shall  reap  after  the  measure  of  mercies
both  here  and  hereafter  (Hos.  x.  12).  2.  Kindness.  This  is  the  temper  of  mind
which  produces  a  sweet  and  happy  intercourse  with  others.  Our  English  word  is
derived  from  "  kin,"  and  thus  a  Jdnd  man  is  a  hinned  man  ;  we  ought  to  regard  the  saints
as  kinsfulk,  for  they  are  children  of  God  and  brethren  in  Christ.  3.  Humility.  This
is  the  temper  of  mind  which  afi'ects  our  estimate  of  ourselves.  It  is  closely  allied  to
kindness,  for  it  takes  an  unselfish  view  of  personal  interests.  We  ought  to  "  seek  low-
liness "  (Zeph.  ii.  3),  because :  (1)  It  is  one  of  Christ's  own  graces  (Matt.  xi.  29).  (2)  God
regards  it  as  a  grace  eminently  worthy  of  our  vocation  (Eph.  iv.  1,  2).  (3)  He  loves
to  dwell  in  a  lowly  soul  (Isa.  Ivii.  15).  He  giveth  grace  to  the  lowly  (1  Pet.  v.  5,
6).  (4)  He  does  not  despise  their  prayers  (Ps.  cii.  7).  4.  Meekness,  long-suffering.
They  affeet  our  outward  bearing  towards  others,  especially  in  the  case  of  injury  or
insult.  They  are  linked  together  as  companion  graces  in  Gal.  v.  22.  They  arc  eminently
illustrated  in  the  life  of  Christ,  and  are  both  fruits  of  the  Spirit  (Gal.  v.  22).  -God
will  guide  the  meek  in  jndgment  and  teach  them  his  way  (Ps.  xxv.  9).  It  is  the
praise  of  Christian  love  that  it  suffers  long  (1  Cor.  xiii.  4).  5.  Forbearance  and
mutual  forgiveness,  "  forbearing  one  another,  and  forgiving  each  other,  if  any  man  have
a  complaint  against  any."  This  temper  is  eminently  conducive  to  peacefid  relations  aiid
diminishes  the  natural  friction  of  life.  It  implies  (1)  a  bearing  with  the  infirmities  of
others  (GaL  vi.  2) ;  (2)  a  disposition  to  take  wrong  rather  than  stand  upon  the  last  jot
of  our  rights  (1  Cor.  vi.  7) ;  (3)  a  pleasing  of  our  neighbour  for  his  good  to  edification
(Eom.  XV.  1,  2) ;  (4)  a  frank  forgiveness  of  our  neighbour  in  case  of  a  fault, — jars  and
discords  may  arise  even  among  saints.  (5)  It  is  a  temper  which  is  illustrated  an<l
enforced  by  the  example  of  Christ:  "Even  as  the  Lord  forgave  you,  so  also  do  ye."
His  example  is  decisive  both  as  to  the  act  and  the  manner  of  it.  He  forgave  his
enemies;  he  forgave  freely ;  he  forgave  finally,  for  salvation.  6.  Love.  "And  above
all  these  things  put  on  love,  which  is  the  bond  of  perfectness."  This  love  1 3  the  brethren
is  to  be  put  on  as  the  cincture  to  bind  the  other  graces  together.  (I)  The  necessity  of
this  love,  (a)  It  is  the  proof  of  faith  (Gal.  v.  6).  (6)  It  tends  to  the  increase  of  the
mystical  body  (Eph.  iv.  17).  (c)  It  makes  us  like  God  himself  (1  John  iv.  16).  (d)
It  is  a  demonstration  of  the  reality  of  religion  to  a  godless  world  (John  xv.  8;  Matt.
V.  16).  (2)  The  dignity  of  this  love ;  it  is  "  the  bond  of  perfectness."  It  holds  together
all  the  graces  which  make  up  perfection.  The  JudiBO-Gnostics  found  their  perfecdon  in
knowledge;  the  apostle  finds  it  in  love.  "Knowledge  puffeth  up,  charity  edifielh"
(1  Cor.  viii.  1).  Love  binds  believers  together,  and  looks  to  their  final  perfection  in
God.— T.  C.

Ver.  15. — Peace  and  thanksgiving.  "  And  let  the  peacp  of  Christ  rule  in  your  hearts,
to  the  which  also  ye  were  called  in  one  body ;  and  be  ye  thanl-ful."

I.  Christian  peace.  1.  Itt  Author,  (1)  Chrioi  is  our  Peace  (Epti.  ii.  14),  and
"  the  Lord  of  pence  "  (2  TheM.  Iii.  16),  and  "  the  Prince  of  peace  "  (Isa.  ix  6).     (2)  It


OH.ni.  1— 25.]         THE  EEISTLB  TO  THE  COLOSSIA>ra.  175

is  liis  l('c;;icy  to  the  Church  (.1  >liii  xiv.  27).  It  is  otir  .,f  tliK  iript-  "I  thf  Spirit  (Oal
V.  22).  (;i)  He  jinic  laiiiis  It — '■  i  :il  |ml'ii-'etli  iicace  "  ( l^;i.  lii.  7),  'i.  7'  '  ^/l'(  if  o
eJemr-it  of  its  exercise. ^  "Tu  ih  wliii'li  iil.sd  yr  were  ill»l  in  ■■  ■  1>  ■  v."  A-"G'r..
bath  called  iis  in  |  eaou  "  (1  C  r.  vii.  15),  we  are  to  iculizc  our  iini  \  .i\  ii  a-  ineiiiliti.-
of  the  bixly.  Uniiy  is  out  of  the  qu  stioii  without  peace.  Ld  u>  -h.w  tiie  IVuil  of  our
calling  by  being  lovers  of  peace.  '1  lie  kingdom  of  God  is  "rigli  (oii  iie-s  and  peace.''
3.  Jts  eiithronernent  as  umpire  in  the  heart.  "Let  it  be  umpiie  u  your  hearts."  (1;
It  is  to  act  with  decisive  force  in  the  couHiot  of  impulses  or  feelings  that  may  arise  in
a  Christian  life.  (2)  Ifet  we  must  retain  truth  along  uith  pejice  (Heb.  xii.  14;  Mark
ix.  50).     The  true  wisdom  is  to  be  "first  pure,  then  peacealile"  (Jas.  iii.  17).

II.  Thanksoivino.  "And  be  ye  thankful."  It  is  our  duty  to  be  always  thankful
to  God.  It  held  a  constant  place  in  the  apostle's  thoU'^hts.  The  word,  in  its  substan-
tive and  verbal  forms,  occurs  thirty-seven  times  in  his  Epistles.  We  must  be  in  a
constant  mood  of  thanksgiving  for  his  mercies,  for  his  grace,  for  bis  comforts,  and  for
his  ordinances. — T.  0.

Ver.  16. —  The  use  of  the  Word  for  spiritual  edif  ration.  The  apostle,  in  view  of  the
right  exercise  of  tlie  foregoinii  graces,  counsels  tlie  Oolos.->iaus  tu  make  the  Word  ol
Christ  the  subject  of  experimental  study.  "  Let  the  Word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  riclily
Ip  all  wisdom."

I.  The  efficacy  of  Christ's  Word.  1.  The  Scrip'ur'f  are  Christ's  Word.  They
have  Christ  for  their  Author,  for  their  Subj  ct,  for  their  Kud.  Tnis  is  the  Word  t'lat  is
" sounded  forth  "  everywhere  (1  Thess.  i.  8),  that  "  runs  "  everywhere,  to  be  glorified  in
its  success.  It  is  Christ,  too,  who  gives  power  to  this  Word.  2.  This  Word  ought  to
dwell  in  ut.  Not  come  and  go,  but  tarry  as  in  a  fixed  abode.  It  ought  to  be  an
abiding  power  within  us.  "The  Word  of  God  abid.tli  in  you"  (1  John  ii.  14).  3.
The  place  of  its  indwelling  is  the  heart;  not  the  meinorv  or  the  hi  ad,  but  the  henrt.

"  Thy  Word  have  I  hid  in  my  heart "  (  Ps.  cxix.  11).  4.  Th  manner  of  its  indwelling.
"  Richly  in  all  wisdom."  (1)  Not  "  with  a  scanty  footliold,  but  with  a  large  and  libeial
occupancy."  (2)  It  implies  (a)  receiving  the  Word  with  all  meekness  and  humility
(Jas.  i.  21);  (J)  dividing  it  aright  (2  Tim.  ii.  15);  (c)  trying  all  things  so  as  to
keep  that  which  is  good  (1  Thess.  v.  21).

II.  The  use  or  end  of  Christ's  Word.  "Teaching  and  admonishing  one  another
with  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  singing  with  grace  in  your  hearts  to  the
Lord."  Theie  is  a  double  function  here  asf<igned  to  the  Word:  one  makiiiij  its  influence
felt  upon  the  mind — "teaching;"  the  other  upon  the  heart — "siiigiiig"  with  thanks-
giving. 1.  The  Word  is  useful  for  teaching  and  for  warning.  Tliese  represent  the
positive  and  the  negative  sides  of  instruction.  (1)  Teaching,  (a)  This  implies  that  the
Word  is  to  be  used  by  every  Christian  for  the  puriioses  of  instruction  (Exod.  xxiv.  12).
When  we  have  received  the  "ingrafted  Word  "  into  our  hearts,  we  must  spread  it  abroad.
(6)  It  deepens  our  sense  of  the  vj^lue  of  the  Word  to  impart  it  to  others,  (c)  It  is  a  test
of  the  sincerity  of  our  attachment  to  make  it  known,  (d)  It  is  by  the  efforts  of  all
Christians  in  this  way  that  the  Word  will  eventually  reach  the  ends  of  the  earth.  (2)
Admonition,  (a)  It  must  be  grounded  on  the  Word  (Titus  i.  6).  (6)  It  must  be  done
in  love  and  meekness  (2  Thess.  iii.  1 ;  Gal.  vi.  1).  (c)  With  a  reasonable  secrecy
(Matt,  xviii.  15).  (d)  With  compnssion  and  tenderness  (2  Cor.  ii.  4).  (e)  With  per-
severance (Pro  v.  xiii.  19).  2.  The  Word  is  useful  for  the  purpose  of  iocred  song.  As
those  who  make  the  songs  of  a  nation  can  shape  its  political  and  moral  life,  so  the
hymn-writers  have  in  a  large  degree  shaped  the  theology  of  the  Church.  (1)  Singing  is
a  necessary  part  of  Divine  worship  (Eph.  vi.  19 ;  Jas.  v.  13 ;  Ps.  Ixvi.  1,  2).  It  is  good
for  spiritual  recreation  (Jas.  v.  13).     We  should  sing  in  our  houses  as  well  as  in  our


churches  (Ps.  ci.  1,  2  ;  1  Cor.  xiv.  26).  (2)  The  matter  of  singing — "  psalms,  hymns,
spiritual  songs."  These  are  supposed  to  represent  three  varieties  of  the  psalms  ol
Si  lipture.  There  is  evidence,  however,  that  Ciiristiaus  themselves  composed  hymns  for
public  worship  (1  Cor.  xiv.  lH).  (3)  The  manner  of  siugmg — "siuiiiuij  with  grace  in
your  hearts  to  the  Lord."  (u)  It  was  to  be  «iih  the  aucouipaniinent  of  Divine  grace,
that  is,  with  a  holy  joy  (Ps.  ix  .'),  with  a  hnmhlu  nuht  in  the  Lord's  mercies  (Ps.
xiii.  5),  with  a  lively  recollection  of  his  beueiiis  (Ps.  xlvii.  7).  (6)  It  was  to  be  the
outcome  of  the  heart's  feeling  as  well  as  the  expression  of  the  life.    This  implies  singing


176  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.         [oh.  m.  1—26

with  understanding  (1  Oor.  xiv.  14).    Therefore  wo  are  to  prepare  our  hearts  before  wa
siug  (Ps.  IviL  7).    (c)  It  was  to  be  addressed  to  the  Lord^  not  to  man.— >T.  G.

Ver.  17.— !Z%«  principle  of  a  godly  life.  This  is  the  practical  lesson  that  flows  from
the  theology  of  the  Epistle.  "  And  whatsoever  ye  do  in  word  or  deed,  do  all  in  the
Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  giving  thanks  to  God  the  Father  through  him."

I.  The  whole  extent  op  Christian  life  is  oonseobated  to  the  Lobd.  Every-
tl  mg  falls  under  the  two  heads  of  words  and  deeds.  1.  Words.  (1)  We  must  avoM
words  that  would  dishonour  Christ— vain  words  (Eph.  y.  6),  bitter  words  (Job  vi.  3),
deceitful  words  (Ps.  xxxvi.  3),  idle  words  (Matt.  zii.  36).  James  tells  us  the  sins  of
the  tongue  (Jas.  iii.  2).  (2)  We-must  use  words  of  wisdom  (Book  of  Proverbs),  words
of  truth  and  soberness  (Acts  zxiii.  25),  words  of  righteousness  (Jub  vi.  25),  wholesome
words  (2  Tim.  i.  13),  words  of  eternal  life  (John  vi.  68).  2.  Deedi.  These  must  be
done  (1)  In  faith,  for  "whatsoever  is  not  of  faith  is  sin  ;"  (2)  in  prayer  (Ps.  is.  1);
(3)  with  warrant  from  God's  "Word  (Isa.  viii.  20) ;  (4)  with  perseverance  (Gal.  vi.  9).
3.  All,  both  words  and  deeds,  must  be  done  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord.  They  must  have
supreme  reference  to  him  (l  Cor.  x.  31);  they  must  be  done  under  his  warrant  or
authority,  in  the,strength  of  his  grace,  after  his  own  glorious  example,  and  with  ultimate
regard  to  his  glory.  4.  Christian  obedience  must  all  the  while  he  mingled  with  thanka-
yiving  to  Ood  the  Father.  We  thank  him  (1)  for  the  ability  to  do  all  our  works  in  the
Lord's  Name ;  (2)  for  our  liberty  in  Christ ;  (3)  for  our  victory  over  sin ;  (4)  for  our
manifold  blessings  in  Christ.

II.  Heasons  fob  the  oonsecbation  of  oub  whole  life  to  the  Lobd.  We  ought
to  be  mure  circumspect  than  others  in  our  words  and  deeds :  1.  Because  "  we  live  and
die  to  the  Lord."  (Bom.  xiv.  8.)  We  are  "  the  Lord's."  2.  Because  we  are  entrusted
with  sucA  blessings.  "  £ecause  God  hath  bestowed  upon  them  more  blessings,  and
therefore  as  he  gives  more  wages,  requires  more  work."  3.  Because  we  are  more  observed
than  others.  Therefore  we  must  "  walk  circumspectly,  not  as  fools,  but  as  wise  "  (Eph.
V.  15).    4.  Because  we  have  theprosjpeet  of  an  abundant  reward  accordity  to  our  works.

— T.a

Ver.  18. — The  duties  of  vnve$.  The  apostle  next  prbceedg  to  enjoin  family  duties,
not  in  the  spirit  of  those  errorists,  who  imagined  that  such  duties  were  vulgar  and
inconsistent  with  the  contemplative  aspect  of  the  Christian  life.  His  first  practical
exhortation  is  to  wives,  and  is  summed  up  in  the  single  duty — "  submit  yourselves."

L  The  duty  of  bubmipsion.  "  Wives,  submit  yourselves  to  your  own  husbands."
This  duty  includes :  1.  Honour.  They  must  honour  their  husbands  as  their  head  (1
Cor.  xi.  3 ;  1  Pet.  iii.  6).  2.  Truthfulness.  (Prov.  ii.  17.)  3.  Obedience.  (Eph.  v.  23  ;
1  Cor.  vii.  34.)  4.  Oo-operation  with  their  husbands  in  all  family  affairs.  They  must
"  guide  the  house  with  discretion  "  (Titus  ii.  5).  5.  They  must  not  assume  authority
over  their  husbands,  either  in  ecclesiastical  or  in  domestic  affairs  (1  Tim.  ii.  14).

II.  Reasons  foe  this  duty.  "As  it  is  fit  in  the  Lord."  In  Oriental  countries,
woman  was  the  slave  rather  than  the  companion  of  man,  but  in  the  Orecized  com-
munities of  Asia  Minor,  woman  held  a  higher  position,  and  her  new  position  under  the
gospel  may  have  led  her  to  carry  her  freedom  to  the  point  of  licence.  It  was,  therefore,
necessary  to  define  her  position  accurately.  Her  subjection  to  man  is  "fit  in  the  Lord  "
on  several  grounds.  1.  From  man's  priority  of  creation.  (1  Tim.  ii.  13.)  2.  2'he  woman
was  made  for  man,  not  the  man  for  the  woman.  (1  Cor.  ii.  9.)  3.  2%e  woman's  priority
in  the  original  transgression.  (1  Tim.  ii.  14.)  4.  The  man's  headship  over  the  woman.
(1  Oor.  xi.  3.)  6.  Her  weakness.  She  is  "  the  weaker  vessel "  (1  Pet.  iii.  7),  aud
thererore  stands  in  need  of  his  greater  strength  and  protection.  6.  2'he  suly'ection  to  man
is  placed  on  the  same  basis  as  the  subjection  of  the  Church  to  Christ.  (Eph.  v.  22 — 24.)
7.  But  the  apostle's  language  in  the  text  implies  a  limitation  upon  her  submission ;  for
she  is  to  be  subject  to  him  "  in  the  Lord."  Both  husband  and  wife  must  have  a  due
consideration  for  each  other's  position,  because  they  are  "  heirs  of  the  grace  of  life,"
and  they  must  see  that  "  their  prayers  are  not  hindered  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  7). — ^T.  0.

Ver.  19, — Hii  dutie*  ijf  husband*.  "  Husbands,  love  your  wives,  and  be  not  bittet
against  them."


OH.  ml— 25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  177

I.  The  ptTTY  OF  LOVE.  This  love,  which  is  consistent  with  his  headship  over  her,
implies:  1.  That  he  is  to  delight  in  Aer(Piov.  v.  18,  19),  and  phase  her  (1  Cor.  vii.  33).
2.  That  he  is  to  cherish  her  as  Christ  the  Church  (Kph.  v.  29),  providing  for  her
support  and  comfort  (1  Tim.  v.  3)."  3.  2%a<  he  is  to  protect  her  as  the  weaker  vessel.  4.
That  he  is  not  to  be  hitter  against  her,  using  bitter  words  or  sour  looks,  acting  rigorously
or  imperiously,  as  if  she  wure  a  slave  and  not  a  companion.  5.  That  he  is  to  sesk  her
spiritual  good,  for  she  is  to  he  an  heir  with  him  of  the  grace  of  life.    (1  Pet.  iii.  7.)

II.  Tub  bbasons  of  this  duty.  1.  The  intimacy  of  the  relationship  between  them.
He  leaves  father  and  mother  to  cleave  to  his  wife.  She  is  bone  of  his  bone  aud  flesh  of
his  flesh  (E|jh.  v.  28,  29,  33).  2.  She  was  originally/  provided  as  a  help-meet  for  him.
(Gen.  ii.  18.)  "  Yet  is  she  thy  companion,  and  the  wife  of  thy  covenant "  (Mai.  ii.  14).
8.  She  is  the  glory  of  the  man.  (1  Cor.  xi.  7.)  4.  The  strongest  argument  is  the  analogous
love  of  Christ  to  his  Church.    (Eph.  v.  25— 28.)— T.  0.

Ver.  20. — The  duties  of  children.  "  Children,  obey  your  parents  in  all  things:  for
this  is  well-pleasing  to  the  Lord."

I.  The  duty  of  children  is  obedience.  This  includes;  1.  Reverence.  (Lev.  xix.  3  ;
Eph.  vi.  1,  2.-)  2.  Readincsi  to  receiae  instruction  from  parents.  (Prov.  i.  8.)  3.  Sub-
vdssion  to  their  rebukes.  (Prov.  xiii.  1.)  4.  Gratitude.  (1  Tim.  v.  4.)  6.  Submission  to
their  just  commands.  They  are  to  obey  "  in  all  things,"  that  is,  in  all  lawful  things,
for  it  must  be  done  "  in  the  Lord  "  (Eph.  vi.  1).

II.  The  grounds  of  this  duty.  "For  this  is  well-pleasing  to  the  Lord."  This  is,
in  itself,  a  suBicient  reason  for  filial  obedience.  But  it  is  well-pleasing  to  the  Lord  for
several  rcajuns.  It  is  not  enough  to  serve  God,  but  we  must  serve  him  so  as  to  please
liim  (Heb.  xii.  28).  1.  It  is  agreeable  to  his  Law.  (Bxod.  xx.  12.)  2.  It  is  right  in
itself.  (Eph.  vi.  1.)  3.  Christ  was  obedient  to  his  parents.  (Luke  ii.  51.)  ^  It  it
necessary  to  the  good  order  of  family  life.  5.  The  welfare  of  the  child  depends  upon  its
obedience,  especially  at  a  time  when  it  cannot  reason  upon  what  is  righi. — T.  0.

Ver.  21. — The  duties  of  fathers.  "  Fathers,  provoke  not  your  children,  lest  they  be
discouraged."

I.  The  duty  of  parents.  It  is  here  exhibited  on  its  negative  side.  They  are  not  to
abuse  their  authority  over  their  children  by  too  great  severity  either  in  Words  or  deeds.
Some  parents  spoil  their  children  by  indulgi-nce  ;  others,  by  unwise  severities.  Bitter
words  are  used,  vmreasonable  commands  are  given,  immoderate  correction  is  administered.
Parents  are  to  behave  lovingly  to  their  children,  eveu  while  maintaining  their  just
authority  over  them.

II.  The  danger  of  needless  harshness.  "  Lest  they  be  discouraged."  They  may
lose  heart ;  their  spirit  may  be  broken ;  they  may  become  morose,  sullen,  and  reckless.
Thus  they  may  be  turned  aside  from  the  service  of  God,  lose  the  capacity  tc  do  great
things,  become  pusillanimous,  and  eventually  become  a  sad  disappointmeci  to  their
parents. — T.  0.

Vers.  22 — 25. — 7%e  duties  of  servants.  The  ai'0?tle  enters  Into  fuller  detail  in  hii
injunctions  to  servants,  because  his  intercourse  with  Onesimus,  a  Colossian  slave  now
returning  to  his  master  Philemon  in  a  new  character,  had  turned  his  thoughts  to  the
c)cn<1ition  and  difficulties  of  the  whole  class  of  dependants.  His  injunctions  to  them
imply  that  they  had  a  right  to  be  instructed  out  of  the  Word,  and  that  if  men  have  less
consideration  for  their  interests,  the  Lord  redoubles  his  concern  for  them.  There  was
a  danger  that  slaves  in  the  Roman  empire  might  repudiate  their  relation  to  their  masters,
and  accordingly  the  apostle  enjoins  the  duty  of  obedience  to  masters,  while  he  announces
principles  destined  ultimately  to.  destroy  the  unnatural  relation.

I.  The  padlts  of  servants.  He  specifies  five  of  them.  1.  Eye-servio».  There
was  a  temptation  to  this  fault  where  the  master's  authority  was  regarded  as  unjust  and
crueL  2.  Eypocritical  srrvice,  arising  out  of  a  divided  interest  and  the  absence  of
singleness  of  heart.  3.  Half-service.  Servants  might  not  please  th<ir  masters  "in  all
tilings,"  but  in  such  things  as  pleased  iheuiselves.  4.  Oodlessness.  Tlicy  chose  to
please  men  rather  than  the  Divine  Master,  5.  A  base  and  discouraged  spirit,  which
was  to  be  banished  by  prospects  of  heaveiily  reward.

poLossiANa.  ir


178  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN3.         [oh.  ni.  1—25.

II.  The  duties  of  bbbvants.  These  are  all  summed  op  in  the  one  word  "obedience."
But  this  oliedience  must  be  becomiuEly  rendered  in  several  Important  respects.  1.  "  Noi
with  tye-sirvi<:e,as  men-pleusers ;  hut  in  sini/leness  of  heart,  fearing  Ood."  (1)  Eye-
service  is  designed  to  please  man.  Work  will  be  done  only  so  long  as  the  master's  eye
is  on  the  servant.  There  is  no  thought  of  pleasing  alight  but  man.  (2)  There  must  be
sinaleness  of  heart,  that  is,  simplicity  and  sincerity  of  spirit,  that  will  lead  to  an
undivided  devotion  to  work,  arising  from  "the  fear  of  God,"  because  they  realize  that  the
eye  of  the  Divine  Master  is  ever  upon  them.  Dissimulation,  duplicity,  pretence,  deceit,
must  be  far  from  Christian  servants.  2,  It  must  be  hearty  service.  "  And  whatsoever
ye  do,  do  it  heartily,  as  to  the  Lord,  and  not  to  men."  Servants,  in  obeying  their  masters,
serve  the  Lord.  They  do  the  will  of  God  from  the  heart,  not  grudgingly  or  murmuringly,
but  with  a  truly  hearty  obedience.  3.  It  must  ie  obedience  "  in  all  things ; "  that  is,
in  all  things  lawful.  But  servants  must  consider  the  master's  commands  as  well  as  his
interests,  and  seek  to  obey  them  in  everything,  however  irksome  or  humiliating.

III.  The  encouragements  of  servants.  "Knowing  that  of  the  Lord  ve  shall
receive  the  reward  of  the  inheritance :  for  ye  serve  the  Lord  Christ."  1.  It  is  an
encouragement  for  them  to  know  that  masters  are  only  "  according  to  the  flesh."  This
limits  human  slavery.  The  master  cannot  touch  the  soul,  which  is  the  temple  of  the
Holy  Ghost  (1  Oor.  iii.  16),  for  the  slave  is  "  Christ's  freeman  "  (1  Cor.  viL  22).  2.  There
is  a  reward  for  true  obedience  as  well  as  a  compensation  for  wrongs  endured.  (1)
Servants  ought  to  know  of  their  blessed  prospects,  (2)  Tiieir  works  will  be  surely
rewarded,  reckoned,  no  doubt,  of  grace,  not  of  debt.  They  shall  receive  "  the  reward  of
the  inheritance,"  the  heavenly  glory,  by  the  Father's  bequest.  God  will  be  their
Paymaster  if  they  are  wronged  or  defrauded  by  man.  Therefore  they  have  strong
encouragement  to  give  just  obedience  to  man.  3.  There  is  a  retribution  on  unjust  or
tyrannical  masters  for  the  wrongs  they  have  done  to  their  servants.  "  But  he  that  doeth
wrong  shall  receive  for  the  wrong  which  he  hath  done :  and  there  is  no  respect  of
persons."  Some  think  this  refers  to  dishonest  servants,  or  to  both  servants  and  masters
who  may  have  failed  in  their  duty  to  each  other.  It  is  more  natural  to  regard  it  as
referring  to  the  case  of  masters,  for  the  passage  is  designed  to  encourage  servants  suffer-
ing injustice  with  the  prospect  of  a  day  of  judgment  for  those  who  wronged  them.  God
is  "  wi  respecter  of  persons."  Man  may  make  a  difference.  God  finds  the  claim  of  the
slave  as  vaUd  as  the  claim  of  the  master. — T.  CS.

Vers.  1,  2. — Uie  heavenly  life.  Paul  has  been  warning  his  Colos-sian  converts  against
the  superstitious  interest  in  ceremonies  which  the  false  teachers  tried  to  foster ;  and  now
he  passes  to  the  higher  things  and  thoughts  which  should  occupy  the  soul.  He  speaks  of
their  resurrection  with  Christ  if  they  are  real  converts,  and  of  the  consequent  duty  of
living  a  heavenly  life,  which  consists  in  setting  one's  heart  upon  heavenly  things  in
contrast  to  the  things  which  are  upon  the  earth.  He  further  shows  that  this  heavenly
life  is  to  end  in  a  glorious  manifestation  at  the  second  advent  of  Christ.  The  line  of
thouglit  here  is  consequently  of  the  highest  character.

I.  The  death  to  earthly  things.  (Ver.  3.)  The  apostle  here  affirms  that  the
Colossian  Christians  "  died "  (Revised  Version).  Now,  this  represents  a  distinct
element  in  Christian  experience;  it  means  that  the  soul  passes  through  a  death  to
earthly  things — to  sin  and  the  allurements  of  the  flesh,  just  as  our  Lord  died  upon
tl;e  tree.  The  Crucifixion  must  have  its  counterpart  within  us.  We  die  to  the  attrac-
tions of  the  world.  "  The  dead,"  says  Augustus  Hare,  in  a  sermon  on  this  passaj;©,
"  know  not  nor  care  for  anything  in  this  world.  Their  love  and  hatred  and  envy  are
clean  wiped  out.  A  dead  man  is  as  cold  and  motionlesf  as  a  stone,  to  all  that  the
living  make  the  greatest  stir  about.  How  perfectly,  then,  how  entirely,  ought  we  to  be
free  from  sin,  in  order  to  be  dead  to  it !  It  is  not  enough  to  keep  from  outward  acts  of
sin,  if  the  heart  cherishes  any  secret  liking  for  it.  This  is  not  dying  to  it.  Before  we
can  attain  to  that  perfect  sinlessness,  our  hearts  must  be  as  completely  closed  against
the  tempter  as  if  we  were  nailed  down  in  our  coffins ;  our  ears  must  be  deaf  to  his
voice ;  our  eyes  must  be  blind  to  his  charms.  We  must  not  only  give  up  every  evil
practic' ;  we  must  also  stifle  every  evil  desire.  Nothing  less  can  deserve  the  name  of
bi  ing  dead  to  sin.  This,  then,  is  the  perfection  of  innocency  which  we  are  to  strive
«fter."    Kow,  every  true  Christian  has  experienced  ip  larger  or  satE^ll^r  measiu-e  t'^^


OH.  in.  1-25.]        THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIAKS,  1T9

dearieiiiiig  to  things  earthly  which  has  its  perfect  ideal  in  absolute  death.    The  world
has  not  the  attractions  for  our  deadened  hearts  that  it  once  had.

II.  The  besbbrection  to  newness  of  life.  (Ver.  1.)  Simultaneously  with  the
death  to  things  earthly  comes  the  resurrection  to  newness  of  life.  We  are  regarded  as
rising  along  with  Christ  out  of  our  grave  in  trespasses  and  in  sins  (Eph.  ii.  2 — 5)  and
entering  into  a  new  life  unto  God.  Our  Lord's  life  after  his  resurrection  is  tlms  the
type  of  our  new  life.  As  our  Lord  entered  by  resurrection  into  an  immortal  life  such
as  he  had  not  before  he  suffered,  according  to  his  words,  "  I  am  he  that  livetb,  and
was  dead ;  and,  behold,  I  am  alive  for  evermore ; "  so  believers  enter  by  resurrectiou  into
a  new  life  essentially  different  from  the  old.  We  have  passed  by  faith  "  from  death
unto  life."  "  A  resurrection,"'  says  Liddon,  "  is  a  transfer  from  one  state  to  another.
It  is  a  passage  from  the  darkness  of  the  tomb  to  the  sjinshine  of  the  upper  svir.  It
is  an  exchange  of  the  coldness,  stillness,  corruption  of  death,  for  the  warmth  and  move-
ment and  undecayed  energies  of  life."  We  have  in  resurrection  attained  to  "  life
eternal."

III.  The  ascension  into  heavenly  relations.  (Vers.  1,  2.)  Not  only  does
Paul  regard  believers  as  "  raised  together  with  Christ,"  but  also  as  bound  to  ascend  in
spirit  into  heavenly  relations.  "  The  things  which  are  above,  where  Christ  is,  seated
on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  are  to  concern  us.  Our  mind  is  to  be  set  upon  these  things
insitead  of  upon  the  things  that  are  upon  the  earth.  Having  so  risen  with  Christ,  we  are
bound  to  show  the  reality  of  our  resurrection  by  leading  a  new  life  and  seeking  the
things  that  are  above.  "  As  Christ  did  not  break  loose  from  the  grave,"  says  Hare,
"  to  tarry  on  earth,  but,  having  risen  from  the  dead,  ascended  into  heaven,  so,  instead  of
lingering  among  the  things  of  earth,  we  too  should  ascend  into  heaven  in  heart  and
mind,  and  dwell  there  with  him  continually."  Now,  suppose  we  ascended  into  heaven
and  sat  down  with  Christ  upon  his  throne  (Eph.  ii.  6),  what  should  we  realize  about
our  relations  to  heavenly  things  ?  1.  We  should  realize  that  Christ  is  our  Life.  The
heavenly  world  depends  consciously  upon  Jesus  for  its  glorious  existence.  He  is  the
Life  of  each  and  of  all.  As  the  source  of  life,  he  is  there  beyond  the  reach  of  change,  an
exhaustless  Fountain.  2.  We  should  realize  that  Christ  is  the  Object  of  supreme  affection.
The  celestial  world  not  only  traces  all  its  life  to  Jesus,  but  centres  all  its  love  in  him.
To  love  him  with  all  the  soul,  heart,  mind,  and  strength  is  deemed,  not  the  duty
merely,  but  the  constant  privilege  of  all.  He  is  the  Beloved  One  who  is  loved  beyond
all  conception.  3.  We  should  realize  that  Chrisfs  kingdom  and  reign  are  the  supreme
concern  of  the  whole  heavenly  world.  Angels  and  redeemed  ones  alike  bend  in  rapturous
interest  over  the  progress  of  Christ's  kingdom  and  inquire  doubtless  in  what  ways  they
can  promote  it.  The  heavenly  life  is  thus  a  life  of  hope  for  the  triumph  of  that  sacred
cause  which  centres  in  the  Son  of  God.  4.  We  should  realize  that  Ghrisfs  second
advent  in  glory  is  to  be  the  date  of  ow  glorification  with  him.  The  heavenly  world
not  only  awaits  Christ's  triumph,  but  also  his  manifestation  as  the  glorified  Saviour.
And  in  that  manifestation  of  the  Son  the  other  sons  of  God  are  to  share.  So  that  the
second  advent  of  Christ  into  this  world  is  a  distinct  matter  of  hope  to  the  celestial
inhabitants.  Now,  in  all  these  ways  we  can  in  this  life  realize  heavenly  relations.
We  can  regard  Christ  as  our  Life,  hidden,  doubtless,  from  the  eye  of  sense,  but  palpable
to  faith,  and  rejoice  in  him  as  our  Divine  and  exhaustless  Source  of  life.  We  can  set
our  heart's  supreme  affections  on  him,  loving  him  and  all  he  loves  for  his  own  dear
sake.  We  can  make  his  kingdom  and  reign  our  supreme  concern,  every  other  thought
being  subsidiary  and  tributary  to  this.  We  can,  lastly,  hope  for  and  love  his  appearing
as  the  time  for  the  manifestation  of  the  sons  of  God.  Thus  shall  we  live  the  heavenly
life  on  earth.  Thus  shall  we  show  that  we  are  more  citizens  of  the  other  world  than  ol
this,  and  that  we  are  contemplating  the  time  of  our  emigration  with  satisfaction.
We  have  acquainted  ourselves  with  the  nature  of  the  country  we  are  going  to;  we  have
studied  the  guide-book  and  consulted  the  faithful  and  true  Witness  about  heavenly
things ;  the  soil  and  climate  of  the  better  land  are  not  altogether  unknown.  Its  holy
and  fragrant  air,  its  religious  and  happy  spirit,  its  buuntiful  conditions,  we  have  tried
to  realize,  and  when  we  are  transferred  to  it  we  feel  persuaded  ws  shall  be  at  horn*. —
R.  M.  E.

Vers.  5 — 11. — Mortification  after  d^aiK.    Paul,  having  spoken  «rf  our  death  t?


180  THE  EPISTLB  TO  THE  00L0SSTAN8.       [ch.  m.  1— 2&

earthly  things  and  of  our  heavenly  life,  speaks  next  of  mortification  as  succeeding  death.
It  seems  at  first  sight  strange,  yft,  when  analyzed,  it  is  seen  to  convey  most  important
truth.  To  quote  from  Godet's  '  ]Studes  Bibliqueg : '  "  When  this  apostle  [Paul]  wishes
to  teach  us  how  one  may  attempt  to  die  to  sin  and  to  live  to  God,  see  bow  he  expresses
himself:  'Reckon  that  you  ore  dead  to  sin  and  living  unto  God  in  Jesus  Christ  our
Lord'  (Rom.  vi.  11).  This  language  is  but  little  conformed  to  that  of  reason.  Human
wisdom  says, '  Disengage  yourself  little  by  little  from  the  bonds  of  sin  ;  learn  gradually
to  love  God  and  live  for  him.'  But  in  such  a  way  we  should  never  break  radically
with  sin  and  we  should  never  give  ourselves  completely  unto  God.  We  dwell  in
the  dark  and  troubled  atmosphere  of  our  own  nature'  and  we  cannot  contemplate  the
full  blaze  of  the  Divine  holiness.  Faith,  on  the  contrary,  raises  us,  in  some  sort  by  a
bond,  to  the  royal  position  which  Jesus  Clirist  now  occupies  and  which  in  him  is  already
ours.  From  that  position  we'see  sin  under  our  feet;  there  we  relish  (savourons) the
life  of  God  as  our  true  essence  in  Jesus  Christ.  Beason  says, '  Become  holy  by  being  so.'
Faith  says,  'Thou  art  so;  become  it,  then.  Thou  art  so  in  Christ;  become  it  in  thine
owu  person.'  Or,  as  St.  Paul  says  to  the  Colossians  (iii.  3,  5), '  Ye  are  dead ;  mortify,
then,  your  terrestrial  members.' "    Accordingly  we  have  here —

L  The  ideal  death  to  sin.  The  only  one  in  this  world'  who  was  really  dead  to  sin
was  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  His  real  experience  is  only  our  ideal.  Of  course,
we  get  the  benefit  of  his  deadness  to  sin.  It  encircles  as  with  a  halo  all  believers.
But  for  this  very  reason  we  make  it  the  ideal  of  our  heart  and  aim  after  it.  To  be  as  dead
to  the  allurements  of  earth  as  Jesus  was  upon  the  cross,  as  the  body  cff  Jesus  was  when
in  Joseph's  tomb, — this  is  the  goal  of  our  spiritual  ambition.  Faith  bounds  across  the
chasm  which  separates  the  real  and  ideal,  and  reckons  it  as  already  ours.  Faith  is  thus
victorious  anticipation  that  the  ideal  shall  be  real  one  day.

II.  The  EEALiTY  OP  MOBTiFTiNO  CUB  MEMBERS.  (Vers.  6 — 9.)  The  Colossians  seem
to  have  been  chained  by  habits  of  gross  sin.  It  was  no  simple  matter  to  break  the
chain  and  assert  their  spiritual  freedom.  Before  death  sets  in,  when  mortification  of
the  physical  kind  is  approaching,  the  suffering  is  intense.  But  once  the  part  is
deadened,  pain  has  ceased.  This  has  its  spiritu«l  counterpart.  The  process  of  mortifi-
cation is  painful  in  the  extreme.  The  lusts  of  the  flesh,  the  lusts  of  the  mind  and
heart,  cannot  be  mortified  by  magic.  It  is  a  slow  undermining  of  the  sinful  nature,  like
the  crucifixion  of  the  body.  But  we  must  be  prepared  for  it,  and  mnnfiiliy  must  we
sit,  like  executioners,  beside  our  darling  sins  and  nail  them  to  Christ's  cross.

III.  The  Divine  wrath  against  sin  helps  us  in  our  moktikication.  (Ver.  6.)
When  we  realize  God's  attitude  towards  our  darling  sins,  that  they  are  abominable  in
his  sight,  and  that  towards  those  who  cherish  them  his  wrath  must  be  manifested,
then  we  are  determined  to  prosecute  our  mortification  work  with  the  utmost  zeaL
Those  who  throw  doubts  upon  the  Divine  anger  have  failed  to  appreciate  what  a
mighty  moral  strength  lies  within  it.

IV.  The  GLORions  oonbciousness  also  oombs  that  Christ  is  am,  and  nr  all.
(Ver.  11.)  The  old  man,  or  old  nature,  being  mortified,  the  new  man,  nr  new  nature,
which  is  in  the  Divine  image,  takes  its  place.  But  in  addition  Christ  is  realized  as
dwelling  within  and  reinforcing  our  "  better  self."  By  his  indwelling  all  the  old  distinc-
tions of  Greek  and  Jew,  circumcision  and  uncircumcision,  barbarian  and  Scythian,
bond  and  free,  are  felt  to  be  of  no  account ;  for,  if  Chriht  dwells  within  each,  he  secures
the  unity  of  alL  It  is  this  glorious  consummation  which  the  apostle  contemplated.
H(!  rejoiced  in  the  thought  of  unification  through  the  indwelling  Christ.  "  Our  mind,"
it  has'been  said,  "must  become  Christ's,  as  Christ  is  God's.  Our  very  self-consciousness,
crucirted  with  him,  must  cease  to  be  our  own.  Only  then  can  our  work,  as  being
of  God  that  worketh  in  us,  work  out  the  true  salvation,  the  deliverance  from  seif-
seeking  self."  We  may  also  refer  to  a  sermon  of  Tholn'k,  in  which  from  this  eleventh
Terse  he  treats  of  "  Christ  before  us  as  our  Pattern  j  Christ  in  us  as  uur  'L\fe ;  and  Christ

for  us  as  our  liighteousnesa.'' — B.  M.  E.

Vers.  12 — 17. — The  new  life  of  love.  We  have  turned  over  a  new  leaf,  ao  to  speak,
in  these  verses.  The  old  lile  we  liave  to  mortify  gives  jilace  to  a  new  life  of  love
which  we  have  to  develop.  Now,  the  moment  we  speak  of  love,  we  are  brought  into
relations  with  othen.    It  is  the  social  Christian  life,  thejrefore,  of  which  JPaul  hera


Olt  m.  1— 26.]        THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIAN&  Itt

speaks.     As  already  feen,  he  is  aiming  at  the  unity  of  the  Church.     Here  we  have  tha
means  by  which  it  is  secured.     Let  us  briefly  analyze  this  life  of  love.

I.  It  has  a  heart  of  compassion.  (Ver.  12,  fievised  Version.)  All  the  emotion
which  misfortune  evokes  in  the  heart  of  God  is  to  have  its  counterpart  in  the  heart  of
his  people.  "  Kindness,  humility,  meekness,  and  long-suffering  "  are  to  be  in  exercise
within  us  continually.  The  apparent  drawbacks  in  others  are  thus  transfigured  by
onr  kindly  spirit  into  helps  to  unity.

II.  It  has  a  FORQiviNaNBSs  LIKE  THAT  OP  GoD.  (Ver.  13.)  Church  members  and
those  outside  the  Church  will,  from  time  to  time,  be  guilty  of  injustice  towards  us ;
we  may  have  just  ground  of  complaint.  But  how  our  brother's  offences  dwindle  into
utter  insignificance  when  compared  with  the  offences  we  have  ourselves  committed
against  God  !  It  will  not  do  to  be  severe  on  our  debtors  after  God  has  been  so  forgiving
towards  ourselves  (Matt,  xviil.  21 — 35).  If  we  cultivate  a  God-like  forgivingness,
then  we  shall  be  promoting  constantly  the  unity  of  the  Church.

III.  Love  IS  ITS  BOND  OF  PERFBCTNESS.  (Ver.  14.)  We  need  only  study  1  Cor.  xiii
to  see  how  love  is  the  all-important  matter.  It  is  what  brings  the  whole  life  into
harmony.  For  love  expresses  the  willingness  of  the  person  to  give  himself  to  the  good
of  others.     It  is  the  principle  of  the  new  life,  without  which  it  cannot  exist.

IV.  God's  peace  RtTLEs  and  evokes  man's  obatitddb.  (Ver.  15.)  For  when  we
are  God-like  in  our  compassion,  forgiveness,  and  love,  we  find  a  peaceful  temper  laying
hold  of  us.  We  cannat  war  with  others,  but  must  follow  the  things  that  make  for
peace.  To  the  unity  of  peace  we  feel  that  God  has  called  us.  He  has  been  our  Peace-
maker and  the  Peacemaker  of  many  more,  and  so  we  dwell  in  the  unity  of  the  one
mystical  body.  And  surely  such  a  state  of  mind  and  heart  is  something  to  be  thankful
for.  A  grateful  spirit  for  our  personal  peace  and  for  the  peace  which  permeates  through
the  Church  of  God.

V.  God's  Word  is  translated  into  heartfelt  praise.  (Ver.  16.)  For  we  can
only  sustain  the  new  life  by  the  reception  of  God's  quickening  Word.  It  must  dwell
within  us  richly.  And  if  it  do,  it  will  evoke  praise  from  our  grateful  hearts.  We
will  sing  in  our  social  gatherings  one  to  another,  and  be  mutually  helpful.  The
meetings  of  the  saints  shall  be  of  a  most  joyful  character.  And  what  a  unifying
element  is  always  found  in  social  praise  I  How  it  blends  our  hearts  into  unity  as  we
praise  the  one  Lord.  The  very  harmony  of  the  music  catches  our  souls  and  blends
them  into  something  like  the  harmony  of  heaven.

VI.  All  life  becomes  sacramental,  (Ver.  17.)  There  can  be  no  idle  words  nor
random  deeds  in  the  new  life.  All  is  consecrated  to  the  Lord.  His  Name  is  our
banner,  and  under  it  all  is  done.  God  has  thus  come  and  made  "  the  common  "  clean,
and  the  life  on  earth  is  like  the  great  sheet  of  the  Apostle  Peter,  in  which  the  four-
footed  beasts  and  creeping  things  were  pure.  Into  every  nook  and  cranny  of  the  new
life  the  consecrated  spirit  is  carried.  The  meanest  matters  are  thus  lifted  into  heavenly
light,  and  God  reigns  over  all.  Thus  it  is  that  the  sacramental  element  is  carried  into
all  things,  and  we  feel  that  "  the  communion  of  the  Lord's  Supper  is  meant  to  he  a
sample  of,  and  not  an  exception  to,  our  common  days ;  and  in  the  rite  there  lies  a  mighty
power  to  make  the  whole  of  the  rest  of  life  like  itself."  Arnold  has  a  curious  sermoa
on  this  text,  in  which  he  advocates  the  consecration  in  the  making  of  "  wills."  But
this  is  only  an  illustration  of  a  universal  principle  which  God  requires  in  the  Christian
life.  There  is  to  be  no  exception  to  consecration.  In  a  grateful  spirit  w«  are  to  do
all  in  Christ's  Name.    May  it  be  our  single  ambition  ! — B.  M.  E.

Ver.  18 — ch.  iv.  1. — Christianity  remodelling  the  ancient  household.  The  unity  of  the
Church,  which  Paul  has  in  view,  is  to  have  its  counterpart  and  model  in  the  unity  of
the  Christian  household.  The  Church  is  only  an  enlarged  family.  Hence  Church
officers  are  to  serve  their  apprenticeship  in  the  matter  of  rule  in  the  family.  If  they
are  not  able  to  rule  their  own  families  well,  they  have  no  business  to  take  office  in  the
Church  of  God  (1  Tim.  iii.  2, 12).  Of  necessity,  therefore,  Christianity  takes  up  the
household  and  sanctifies  it.  The  relation  of  Christianity  to  family  life  is  most
important.  In  the  present  section  Paul  takes  up  three  relations  and  shows  how  love
is  to  regulate  them  all.

Jt  Twi  )wuq;'iONa  of  husbanps  and  wives.    (Vers.  18, 19.)    XTow,  it  i«  w«ll  kiMWi|


182  TME  EPISTLil  TO  THE  COtOSSlAlfS.       f«5tt,  m.  1-28.

that  wom«n  did  not  get  juslice  under  the  ancient  regime,  and  yet  the  apostle  oxhortg
the  wives  to  be  in  subjection  to  their  husbands,  as  is  fitting  in  the  Lord  (Revised
Version).  Christianity  has  emphasized  the  passive  virtues ;  it  glorifies  woman,  there-
fore, by  showing  to  the  world  how  glorious  a  thing  it  is  to  be  subject  and  even  to  suffer
for  love.  Apparently  this  is  to  neglect  "  women's  rights,"  but  really  it  has  secured
them.  It  is  in  woman  lovingly  filling  her  station  that  she  secures,  not  only  her  rights,
but  absolutely  her  reign.  Husbands,  again,  are  exhorted  to  give  up  all  bitterness
against  their  wives  and  to  love  them.  Elsewhere  he  ^ows  that  the  measure  of  the
husband's  love  is  to  be  the  love  of  Christ  for  his  Church ;  that  is,  a  love  which  can
be  self-sacrificing  if  need  be,  and  which  will  be  considerate  at  all  times  (Eph.
T.  22 — 33).  In  such  a  case,  how  harmonious  family  life  proves  1  The  stronger  and  the
weaker  natures  are  blended  by  love  into  one.  Each  has  its  sphere,  and  there  need  be
no  collision  amid  the  responsibilities  of  love.

II.  The  relations  of  parents  to  children.  Here,  again,  the  apostle  appeals  first
to  the  weaker  side.  He  wishes  children  to  think  how  pleasing  to  the  Father  in  heaven
obedience  is,  and,  as  he  has  put  their  parents  over  them  to  be  obeyed,  the  children
should  obey  them  in  all  things.  There  is  to  be  strict  obedience  in  all  things  to  the
natmral  authority.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fathers  are  exhorted  not  to  provoke  the
children  by  their  tyranny,  lest  the  little  ones  be  discouraged.  Paul  saw  no  such
danger  from  the  mother's  rule.  A  mother  comes  with  a  tenderness  and  sympathy
such  as  the  harder  nature  of  the  father  cannot  always  command.  This  exhortation  to
fathers  is  surely  a  great  triumph  for  the  mother.

III.  The  relations  op  masters  to  slaves.  And  here,  again,  Paul  appeals  first  to
the  slaves.  He  does  not  encourage  revolt,  but  the  conquest  which  comes  through  loving
obedience.  Let  the  slave  simply  obey  in  the  fear  and  love  of  God;  let  him  do  his
work,  not  in  a  spirit  of  eye-service  as  a  pleaser  of  men,  but  in  a  spirit  of  conscientious-
ness as  a  slave  of  Christ,  and  he  may  rest  assured  of  compensation  from  his  Master  in
due  season.  This  is  liberty — the  liberty  of  love,  even  though  he  is  still  nominally  a
slave.  It  is'this  Christian  spirit  which  hag  made  its  mark  and  won  the  sympathy  of
the  world,  and  issued  in  the  emancipation  of  the  slaves.  Although  Christianity
apparently  neglected  the  slaves,  it  has  really  been  their  deliverer.  For  what  has  it
insisted  on  among  the  masters  ?  On  justice.  Above  them  it  has  pointed  out  a  heavenly
Master,  with  whom  there  is  no  respect  of  persons,  and  who  will  do  right  by  slave  as
well  as  by  freeman,  and  give  all  their  due.  The  gospel  has  contended  for  justice  as
between  man  and  man,  and  the  world  is  gradually  coming  to  it.  This  freedom  from
respect  of  persons  which  characterizes  God  is  a  terror  at  once  to  the  evil-doing  slave
and  to  the  evil-doing  master.  If  we  could  bring  the  world  to  tliis,  men's  wrongs  would
soon  be  righted.  We  are  coming  to  it,  blessed  be  GKjd,  steadily,  The  Christianized
household  is  thus  seen  to  be  a  unity.  Husbands  and  wives  are  united  in  love's  best
bonds.  Parents  and  children  are  united  in  beautiful  authorities  and  subordinations.
And  masters  and  servants  are  united  as  subjects  and  servants  of  the  one  Master  in
heaven.  It  is  the  one  God  of  love,  who,  as  he  overshadows  all,  unifies  them  in  a  hfe
of  love,  which  is  the  greatest  witness  he  can  have  on  earth.  Let  us  see  to  it  that  the
Christian  spirit  in  all  its  beautiful  and  unifying  power  reigns  in  our  households  and
fulfil*  within  them  the  work  of  God.— B.  M.  E.

Vers.'  1 — 4. —  Our  risen  life.  "If  then  ye  were  raised  together  with  Christ."  At
this  point  the  apostle  leaves  the  polemical  and  begins  the  practical  Doctrine  again
forms  the  foundation  for  exhortation.  As  in  combating  asceticism  he  proceeded  upon
the  fact  that  we  were  sharers  with  Christ  in  his  death,  so  in  presenting  a  substitute  for
asceticism,  he  proceeds  upon  the  fact  that  we  were  sharers  with  him  in  his  resurrection.
Our  being  baptized  with  him  extended,  not  only  to  our  dying  with  him,  but  also  to  our
rising  with  him.

I.  Its  heavenward  dibeotion.  1.  In  its  connection  with  Christ.  "Seek  the
things  that  are  above,  where  Christ  is,  sented  on  the  right  hand  of  God."  It  was
when  we  were  raised  with  Christ  that  we  were  introduced  to  the  things  that  are
above.  Thei'e,  henceforth,  we  found  our  proper  sphere.  Our  being  must  now  ever,  and
increasingly,  tend  thitherward.  The  things  that  are  above  we  are  to  seek  supremely.
They  ate  the  only  things  which  are  worthy  of  being  sought  in  tk9  fullest  senw,    Qi


09.  »n.  1—25.]       THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  00L0SSIAN8.  1«S

the  heavealy  sphere  Clirist  is  the  blessed  and  glorious  Centre.  He  is,  in  a  word,  the
thiugs  tliat  are  above.  He  is  here  mentioned  with  a  local  reference.  The  time  was
when  he  was  on  earth  and  mingled  with  men.  He  was  seen  by  the  eleven  disciples
going  up  into  heaven.  He  was  seen  by  the  dying  Stephen  standing  on  the  right  hand
of  Goil.  And  we  are  to  think  of  him  as  still  stationed  ("  seated,"  it  is  here,  and  accord-
ing to  the  usual  conception)  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  To  him,  then,  must  our  being
now  and  ever  tend .  He  has  <;one  into  heaven  to  draw  onr  desires  and  affections  after
him  and  up  toward  him.  We  are  to  turn  to  him  with  our  whole  desire.  We  are  to
turn  to  him  for  all  that  we  neen.  Our  spiritual  life  cannot  be  maintaiced  without  the
things  that  are  above  in  the  shape  of  heavenly  blessings  descending  on  us,  and  we
must  turn  to  him  for  their  bestowal  (in  regal  manner,  seeing  that  he  occupies  the  seat
of  rule).  We  must  turn  to  him  with  the  whole  affection  of  our  being.  For  he  is  a
Person  (the  Manifester  of  God,  and  Author  of  our  salvation),  and  is  pronounced  "  the
altogether  lovely."  And  to  be  poweifully  drawn  toward  him  is  the  only  way  to  be
delivered  from  that  in  regard  to  which  asceticism  is  pronouncid  ineffective,  viz.  the
temptations  of  the  flesh.  Drawn  toward  him,  we  are  drawn  away  from  all  tliat  should
be  below  us,  and  we  are  drawn  up  to  the  things  which  are  high.  We  have  thus,
though  on  earth,  a  great  elevation  for  our  being.  And,  in  accordance  wiili  it,  we
should  look  high,  even  up  to  him  who  is  seated  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  2.  In  its
contrast  with  an  earthward  direction.  "  Set  your  mind  on  the  things  that  are  above,
not  on  the  things  that  are  upon  the  earth."  There  ia  a  word  employed  here  with  a
slightly  ditlerent  meaning  from  "  seek."  The  idea  is  that  we  are  to  be  so  drawn  to
the  things  that  are  above  as  that  tliey  are  to  occupy  our  thoughts.  There  is  not  only
the  sphere  of  the  things  that  are  above,  but  there  is  the  sphere  of  the  things  that  are
upon  the  earth,  to  which  also  we  are  related.  We  are  not  to  think  of  the  latter  with
a  sinful  association.  The  things  upon  the  earth  have  been  made  by  God,  and  are,
therefore,  good  in  themselves.  But  they  are  evidently  placed  in  a  certain  subordination.
They  are  things  upon  the  earth,  in  contrast  with  the  things  that  are  above.  It  is
implied  that  they  are  not  to  be  sought  supremely,  but  (if  they  would  be  sought  truly
according  to  their  nature  and  purpose)  with  a  due  subordination  and  subservience  to
the  things  that  are  above.  We  are  not  to  allow  them  to  occupy  our  thoughts.  And
the  reason  is  olivious.  They  cannot  so  fill  up  our  being  as  to  bring  about  our  perfec-
tion and  hajipiness.  De  Qnincey  thus  concludes  his  apostrophe  to  opium:  "Thou
only  givest  these  gifts  to  men  ;  and  thou  hast  the  keys  of  Paradise,  0  just,  subtle,  and
mighty  opium  I"  But  tlie  opium-eater's  Paradise  easily  changes  into  its  opposite.
There  is  a  fluctuation  connected  with  all  things  that  are  upon  the  earth.  And  we
know  that  soon  our  whole  earthly  prospect  will  dissolve.  That  is  intended  to  teach  us
this  lesson,  that  we  are  not  to  set  our  mind  on  earthly  things.  We  are  not  to  feel
toward  them  as  though  they  were  essential  to  onr  being.  But,  feeling  them  to  be
limited  in  quality  and  duration,  we  are  to  set  our  mind  on  that  which  is  unlimited  in
quality  and  duration,

II.  Its  hidden  nature,  1.  We  are  dead  to  the  outwardness  of  the  worldly  life.
"  For  ye  died."  There  is  a  hiddenness  connected  with  the  worldly  life  which  is  not  to
be  spoken  of.  "  My  soul,  come  not  thou  into  their  secret."  But  the  worldly  life  is
characteristically  a  life  in  the  outward.  It  is  a  life  within  the  sphere  of  the  five
senses.  It  is  a  life  of  communion  and  commerce  with  earthly  things.  It  is  a  life
which  has  its  roots  in  the  world.  Jt  is  a  life  the  highest  ambition  of  which  is  to
appear  well  to  the  world,  and  to  continue  to  appear  well.  Now,  as  Christians,  we  are
dead,  so  far  as  going  after  the  outward  is  concerned.  We  occupy  a  different  standpoint
altogether.  We  are  dead  where  men  of  the  world  are  alive.  And  the  course  we  have
to  take,  in  obedience  to  Christ,  may  even  bring  us  into  coljision  with  the  world.  2.
It  is  a  life  hidden  with  Christ  in  Ood.  "  And  your  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."
(1)  It  is  hidden  from  the  world.  We  are  in  a  position  to  comprehend  the  worldly
life  from  our  experience  of  what  sin  is.  But  the  Christian  life  is  lieyond  the  compre-
hen>ion  of  men  of  the  world,  for  they  huve  had  no  experience  of  it.  They  have  no
alLuities  to  it,  and,  therefore,  it  is  an  enigma  to  them,  as  nature  and  art  are  to  those
who  have  no  api)reciatiuii  of  the  beautiful.  'I'h'v  see  the  manifestations  of  the  (Jhristian
life,  but  they  cannot  appreciate  the  motives  by  which  we  are  actuated,  the  principles
by  which  w«  are  guided.    (2)  It  it  partly  hidden  from  ourselves.    Thew  ii  a  mystery


184  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa         t™.  m.  1—28.

—  p— ^  >

in  all  life.  We  cut  into  a  plant  to  find  what  life  is,  but  it  eludes  the  finest  perception.
Clirisiians,  then,  cannot  be  expected  to  understand  the  mystery  of  the  life  of  God  in
the  snnl.  And,  apart  from  that,  we  can  only  imperfectly  understand  out  experiences.
Our  life  goes  forward  according  to  the  thought  and  working  of  One  unseen.  (3)  It  is
a  life  of  hidden  fillowship  with  Christ.  It  commenced  in  that  region  of  the  soul  which
is  penetrated  only  by  our  own  eye  and  by  the  eye  of  God.  There  with  Christ  we
dedicated  ourselves  to  him.  There  we  have  fellowship  with  Christ,  in  our  jtns,
even  in  our  earthly  joys.  There  we  have  fellowship  witli  Christ  in  our  sorrows,  evea
our  sorrows  of  repentance  and  painful  struggles  after  virtue.  And  there  he  is  with  ua
to  encourage  us  in  all  the  efforts  we  put  forth  for  the  advancement  of  his  cause.  (4)
It  is  hidden  in  Ood.  The  worldly  life  has  its  roots  in  the  world.  The  life  which
consists  in  fellnwsliip  with  Christ  is  hidden  because  it  is  lived  in  God.  He  is  essentially
hidden — the  invisible  God ;  he  is  called  in  this  Epistle,  elsewhere,  a  God  tliat  hideth
himself.  Uur  life,  then,  has  its  roots  hidden  in  him,  in  his  eternal  purpose  and
inexhaustible  goodness.

III.  Its  I'UTnBE  MANiFESTATiow.  "  When  Christ,  who  is  our  Life,  shall  be  manifested,
then  shall  ye  also  with  him  be  manifested  in  glory."  The  Christian  life  is  to  be
manifested  to  men.  We  are  to  make  our  light  so  sliine  before  men  that  others,  seeing
our  good  works,  may  glorify  our  Father  which  is  in  lieaven.  But  the  manifestation
referred  to  here  is  that  to  which  we  are  to  look  forward  as  the  crown  of  our  being.  1.
It  results  from  our  relation  to  Christ.  Our  life  is  not  only  with  him,  but  he  is  mir
Life.  He  is  the  life  of  our  life.  The  essential  thing  in  the  relation  here  is  that,  thus
living  within  us,  he  gives  type  and  form  to  our  life.  2.  It  results  from  his  manifestution.
There  is  a  mnnil'estation  yet  before  him.  "When  Christ  .  .  .  shall  be  manifested."
It  is  implied  that  at  present  he  is  in  a  condition  of  concealment.  He  is  concealed  from
the  world.  Many  think  that  he  and  his  cause  arc  under  a  cloud.  He  is,  to  a  certain
extent,  manifested  in  heaven ;  but  he  is  not  manifested  in  the  full  meaning  of  his  work,
in  his  full  fjlory  as  Saviour.  His  manifestation  will  be  our  manifestation.  Wo  shall  I)e
completely  vinrlicated  before  men.  It  will  be  made  completely  manifest  that  we  are
sons  of  Gud  and  friends  of  Christ.  Christ  within  us  will  work  out  till  we  are  made
gloriaus  in  body  and  in  soul  with  his  glory. — E.  F.

Vers.  5 — 11. — Dying  before  rising.  There  is  an  alternating  between  dying  and
rising.  Having  carried  out  the  idea  of  rising,  the  apostle  goes  back  to  the  idea  of
d\  ing  ;  and,  before  this  panigraph  is  concluded,  he  goes  back  to  the  idea  of  rising.

L  MoRTiFTiNQ  OF  ouE  MEMBEKS  WITH  REFERENCE  TO  TWO  SINS.  "  Mortify  therefore
your  members  which  are  upon  the  earth."  It  is  not  a  groumt  of  condemnation  that
our  members  are  upon  the  earth.  The  idea  is  simply  the  members  throuu;h  which  we
hold  coriespondence  with  earth.  Of  these  members,  collectively,  the  apostle  says,  "  I
beseech  you  therefore,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God,  to  present  your  bodies  a  living
sacrifice."  Our  members  may  be  instruments  of  righteousness  or  instruments  of
unrighteousness.  We  are  to  mortify  them  by  refusing  to  use  them  as  instruments  of
unrighteousness.  1.  Sensuality.  "  Fornication,  uncleanness,  passion,  evil  desire."
There  are  four  words  used  to  describe  this  sin.  The  first  describes  a  special  form  of
uncleanness.  The  second  is  wider,  and  includes  all  forms  of  uncleanness.  The  third
is  wider  still,  and  describes  such  heated  desire  as  may  lead  to  uncleanness.  The  fourth
is  widest  of  all,  and  includes  all  such  desire  as  implies  want  of  purity  of  feeling.  2.
Covttousness.  "  And  covetousness,  the  which  is  idolatry."  The  article  being  used  with
"  covetousness  "  (nut  with  the  other  four  words)  indicates  the  introduction  of  a  new
class.  These  four  form  one  class ;  and  this  fifth  is  a  class  by  itself.  The  fact  that  it  is
associated  (as  in  E|hesians)  with  forms  cf  sensuality  marks  the  sense  which  the
a[)Ostle  had  of  its  evil  character.  There  is  not  here  the  thought  that  it  is  to  be  among
the  thiuis  which  are  not  to  be  named.  But  there  is  the  thoujiht,  which  follows  in
Epliesians,  that  cov  tousness  is  idolatry ;  that  is  to  say,  idolatry  by  pre-eminence.  Scnsu-  -
ility  is  also  idolatiy.  It  is  making  an  i'lol  of  self  in  the  form  of  lower  and  njomentary
enjoyment.  Covetousness  has  a  certain  aspect  of  unselfishness.  It  is  a  giving  up  of
present  enjoyment ;  it  is  a  giving  up  even  of  future  enjoyment.  But  when  unveiled
it  is  really  a  njor^e  systematic  form  of  selfishness.  It  is  making  an  idol  of  self,  not  in
'he  foru  of  future  enjoyment,  but  (whieh  is  no  better)  in  the  form  of  the  means  o(


m.  m.l— 25.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSlANS.  186

future  enjoymei)t.  And  experience  shows  that  the  one  idol  is  less  readily  dethroned
ihan  the  other.  Tlie  next  thought  (wlilch  also  follows  in  Ephesians)  »'■.  that  foi'  these
sins  Ood  deals  wi'h  men.  "For  which  things'  sake  cometh  the  wrath  of  G-i;d  upon
the  sons  of  disobedience."  They  disobey,  for  the  first  commandment  is  "  Tliou
shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me."  They  transgress  the  laws  of  the  body ;  they
transgress  also  the  laws  of  the  spiritual  nature.  They  not  only  disobey,  but  they
persist  in  courses  of  disobedience.  They  are  the  sons  of  disobedience.  They  are  as
though  they  had  disobedience  as  their  father ;  so  vile  is  their  parentage.  They  refuse
the  gospel,  by  which  they  could  be  delivered  from  their  evil  courses.  And  therefore
it  is  that  the  wrath  of  God  cometh  upon  them.  It  cometh  upon  them  indpiently  now.
It  cometh  upon  tliem  in  the  shape  of  a  materializing  of  the  spirit.  It  cometh  upon
them  in  the  shape  of  inward  dispeace.  It  cometh  upon  them  in  the  shape  of  dis-
turlance  from  without  (bodily  malady,  loss  of  estate,  loss  of  respect,  complications).
G.id  has  many  ways  of  showing  his  displeasure  against  men  for  these  sins  even  now,
and  his  displeasure  will  yet  be  more  decidedly  manifested.  The  next  thou/ht  (which
also  follows,  though  not  under  the  same  figure,  in  Ephesians)  is  that  they  were  to
remember  their  former  participation  in  these  sins.  "  In  the  which  ye  also  walked
aforetime,  when  ye  lived  in  these  things."  In  heathenism  they  lived  in  an  atmosphere
which  was  pollution.  And  then  they  participated  m  the.se  sins.  If  in  this  fact  there
was  danger  of  their  being  decoyed  back  to  their  former  ways  under  false  representations,
on  the  other  hand  there  was  strength  to  be  got  from  realizing  how  much  they  had
benefited  by  the  change  from  heathenism  to  Christianity.  In  their  present  joys  and
habits  (for  which  they  were  indebted  to  Christ)  they  had  wherewith  to  oppose  tempta-
tions from  their  past.

II.  These  and  other  sins  to  be  put  away.  "  But  now  put  ye  also  [as  well  as
others  rescued  from  heathenism]  away  all  thesp."  There  seems  to  be  a  retrospective
as  well  as  a  prospective  reference  in  the  injunction.  The  other  sins  are  in  two  classes.
1.  Sins  of  temper.  "  Anger,  wrath,  malice."  The  first  describes  a  more  settled,  the
second  a  more  eruptive,  stute  of  our  feeling  against  others.  They  are  to  be  condemned
(1)  when  they  are  accompanied  with  want  of  self-possession;  (2)  when  they  are
accompanied  with  want  of  reasonable  ground ;  (3)  when  they  are  accom|janied  with
malice  or  anything  like  delight  in  the  evil  condition  of  others.  When  these  elements
are  wanting,  they  are  not  to  he  condemneil,  but  need  to  be  carefully  watched.  2.
Sins  of  speech.  "Bailing,  shameful  speaking  out  of  your  mouth."  Railing  is  speaking
abusively  (it  may  not  be  clamorously)  against  others.  This  is  to  be  condemned  when
it  is  accompanied  with  foulness  of  speech  (shameful  speaking).  The  mouth  should  not
be  prostituted  to  such  uses.  "  Lie  not  one  to  another."  We  are  not  even  to  lie  to
ourselves.  We  are  not  to  make  ourselves  believe  that  we  are  other  (even  worse)  than
we  really  are.  We  are  not  to  see  things  other  than  they  rtally  are.  We  are  not  to
lie  to  others.  We  are  not  to  make  it  appear  to  them  that  we  are  other  than  we  really
are.  We  are  not  to  make  them  out  to  be  other  (even  better)  than  they  really  are.  We
are  not  to  state  things  to  be  other  than  they  really  are.  We  are  to  put  away  all  false-
hood from  our  intercourse  with  others.  Eeason  given  for  pu' ting  away  the  last  and  all
the  sins  that  have  been  named.  "  Seeing  that  ye  have  put  off  the  old  man  with  his
doings."  Our  old  condition  is  personified  as  "  the  old  man."  His  doings  have  been
pointed  to.  In  baptism  we  put  off  the  old  man  >with  his  doings.  We  must  not  be  as
though  unregenerate.  We  must  have  nothing  to  do  with  practices  the  time  of  which
is  past.

III.  The  pottino  os  in  thk  new  iifb,  "  And  have  put  on  the  new  man."  Ouv
recent  condition  is  personified  as  "the  new  man."  There  is  a  prefacing  with  tuio
important  statements.  1.  There  is  a  distinctly  defined  renewd  constantly  going  on.
"  Which  is  being  renewed  untp  knowledge  after  the  image  of  him  that  created  him."
It  may  be  said  that  Christ  perfected  thu  new  condition  for  us.  As  appropriated  by  us,
it  is  in  the  way  of  a  constant  renewal  of  our  life.  As  in  a  tree,  so  with  us,  with
repeated  endeavours  ther«  ever  results  fresh  accession  of  life.  The  end  of  the  renewal
is  here  said  to  be  knowledge.  The  false  teachers  claimed  wisdom,  claimed  by  their
philosophy  to  give  the  power  to  know.  The  apostle  shows  how  knowledge  was  to  be
come  to.  He  thinks  of  it  as  the  terminus  of  a  loug  process  of  renewal.  It  is  the  word
which  means  thorough  knowleilge,i,c  of  God  and  redemptioa    There  is  thus  accordance


ISe  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN3.         [en.  m.  1— 28.

wit>i  the  preat  statement,  "And  this  is  life  eternal,  that  they  »hould  know  ihee  th«
oiiK  true  Gud,  and  him  whom  thoii  did<t  send,  even  Jesus  Christ."  There  la  imthing
fureign  to  our  nature  in  this  renewaL  God  made  us  in  his  own  image.  Me  desi4aed
•  renewal  to  go  forward  in  us  according  to  a  God-like  type.  He  designed  ia  our
renewal  that  we  should  come  to  the  thorou°;h  knowledge  of  himself.  And  this  is  what
redemption  effects  for  us.  2.  In  respect  of  this  reneioal  eartKly  distinctions  are  of  no
importance.  "  Where  there  cannot  be  Greek  and  Jew,  circumcision  and  uncircum-
cision,  barbarian,  Scythian,  bondman,  freeman  :  but  Christ  is  all,  and  in  all."  Thcie
is  a  parallel  passage  in  Gal.  iii.  28.  The  first  distinction  there  ("neither  Jew  nor
Greek")  may  be  said  to  cover  the  first  three  distinctions  here.  Distinction  is  denied  as
to  nationality  ("  Greek  and  Jew").  Distinction  is  denied  as  to  religious  position  ("circum-
cision, and  uncircumcision ").  Distinction  is  denied  as  to  culture;  and  here  the  apostle
does  not  take  the  extremes  of  culture;  but  more  strikingly  takes  those  who  to  the
cultured  Greeks  were  harharians,  and  to  them  opposes  the  Scythians  who  were  baibariuns
to  the  barbarians.  Distinction  is  denied  as  to  social  status  ("  bondman,  freeman  "),  which
distinction  had  significance  in  the  early  Christian  Churches,  from  the  number  of  slaves
coimected  with  them,  and  had  special  significance  in  the  L'olossian  Church,  from  the
convtrsion  of  a  Colossian  slave  still  with  the  apostle  at  Rome.  There  is  not,  and
cannot  6e,  any  of  these  distinctions.  InGalatians  the  apostle  teaches  that  there  are
no  distinctions  on  the  ground  of  our  sonship  in  Christ.  Here  he  teaches  that  there  are
no  distinctions  (in  keeping  with  the  thought  of  the  pre-eminence  of  Christ)  on  the
ground  of  Christ  being  M  and  in  all  in  the  great  renewal.  (1)  Christ  is  all  in  the
renewtd.  The  great  need  of  our  nature  is  to  be  renewed,  and  Christ  fully  meets  that
need.  He  gives  the  whole  contents  and  form  to  our  renewal.  United  to  Christ  by
laith,  we  become  receptacles  of  Christ.  The  pleroma  dwells  in  him,  and  that  plcroma
floods  our  being  with  light,  with  strength,  with  purity,  with  all  things.  Renewed'only
from  Christ,  our  life  manifests  itself  only  in  Christian  forms.  (2)  Christ  is  all  in  all
the  renewed.  Men  were  broken  up  into  classes,,  castes.  The  Jew  drew  back  from  the
undrcumcised ;  the  Greek  despised  the  barbarian ;  the  liarbarian  despised  the  Soy tliian  ;
the  freeman  despised  the  bondman.  The  apostle  points  to  the  fact  that  the  great
renewal  takes  place  in  all  alike.  Alike  in  being  created  in  the  image  of  God,  they  are
also  alike  in  the  renewal' that  takes  place  on  that  ground  and  according  to  that  fact.
The  poor  Scythian  can  be  filled  full  and  beautified  in  the  possession  of  Christ  as  well
as  the  Greek,  the  bondman  as  well  as  the  freeman.  In  view  of  this  essential  ideniity,
all  these  earthly  distinctions  become  of  no  account. — B.  F.

Vers.  12 — 17. —  What  particularly  we  are  to  put  on.  Ebw  we  are  addressed.  "Put
on  therefore,  as  God's  elect,  holy  and  beloved."  The  Colossiim  Christians  had  been
elected  by  God  out  of  a  state  of  heathenism.  By  arrangements  over  which  they  had
exercised  no  control,  the  gospel  had  been  brought  to  them  and  had  been  the  means  of
their  conversion.  As  elected  by  God,  they  were  consecrated  to  God  and  were  in  the
enjoyment  of  the  Divine  love.  The  Colossian  Christians  were  not  exceptional.  We
have  been  elected  by  God  out  of  the  ungodly  state  of  our  own  hearts  and  out  of  the
ungodly  influences  that  more  or  less  prevail  in  a  semi-Christian  state  of  society.  Thus
brought  into  a  trne  Christian  state,  and  in  that  state  devote i  to  God,  and  the  recipients
of  many  tokens  of  the  Divine  favour,  it  becomes  us  to  feel  the  force  of  it  in  reference  to
our  duty.

L  The  Chmstian  forms  of  lovb.  The  concluding  representation  is  that  all  are
Dound  together  by  love.  1.  "A  heart  of  compaasion."  In  the  original  there  is
indicated  the  supposed  seat  of  the  sympathetic  feelings.  In  heathenism  it  was  rather
a  heart  of  cruelty  that  was  worn.  The  weak  were  down-trodden  and  neglected.  Tne
softening  influence  of  Christianity  appears  in  our  hospitals  and  asylums,  in  our
abhorrence  of  oppression,  in  the  missionary  enterprise.  There  is  a  fine  Bensihility  to
the  miseries  of  others  in  those  who  have  felt  the  Divine  compassions  toward  them,
Especially  are  we  to  feel  the  sorrows  of  our  lellow-Chrisiians.  2.  " Kindness"  We
may  show  kindness  where  tlie'e  is  nothing  to  draw  forth  compassion.  Under  all
circumstances  are  we  to  be  king.  There  is  nothing  which  we  can  wear  outwardly  to
be  compared  with  kindness.  "  Kind  hearts  are  more  than  coronets."  Kindness  is  the
dispositioa  to  think  about  others.    It  adds  greatly  to  the  joy  of  their  existence  to  let


OT.ntl-25j        THE  EflSTLE  TO  THE  COLOSStANS.  tM

them  see  (even  in  little  ways)  that  we  are  not  forgetting  them,  but  are  giving  them  a
place  in  our  thoughts.  As  God's  holy  and  beloved,  we  are  to  be  the  vnhioles  of  the
Divine  thoughtfulness,  3.  "  Eumility."  As  a  Christian  grace,  humility  is  founded
upon  the  fact  of  our  having  humbled  ourselves  before  God  as  sinners.  As  a  form  of
love,  it  is  the  disposition  which  forbids  us  to  exalt  ourselves  over  others.  It  is  a  form
of  selfishness  simply  to  wish  to  give  others  a  sense  of  our  impoitance  and  of  their
unimportance.  Hather  does  love  impel  us  to  sink  our  own  importance  and  to  prefer
them.  4.  "  Meekness."  This  is  founded  on  the  fact  of  God  being  the  First  Cause  of
the  provocation  received  from  others.  As  a  form  of  love,  it  is  the  disposition  which
prompts  us  to  endure  rather  than  retaliate  on  those  who  have  wronged  us.  5.  "  Long-
suffering."  This  is  founded  on  the  fact  of  God  having  suifered  long  and  much  with  us.
As  a  form  of  love,  it  is  the  disposition  which  forbids  us  to  weary  of  the  good  of  others.
It  is  enduring  in  hope.  6.  "  Forbearing  one  another."  Forbearance  seems  to  be  the
practical  exhibition  of  the  last  disposition.  It  is  implied  that  we  all  need  to  have  for-
bearance exercised  toward  us,  as  well  as  to  exercise  forbearance  ourselves.  1.  "And  for-
giving each  other,  if  any  man  have  a  complaint  against  any"  It  is  here  "  each  other,"
with  a  look  foi  ward  to  the  thought  of  our  being  all  first  forgiven  by  Christ.  Just
cause  of  complaint  has  already  been  supposed.  How  are  we,  as  just  complainants
against  a  brother,  to  act?  We  are  not  merely  to  endure  and  to  endure  for  his  good,  but
we  are  to  advance  to  positive  forgiveness.  That  is  to  say,  in  love  we  are  to  remove
the  complaint,  so  that  it  is  as  though  it  had  never  been.  The  highest  example  of  for-
giveness. "Even  as  the  Lord  forgave  you,  so  also  do  ye."  The  Lord  had  just  complaiut
against  us ;  who  shall  estimate  what  it  was  ?  But  he  carried  out  a  work  for  us  the
purport  of  which  was  the  removal  of  the  complaint.  That  we  have  appropriated,  and
now  we  are  in  the  position  of  those  from  whom  complaint  has  been  removed.  Porgive-
neaa  is  usually  associated  with  God,  but  in  this  Epistle,  in  which  prominence  is  given
to  the  Person  of  Christ,  it  is  associated  with  him.  The  fact  of  Christ  being  called  here
"  the  Lord  "  points  to  the  fact  that,  as  his  servants,  we  are  bound  by  his  example.  If
the  Lord  has  so  acted,  servants  must  not  nurse  their  wrath.  The  seven  graces  hound
together  hy  love.  "  And  above  all  these  things  put  on  love,  which  is  the  bond  of  per-
feotness."  There  is  the  perfect  number,  and  they  are  bound  in  the  bond  of  perfeotness.
Love  is  thought  of  as  the  girdle  which  binds  the  garments  which  have  been  put  <in
We  have  seen  its  presence  in  all  the  seven.  They  are  simply  love  in  seven  different
relaticns.    There  is  thus  no  looseness  about  them,  but  they  constitute  a  perfect  whole.

II.  The  Christian  form  op  concoed.  "And  let  the  peace  of  Christ  rule  in  your
hearts,  to  the  which  also  ye  were  called  in  one  body."  The  peace  which  is  the
principle  of  concord  is  distinctively  the  peace  of  Christ.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  the  peace
which  Christ  possessed  and  which  he  left  as  a  legacy  to  his  disciples.  He  possessed  a
holy  feeling  of  tranquillity  in  view  of  death  and  under  the  wrongs  which  were  heaped
upon  him,  in  the  enjoyment  of  his  Father's  love  and  in  the  conscious  and  complete
carrying  out  of  his  Father's  purposes  of  love  toward  men.  And  this  holy  feeling  of
tranquility  it  is  intended  that  we  too  should  have,  in  all  drcumstances  (in  our  case
based  on  the  atonement),  in  the  enjoyment  of  our  Father's  love  and  in  the  conscious
endeavour  to  carry  out  his  purposes  of  love.  The  peace  of  Christ  is  to  rtile  in  our
hearts.  In  the  margin  it  is  "  arbitrate."  And  some  have  thought  the  meaning  to  be
that,  between  contending  feelings,  the  peace  of  Christ  is  to  act  as  umpire.  But  the
meaning  seems  simply  to  be  that  it  is  to  rule  so  as  to  put  down  all  disquieting  feeling,
and  so  that  we  have  it  toward  God  and  toward  all  around  us.  The  one  body  is  here
thought  of  as  a  society  in  which  all  are  called  to  a  holy  feeling  of  satisfaction.  It  is,
therefore,  a  society  in  which  concord  (out  of  a  Christian  ground)  reigns.  "  And  be  ya
thankful."  This  is  the  recurrence  of  what  has  been  noticed  as  a  subordinate  feature  in
the  Epistle.     What  we  are  to  he  thankful  for  is  the  tranquility  which  makes  concord.

III.  The  Christian  forms  of  relioiotts  exercise.  1.  The  reception  of  the  Word.
"  Let  the  Word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly  in  all  wisdom."  The  Word  also  is  dis-
tinctively the  Word  of  Christ.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  the  Word  which  Christ  spake  and
which  he  caused  to  be  proclaimed.  It  may  be  taken  as  including  inspired  additions.
There  is  a  great  richness  in  the  Word  of  Christ.  It  contains  all  the  thoughts  that  are
needed  to  give  us  peace,  guidance,  strengthening,  heartening,  under  earthly  conditions.
We  we  to  receive  it  to  be  our  permment  possession.   We  are  to  receive  it,  not  acantily,


188  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.         [oh.  m.  1—25


but  in  all  its  richness.  We  are  to  receive  it  in  all  vnsdom,  that  is,  in  all  wise  appre-
hension (if  its  meaning,  and  not  In  the  way  of  false  interpretation.  2.  Christian  song.
In  Epbesi  ins  this  is  introduced  as  a  countc  ractive  of  false  excitement,  as  one  of  tha
manifestations  of  a  true  excitement  of  the  Spirit.  Here  it  is  introduced  as  the  result  of
the  indwelling  of  the  Word  of  Christ.  It  was  out  of  no  cold  heart,  but  out  of  a  heart
of  summer  gladness,  that  the  Word  of  Christ  came,  and,  received  into  vis,  it  wells  up
in  all  jiiyful  feelings  which  And  expression  in  song.  (1)  Responsive  song.  "  Teaching
and  admonishing  one  another  wiih  psalms  and  hymns  and  spiritual  songs."  Tht
historic  psalms  and  other  compositions  used  in  the  service  of  praise  which  are  called
hymns,  fall  under  the  head  of  "spiritual  songs."  In  Ephesians  the  idea  of  responsivenesa
was  brought  out  in  the  words  "  speaking  one  to  another."  Here  It  is  said  more  definitely
"  teaching  and  admonishing  one  another."  The  principal  purpose  of  song  Is  to  enliven.
But  the  apostle  here  teaches,  that  it  is  not  aside  from  its  principal  purpose  to  teach  and
admonish.  And  this  subsidiary  didactic,  monitory  purpose  it  is  fitted  to  serve  from
its  being  the  outcome  of  the  Word  of  Christ.  (2)  Silent  song.  "  Singing  with  grace  i£i
your  hearts  unto  God."  This  singing  is  only  in  the  ear  of  God.  Our  other  exercises
are  heard  by  God  too.  For  it  is  said,  "  Then  they  that  feared  the  Lord  spake  often
one  to  another:  and  the  Lord  hearkened,  and  heard  it."  But  this  is  for  self-eilificatiou,
with  God  as  the  only  listener.  It  is  singing  with  grace,  not  with  gracefulness,  but  with
the  grace  that  preserves  from  vanity,  from  extravagance,  and  enriches  with  all  Christian
elements.

IV.  The  Christian  form  of  speakino  ajto  acting.  "  And  whatsoever  ye  do,  in
word  or  in  deed,  do  all  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  This,  like  the  others,  is
associated  with  Christ.  His  being  called  "Jesus"  points  to  his  having  been  a  speaker
and  duer  in  human  nature  himself.  Tlie  meaning  is,  not  that  we  are  formally  to  invoke
the  Name  of  Christ  in  connection  with  our  speaking  and  doing.  But  they  are  to  be
according  to  the  rules  laid  down  by  Christ  and  as  unto  Christ.  They  will  thus  be
redeemed  from  all  mere  naturalness  and  all  sinful  elements  that  mix  with  them,  and
will  have  a  richness  as  from  the  Word  of  Christ.  "  Giving  thanks  to  God  the  Father
through  him."  This  is  again  the  refrain  of  the  Epistle,  with  a  certain  prominence.
Our  thanksgivings  are  to  be  unto  the  Father.  We  are  to  give  thanks  through  Christ
as  Mediator.  It  is  only  through  him  that  we  have  leave  to  thank  God.  It  is  only
through  him  that  we  have  anything  to  thank  God  for.  It  is  through  him  that  all  the
blessings  of  salvation  come  to  us ;  and  so  it  is  through  him  that  we  a  to  thank  Gud
for  them.— R.  F.

Ver.  18 — ch.  iv.  1. — Relative  duties.  The  two  considerations  on  which  the  apostle's
treatment  of  the  relative  duties  here  seems  to  be  bused  are  these :  1.  The  position  of
authority  is  also  relativdy,  by  Divine  constitution,  the  stronger  position.  2.  Christ  is
to  be  regarded  as  represented  in  the  position  of  authority.  Throughout  the  paragraph
he  is  designated  in  respect  of  his  authority.  That  there  may  be  no  doubt  about  the
reference,  it  is  expressly  stated,  in  the  twenty-fourth  verse,  that  Christ  is  Lord.

I.  Wives  and  husbands.  1,  Wives.  "  Wives,  be  in  subjection  to  your  husbands,
as  is  fitting  in  the  Lord."  The  wife  has  the  weaker  position.  "  The  weaker  vessel"  is
the  language  used  by  Peter.  She  is  more  delicately  constituted,  and  is  not  so  fitted  to
fight  her  way  in  the  world.  She  is  made  to  lean  upon  her  husband,  and  therefore  it  is
fitting  that  in  her  duty  she  should  fall  into  a  certain  subordination  to  him.  This  is
not  only  fitting  in  itself,  but  it  is  fitting  in  the  Lord.  That  is  to  say,  it  is  Christ  who
is  over  her  in  her  husband.  If,  then,  she  is  a  Christian  wife,  she  has  more  than  her
husband  to  regard  in  the  relation.  She  will  be  willing  to  be  directed  by  Christ  in  her
husband.  2.  Husbands.  "  Husbands,  love  your  wives,  and  be  not  bitter  against  them."
The  husl  and  ("  band  of  the  house  ")  has  the  stronger  position.  He  is  more  robustly
constituted.  He  has  a  bolder  judgment.  And  so  the  controlling  power  has  been  placed
in  him.  But  that  does  not  point  to  his  using  it  for  selfish  ends.  Christ,  as  the  Head  o}
the  Church,  as  is  brought  out  in  Ephesians,  used  his  position  only  to  love  the  Church
and  to  give  himself  up  for  its  deliverance.  So  it  is  the  duty  of  the  husband,  as  the
representntive  of  Christ  in  the  relation,  to  love  his  wife  and  to  protect  her  weakness
with  his  strength.  He  is  not  to  be.a  despot,  putting  bitterness  into  his  strength  againat
his  wife  J — ^that  would  be  utterly  inconsisteut  with  acting  ia  the  Name  of  Christ,


OH.  m.  1—25.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa  18ft

n.  Children  akd  pawsnts.  1.  Children.  "Children,  obey  your  parents  in  all
things,  for  this  is  well-pleasing  in  the  Lord."  Children  are  at  first  utterly  helpless.
And  lor  a  long  time  they  are  dependent  on  their  parents.  Especially,  in  their  inex-
perience, are  they  dependent  on  the  experieuce  of  their  parents.  That  points  to  their
being  obedient  to  their  parents.  The  principle  is,  as  stated  here,  obedience  in  aJl  things,
there  being  no  exception  to  it  in  the  mere  pleasure  of  the  child.  In  Ephesians  the  rule
is  grounded  on  its  being  right.  The  rule  for  the  wife,  we  have  seen,  is  grounded  on  its
hdng  fitting.  The  rule  for  children  here  is  grounded  on  its  being  well-pleasing.  That
is  to  say,  it  is  a  beautiful  thing  to  see  children  subjcciing  their  impulses,  their  wishes,
theii  plans,  to  the  better  jud^^ment,  riper  experience,  of  their  parents.  It  is  a  beautiful
thlL^  to  see  them  rendering  prompt  and  universal  obedience.  This  is  not  only  beautiful
in  itself,  but  it  is  beautiful  in  the  Lord.  That  supposes  that  they  have  given  them-
selves to  the  Lord.  In  that  case  they  will  regard  their  parents  as  given  them  hy  tha
Lord.  And  not  only  so,  but  they  will  regard  them  as  in  the  place  of  the  Lord  to  them.
It  is  pre-eminently  a  beautiful  thing  when  children  learn  to  reverence  and  obey  their
parents,  not  simply  as  their  parents,  but  as  placed  over  them  by  Christ.  2.  Parents.
"Fathers,  provoke  not  your  children,  that  they  be  not  discourafjed."  Parents  (for  we
are  to  think  of  the  whole  ruling  power  relative  to  the  children)  have  the  stronger
position.  There  is  great  disparity  at  first  for  purposes  of  rule.  But  they  are  not  to
use  their  position  io  provoke  their  children.  That  is  the  coarse  way  of  ruling.  The  rod,
though  necessary  at  times,  is  not  to  be  the  substitute  for  reason.  It  is  also  generally
the  selfish  way.  Parents  cannot  take  pains  with  their  children.  They  cannot  bear
with  their  dulness.  They  have  not  the  patience  to  deal  with  their  selt-will  so  as  to
have  it  overcome.  They  cannot  bear  to  have  their  liberty  curtailed,  their  comfort  dis-
turbed, by  their  children.  And  so  they  passionately,  tyrannically,  carry  out  their
pleasure  on  their  children.  That  is  not  only  to  be  condemned  in  itself,  but  it  is  espe-
cially to  be  condemned  in  those  who  should  regard  themselves  as  the  representatives  of
Christ  to  their  children.  Christ  does  not  act  harshly  to  men.  He  does  not  act  harshly
to  them.  And  therefore  they  should  not  act  harshly  to  their  children.  The  effects  are,
as  might  be  expected,  bad.  The  children  are  discouraged.  Youth  is  the  time  of  hope-
fulness. With  the  wakening  of  the  powers  hopes  spring  forth.  And  parents  have
carefully  to  watch  over  the  calling  forth  of  the  powers  of  their  children.  It  is  all-
important  that  these  be  directed  in  a  Christian  way.  But  children  are  easily  discouraged.
They  lose  heart  before  the  difSculties  connected  with  following  out  useful  and  Christian
aims.  And  they  need  to  have  many  words  of  encouragement  spoken  to  them.  They
need  to  be  shown  what  they  can  do.  But  to  give  them  no  encourageujent,  to  treat
them  as  though  they  were  incapable  of  anything  gieat,  to  heap  reproaches  on  them,  to
punish  them  harshly,  is  to  crush  the  life  out  of  them.  The  breaking  of  the  spirit  is
said  to  be  the  bane  of  youth.

III.  Sebvants  and  masters.  1.  Servants.  (1)  Side.  "Servants,  obey  in  all
things  them  that  are  your  masters  according  to  the  flesh."  The  slave  was  entirely  at
the  mercy  of  his  master.  God  never  intended  any  one  to  be  in  that  position.  The
servant  with  whom  we  have  now  to  do  occupies  a  very  different  position — still,  however,
the  weaker  position  in  the  relation.  And  as  for  children,  so  for  servants,  the  rule  is
obedience  in  all  things.  That  is  to  say,  within  the  proper  sphere  of  work  there  is  no
exception  founded  on  the  mere  pleasure  of  the  servant.  When  it  is  said  that  obedience
is  to  be  rendered  to  them  that  are  masters  according  to  the  flesh,  there  is  a  sugges-
tion, though  yet  imly  a  suggestion,  of  a  relation  to  a  hi^htr  Master.  (2)  Frinciple.
"  Not  with  eye-aervice  as  men-pleasers,  but  in  singleness  of  heart,  fearing  the  Lord."
The  principle  is  not  men-pleasing,  or  regard  simply  lor  the  human  master.  That  is  not
fitted  to  be  a  principle,  for  it  proceeds  on  a  variable  element.  It  requires  no  more  than
eye-service,  or  as  it  is  here  (as  distinguished  from  Epliesians),  acts  of  eye-service.  The
eye  of  the  master  cannot  always  be  on  the  servant.  If,  then,  the  seri  ant  is  regulated
by  the  eye  of  the  master,  his  work  must  vary  accordin;^ly,  being  sometimes  well  done,
sometimes  ill  dune,  and  sometimes  not  done  at  all.  The  principle  is  fearing  the  Lord,
or  regard  i'V  the  Divine  Master.  We  are  not  to  undeistund  regard  for  the  authority  of
Christ  in  general,  but  regard  for  the  authority  of  Christ  as  represented  in  the  master,
even  in  the  slave-master.  This  is  fitted  to  be  law  universal.  For  the  eye  of  Christ,
being  all-seeing,  is  always  on  the  servai^t.     There  is  thus  excluded  duplicity ;  there  j#


190  THE  EHSTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.         [oH.m.  1— 2S.

required  singleness  of  service,  or  the  eye  always  on  Christ  in  the  work  done.  (3)
Quality.  "  Whatsoever  ye  do,  work  heartily,  as  unto  the  Lord,  and  not  unto  men."  H
the  slave  looked  away  to  the  Lord  beyond  his  master,  then,  whatsoever  he  did,  whether
it  was  work  great  or  small,  oppressive  or  not  oppressive,  he  could  do  it,  not  only  with  a
sense  of  freedom,  but  cordially.  Christ  regarding  his  work  and  entering  thoroughly  into
it,  he  coiild  do  it  from  his  inmost  being.  And  so  when  a  Christian  servant  falls  in  with  a
bad  master,  he  is  not  at  liberty,  as  taught  here,  to  do  his  work  grudgingly.  He  has
this  reason  in  any  case  for  heartiness  in  the  work,  that  he  is  rendering  it  to  One  who  is
worthy.  (4:) . Encouragement.  "Knowing  that  from  the  Lord  ye  shall  receive  the
recompense  of  the  inheritance:  ye  serve  the  Lord  Christ."  This  was  a  new  order  of
things,  a  new  field  of  thought,  for  the  slave.  A  servant  rightly  considers  himself
entitled  to  payment  for  his  labour.  The  slave  was  entitled  too  ;  but  he  was  not  accus-
tomed to  look  for  payment.  Certainly  he  never  thought  of  being  recompensed  with  an
inheritance.  In  the  eye  of  the  law  he  could  not  hold  an  inheritance.  He  was  only
property  himself.  And  yet  here,  as  a  freeman  in  Christ  Jesus,  it  is  promised  that  he
would  have  an  inheritance.  Tliis  was  nothing  less  than  the  inheritance  promised  down
the  ages  to  the.  people  of  God — the  inheritance  without  any  subtraction  from  it.  This
he  would  receive  af  the  hands  of  the  Eewarder  of  his  servants.  He  was  defrauded  all
hi.^  days  of  the  just  reward  of  his  labour ;  but  the  Lord  would  see  to  his  being  recom-
pensed, and  in  better  kind.  The  Lord  whom  he  served  was  no  tyrant,  but  the  Christ
who  had  died  for  bondman  as  well  as  for  freeman.  And  so  the  Christian  servant  can
make  sure  of  being  recompensed.  It  should  be  a  pleasure  to  serve  the  Lord  Christ  now.
It  should  be  a  pleasure  to  serve  him  even  without  thought  of  reward.  But  the  Lord
Gtirist  is  of  liberal  mind,  and  will  see  to  all  hearty  work  being  rewarded.  And  if  the
heartiness  has  been  overlooked  on  earth,  the  reward  will  only  be  the  greater  in  heaven.
(5)  Warning.  "  For  he  that  doeth  wrong  shall  receive  again  for  the  wrong  that  he
liath  done  :  and  there  is  no  respect  of  persons."  If  a  servant  gives  eye-service  to  his
master,  or  in  any  form  wrongs  him,  it  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  the  Lord  Christ  will
overlook  the  wrong.  There  will  be  a  receiving  again  for  the  wiong  that  he  hath  done.
It  will  be  so  much  taken  from  the  final  reward.  Christ  is  partial  neither  to  servant
nor  to  master,  and,  in  the  final  righting  that  is  toiake  place  between  the  two,  it  will
be  seen  that  his  face  is  set  only  against  wrong-doing.  2.  Masters.  "  Masters,  render
unto  your  servants  that  which  is  just  and  equal ;  knowing  that  ye  also  have  a  Master
in  heaven."  The  master  has  the  stronger  position;  but  that  is  only  that  he  may  use
his  position  for  the  sake  of  the  weaker.  He  is  to  render  to  his  servant  that  which  is
just,  that  which  does  not  depend  on  his  pleasure,  but  is  grounded  on  the  eternal  order
of  ihings.  And  beyond  the  just  he  is  to  render  to  him  that  which  is  equal.  In
Ephesians  it  is  said  that  he  is  to  do  the  same  things.  The  meaning  seems  to  be  that,
as  the  servant  is  required  to  give  him  hearty  work,  so  he  is  required,  on  his  part,  to
give  considerate  treatment.  Such  equality  is  becoming  in  a  Christian  master.  For  he
also  has  a  Master  in  heaven.  The  servant  is  to  give  hearty  work  out  of  regard  to
that  Master.  Out  of  regard  to  the  same  Master  he  is  to  give  considerate  treatment.
That  Master  is  considerate  toward  him;  he  is  to  be  considerate  touard  him  who  has
been  placed  by  Qhrist  under  him  as  a  servant. — R.  F.

Vers.  1 — t. — The  Christian's  higher  life.  Our  text  gires  us  a  magnificent  picture  of
the  higher  life  of  man,  indicating  the  means  of  its  beginning,  the  signs  of  its  progress,
and  the  hope  of  its  perpetuity.

I.  Thk  experiences  of  the  BEanranKO  op  the  higher  life.  These  initial  expe-
riences are  spoken  of  under  the  three  allied  figures  of  death,  the  hiding  as  of  burial,
and  resurrection.  There  is  an  experience :  1.  As  of  death.  "  Te  have  died."  The  soul
as  it  becomes  Christian  passes  through  a  death  with  Christ — (1)  a  death  to  sin,  (2)  a
doatli  to  the  bondage  of  outwardness.  Dead,  yet  alive  1 — the  paradox  that  finds  its
counterpart  tn  the  gardener's  insertion  of  the  vine  shoot,  that  was  cut  off  and  so  dead
to  its  old  stock,  under  the  bark  of  the  living  vine.  2.  As  of  hiding  away  in  burial.
"Hid."  That  may  mean  (1)  what  is  concealed  now  will  be  revealed  by-and-by;  or
(2)  it  may  denote  a  life  of  much  blessed  solitude,  and  so  of  sacred  seclusion ;  or  (3)
it  may  mean  a  life  of  fellowship  with  the  hidden  Christ;  or  (4)  it  may  tell  of  a  life
whoae  purposes  and  inspiratioDi  are  hid  in  Grod.     3>  4>  <^  reswrection.    "  Bi^oi),''


OH.  m.  1—25.]         THE  EnSTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  IM

That  must  indicate  (1)  a  living  life,  such  a  life  as  Ezekiel  portrays,  "  I  vrill  open
your  graves,  and  give  you  a  new  heart,  a  heart  of  flesh  ; "  and  (2)  an  elevated  life.
No  more  of  the  earth — earthy,  no  more  grave-olothes,  sepulchre,  and  earth-worms,  but
such  beauty  and  activity  .and  blessedness  as  belong  to  the  scenes  of  Christ's  forty  days'
risen  life.

II.  The  duty  op  the  highbb  life.  The  duty  is  twofold,  and  the  way  of  obeying
is  twofold  also.  1.  The  twofold  duty  of  the  higher  life.  (1)  The  withdrawal  of  chief
concern  from  inferior  things.  "  Set  not  your  affections,"  etc.  Does  not  this  mean,
cease  to  entwine  your  affections  round  the  things  of  time,  cease  to  concentrate  your
energies  on  the  things  of  this  world  ?  So  far  we  have  only  the  negative  aspect  of  duty ;
but  there  is :  (2)  The  fixing  of  chief  interest  on  superior  things.  They  are  twice  spoken
of  heie  as  "things  above;"  and  may  they  not  denote  what  is  above  socially,  intellec-
tually, spiritually  ?  2.  The  twofold  method  of  attaining  the  performance  of  this  duty.
(1)  "  Seek  the  things  that  are  above."  Let  the  higher  things  be  the  object  of  pursuit.
What  higher  things  ?  Plato  would  have  said,  "  The  true,  the  beautiful,  the  good."  Most
modern  Christians,  meaning  the  same,  would  have  said,  "  Heaven."  And  Paul,  meaning
the  same,  would  have  said,  "  Christ."  For  surely  Christ  is  heaven  and  heaven  is  Christ.
Well,  therefore,  does  Bishop  Pearson  urge,  "Else  to  Christ  with  the  wings  of  ybur
meditation  and  in  the  chariot  of  your  affections."  (2)  "Set  your  affections  on  things
that  are  above."  Not  only  seek  heaven,  but  think  heaven ;  not  only  think  heaven,
but  love  heaven.  Our  life  cannot  rise  into  a  higher  realm  of  itself  auy  more  than  a
bar  of  iron  can  lift  itself.  Both  have  capacity  of  response.  Christ  is  the  magnet  to
uplift  our  natures.    Love  him,  and  the  love  of  him  lifts  up.

III.  The  destiny  of  the  hiohee  life.  In  the  fourth  verse  we  have  the  onward
aspect  of  the  higher  life.  1.  There  is  to  he  a  complete  manifestation  of  this  hiijhtr  life.
Paul  has  said  now  it  is  "hid,"  then  it  will  be  unveiled;  now  it  is  buried,  then  it  will
be  "  risen."  Because  of  misunderstandings,  and  misconceptions,  and  harsh  judgments
of  others,  the  "  higher  life"  is  now  often  hid ;  then  all  will  be  explained,  interpreted,
rectified.  Because  now  that  life  is  so  often  in  itself  distorted,  confused,  it  is  partially
"hid;"  then  in  CRse  and  naturalness  and  grace  it  will  gloriously  "appear."  2.  The
perfect  revelation  of  this  life  will  he  in  perftxt  union  with  Christ.  (1)  How  ?  Because
he  is  the  Origin  and  Susteuance,  the  Life  of  man's  own  inner  higher  life.  (2)  When  ?
No  caleudar  can  fix  the  date.  It  will  be  the  time  of  his  appearing;  and  that  will  be
to  the  a<ies  as  his  incarnation^ was — "  the  fulness  of  the  times."  (3)  What  ?  The  glory
we  shall  have  will  be  his  glory.  That  is  the  glory  of  purity,  simplicity,  victnry,  sacri-
fice, love.  The  paragraph  we  have  thus  considered  names  Christ  four  times.  Our
model  is  Christ's  death;  our  strength  is  Christ's  risen  life;  our  heaven  ia  Christ'*
glory  i  our  hope  is  Christ's  coming.

"Yea,  thro'  life,  death,  thro'  sorrow  and  thro'  sinning,
He  shall  suffice  me,  for  he  hath  suffieed  :
Christ  is  the  End,  for  Christ  was  the  Beginning ;
Christ  the  Beginning,  for  the  End  is  Christ."

V.  R.  T.

Vers.  6 — 11. — Death  to  evil.  The  central  thought  around  which  the  strange  and
•tiiking  ideas  of  these  sentences  gather  is  "  Death  to  evil."  St.  Paul  exhorts  us  to  put
evil  to  death,  to  make' a  corpse  of  it.  Here  we  have  truly  "  Mora  janua  vita."  Wa
Inquire—

I.  In  what  this  death  consists.  "  Put  to  death  your  members  which  are  upon  the
earth."  The  meaning  seems  to  be  the  same  as  Christ's  command,  "  If  thine  eye  offend
thee,  pluck  it  out,"  etc.  Neither  Christ's  nor  Paul's  injunction  can  mean  hack,  hew,
maim,  the  limbs  and  organs  of  the  body.  For  that  is  contradicted  by  such  other
teaching  as  "  Yield  your  members  as  the  instrumenta  of  righteousness;"  aad  luch
disabling  of  limbs  and  organs  would  be  useless,  for  the  dumb  can  be  profana,  and  the
blind  lustful,  and  the  crippled  dishonest.  "Out  of  the  heart  proceeds  evil."  The
figure  in  the  injunction  of  our  text  may  be  that  which  the  whole  context  suggests,
namely,  put  these  members  to  death,  so  far  as  evil  practices  are  concerned ;  be  as  dead
to  them.  Or  the  figure  may  have  reference  to  that  which  describes  the  entire  sinful
character  as  "  t}ie  old  man  " — ^n  old  maij  haviiig  limbs,  organs,  et?.,  h^re  call^  raemtiepi,


192  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIAN&         [oh.  m.  1—86

So  these  physical  members  are  but  symbols  of  the  moral.  Anyhow,  there  is  clearly
enjoined  iiere:  1.  Death  to  corrupt  living.  This  coriupt  living  is  divided  here  into
two  classes — impurity  and  covetousness.  These  divided  between  them  include  the
whole  domain  of  f-m  and  selfishness.  Covetousness,  wliioli  is  cherished  by  many  who
have  the  lepute  of  respectability  and  even  of  C'hiistianity,  is  so  base,  so  loathsome,  so
irreligious,  that  it  is  here  linked  with  hideous  uncleanncss,  and  is  distinctly  declared
to  be  idolatrous.  Avarice  becomes  the  worldling's  religion  ;  greed  of  gain  the  miser's
worship.  Evils  such  as  these,  and  on  wliich  the  apostle  says  God's  wrath  rests,  must
he  slain.  2.  Death  to  wi  ong  conversation.  Paul  deals  with  the  sins  of  speech  which
aeemed,  like  echoes  of  the  past,  to  linger  on  the  lips  of  the  Colossians.  They  are
to  put  off  ^1)  "anger,"  i.e.  settled  hatred;  (2)  "wrath,"  i.e.  tumultuous  outburst  of
passion;  (3)  " malie,"  i.e.  malignity,  spitefulness;  (4)  " blasphemy,"  i.e.  slandering ;
(5)  "  foid-moutlied  abuse,"  i.e.  all  such  rough  speech  as  now  is  known  as  the  Billings-
pate  of  social,  iiolitioal,  or  theological  contruversy  ;  (6)  "  falsehood,"  a  word,  alasl  that
needs  no  description.  All  tliese  six  evils  of  spetcti  are  to  be  slain.  3.  Death  to  con-
ventional distinctions.  The  special  errors  that  we  have  seen  were  prevalent  at  Colossas
were  those  that  primarily  led  Paul  to  deal  with  this  evil.  Pour  conventional  distinc-
tions that,  wherever  they  separate  men's  interests  or  destroy  their  mutual  sympathies,
must  be  slain,  are  here  described.  (1)  National  distinctions:  "Greek  and  Jew."
(2)  Ceremonial :  "  circumcision  or  uncircimcisiou."  (3)  Distinctions  of  culture :  "  bar-
barian, Scythian.''  Max  Miiller  finely  shows  how,  until  Christianity  inserted  the  word
"  brothel  "  instead  of  "  barbarian,"  as  descriptive  of  humanity,  there  was  no  science  of
language.  (4)  Social:  " bond  and  free."  There  seems  to  be  special  reference  here  to
the  runaway  slave  who  was  going  to  carry  to  his  master  the  apostle's  letter,  and  who
was  to  be  received  as  a  brother  both  of  Philemon  and  PauL

II.  How  THIS  DEATH  IS  TO  BE  EFFECTED.  Evil  does  not  die  of  itself,  but  must  be
slain.  Nor  does  it  die  easily ;  it  must  be  strugcrled  with.  It  is  to  be  put  to  death ;
1 ,  By  human  endeavour.  "  Put  to  death."  You  are  wrestler  in  some  tragic  game,
soldier  in  the  momentous  ha.Ule,  executioner  in  the  solemn  judgment;  therefore  you
must  throw  your  opponent,  stay  your  enemy,  hang  or  gibbet  the  culprit.  Here  is
abundant  and  righteous  scope  for  all  our  fighting  instincts.  2.  Bg  Divine  rennvdl,
"  Which  is  renewed."  The  death  of  the  old  is  ensured  by  the  life  of  the  new ;  just  as
old  leaves  are  pushed  oflF  the  boughs  and  branches  by  the  young  vegetation  of  spring,
so  the  old  character  is  displaced  by  tlie  new.  This  power  is  (1)  Divine ;  (2)  constantly
put  forth ;  (3)  according  to  Divirje  ideal — "after  the  image  of  him  that  created  him."
Christ  the  Ideal  is  Christ  the  Source  of  all.  He  is  in  the  renewed  man  as  the  germ  of
life,  whose  outbursting,  as  by  one  blow,  kills  evil,  and  whose  constant  development
Insures  all  good. — U.  B.  T.

Vers.  12 — 17. —  The  marks,  method,  and  motive  of  the  Christian  life.  This  paragraph
is  part  of  the  practical  application  of  the  great  principle  St.  Paul  has  been  expounding
in  this  chapter,  viz.  the  Christian's  death  to  eril  through  the  death  of  Christ,  and  life  to
holiness  through  his  life.     We  have  here —

I.  The  marks  of  the  Christian  life.  When  the  Christian  life  is  illustrated,  as
here,  by  a  garment,  the  analogy  must  not  be  pressed  too  far.  For  instance,  unlike
a  garment,  the  Christian  character  is  not  (1)  merely  outside  a  man,  nor  (2)  separable
from  a  man.  But  that  character  is  like  a  garment:  1.  Because  by  it  a  man  is  fezown  anti
recogriizahle.  2.  Because  by  it  a  man  is  odorKed.  There  are  in  Paul's  description  eight
characteristics  by  which,  as  by  a  beautilul  garment,  the  Christian  man  is  recognizable
and  is  adorned.  (1)  "Bowels  of  mercies,"  which  we  may  paraphrase  as  "a  heart  of
compassion."  Anthropologists  largely  judge  what  physical  race  a  man  belongs  to
by  his  skull ;  the  Christian  must  judge  what  race  a  man  belonss  to  by  his  heart.
Tender-heartedness  is  a  sign  of  the  Christian  as  certainly  as  tmthfiilness,or  temperance,
or  honesty.  (2)  "  Kindness : "  this  is  the  constant,  steady,  oftan  noiseless,  but  always
beneficent,  stream  flowing  irom  such  a  heart.  (3)  "  Meekness ; "  for  whilst  the  apostle
sternly  condenms  mock  humility,  which  the  pietistio  among  the  Colossians  had  affc  cted,
he  rigorously  insists  on  that  selt'-huniiliation  without  which  no  man  can  be  reckoned
a  follower  of  the  uieek  and  lowly  Jesus.  (4)  "Long-suffering:"  this  is  a  temper  ot
life  described  in  the  beautiful  word  "  patience,"  and  it  indicates  freedom  from  tb«


OH.  m.  1—25.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.

intellectual  impatience  which  makes  men  proud  and  restive,  and  from  the  eraotionkll
patience  which  makes  men  frctlul  an.i  irritable.     (5)  "  Forbearance  and  forgivingness,
which  need  no  description.     (6)  "Charity;"  the  love  that  girdles  and  holds  together
all  the  graces.     (7)  "  Peace  of  Christ ;  "  which  is  the  peace  Christ  gives,  and  is  like  the
peace  he  possesses.     (8)  "Thankfulness;"  gratitude  to  God  and   to  one  another,
which  implies  a  whole  cataldgue  of  viriues.

n.  The  method  of  attaining  the  Christian  mfe.  The  method  here  described  is
threefold.  1.  Christ's  dealing  with  ua.  "  Let  the  Word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you  richly,"
The  l?brd  of  Christ."  By  this  we  understand :  (1)  TheWord  that  came  from  Christ
to  us.  That  iWord  is  not  to  pass  away,  but  to  "  dwell "  in  us.  (2)  The  Word  that
spoke  of  him.  Whether  it  were  in  Sc  iptiire  pr<ipliecy,  parable,  or  statement,  it  unveiled
Christ  to  us.  That  vision  is  not  to  pass  away,  but  to  "dwell  "  in  us.  (3)  The  Word
that  Christ  himself  speaks.  He  communes  with  iis  in  the  secret  chambers  of  our  soul,
ami  what  his  still,  small  voice  sa\s  to  us  there  about  pardon,  duty,  Grod,  must  not  pass
away ;  it  must  dwell  there.  (4)  The  Word  is  indeed  Clirist  himself.  He  is  the  uttered
thought,  the  expressed  love  from  God  to  our  soul.  He  must  dwell  in  us.  2.  Our  words
to  one  another.  We  only  gain  ourselvi-s  as  we  help  otliens.  We  mut't  communicate
what  we  have  received  if  we  are  to  become  strong.  (1)  We  are  to  leach.  (2)  We  are  to
admonish.  Of  this  there  are  many  ways.  One  is  here  described  by  "  psalms  and  hymns
anil  spiritual  songs."  3.  Our  word  to  Oad.  "  Singing  with  grace  in  your  hearts  to  the
Lord."    There  must  he  the  outpourini  of  the  heart  to  God.

in.  The  motive  inspikinq  Christian  life.  1.  Mere  is  the  widest  description  of  the
Christian  life.  It  covers  "word  and  fleud."  2.  Here  is  the  deep  st  motive  of  the
Christian  life.  "  The  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  It  is  the  Name  of  him  who  brings
Ood  near,  who  is  the  Reconciliation  of  all  things  to  God.  So  that  what  is  truly  done
in  the  Name  of  Chri-t  brings  the  world  near  Gud,  lilts  up  human  nature  into  fellowship
with  God.  No  wonder  that  Paul  adds,  for  all  this  let  there  be  " giving  of  thanks."
The  Christian  life  ought  to  be  a  eucharist. — U.  E.  T.

Vers.  18—21. — The  Christia/n  view  of  family  life.  The  spirit  which  was  abroad  in
the  early  Colossian  Church  was  at  once  so  ascutic  and  so  pictistic  that  it  undervalued
home,  depreciated  family  ties,  despised  human  relationships.  We  have  heard  Paul
boldly  meet  this  spirit  with  the  great  doctrine  th^t  Clirist  is  the  Fulness  of  all  things,
Sustainer  of  all.  Mediator  of  all,  Kinj;  of  all,  End  of  all.  Here,  and  in  preceding
paragraphs,  he  is  meeting  detailed  developments  of  that  evil  spirit  by  detailed  precepts
flowing  out  of  that  great  doctri  ne  of  Christ  the  Fu  Iness.  In  our  text  the  apostle  teaches
what  we  may  group  around  three  points.

I.  The  duties  of  family  life  are  becipbocal.  He  addresses  first  one  and  then
another  of  the  group  in  a  home.  He^does  not  speak  of  them  or  describe  them  to  one
another,  but  sharply,  smartly,  directly,  he  turns  to  each  with  the  summons,  "  Ye."
And  thus  he  summons  each  to  the  task  of  his  own  duty,  the  fulfilment  of  his  own
obligation.  As  in  some  noble  antiphon  the  singers  take  up  their  alternative  parts,  so
in  the  music  of  home  life  the  members  of  the  family  respond  with  their  alternative
duties.  Between  husband  and  wife,  parent  and  child,  the  only  truly  Christian  relation-
ship is  that  of  inter-dependence  and  of  reciprocity.

II.  The  pbwciples  to  guide  family  mfe  are  simple  and  ybt  sufficient.  The
statement  of  the  principles  here  does  not  seem  intended  to  be  exhaustive.  Some  parallel
I  assages  to  the  Ephesians  are  much  more  complete.  But  the  princi[iles  here  noted  are
specimens.  They  are  moral  samples  of  what  must  actuate  family  life.  And  they  are
simple  enough.  Notihiag  grand,  romantic,  or  impossible.  "  Wives,  submit."  This  cannot
mean  where  conscience  protests.  It  nin  t  rather  indicate  where  taste  er  opinion  differ.
Defer  rather  than  strive.  "  Husbands,  luve."  This  great  king-word  "  love  "  (which  Paul
explains  in  1  Cor.  xiii.)  claims  from  the  husband  what  Christ  gives  to  the  Church —
his  all.  And  one  injunction  of  that  love  will  be  "Be  not  bitter,"  ^a  rough,  rude.
Many  a  courtier  in  society  is  uncouth  as  a  bear  at  home.  Then  he  is  not  a  Christian
husband  after  this  model.  "Cni'ldron,  obey."  Cultivate  the  spirit  in  which  the  child
Jesus  went  down  to  Nazareth,  and  was  subject  to  his  parents.  Such  a  going  down
pieparcs  for  the  true  exaltation  ;  such  subjection  qualifies  for  subsequent  sovereignty.
"  1' ather«,  provoke  not."    Avoid  the  harshness,  and  even  the  thoughtless  exactions  from

C0L0SSIAN8.  O


1&4  THE  EPISTLE  TO   THE  COLOSSIANS.  [ch.  ra.  1—24

your  children  by  which  their  spirits  will  become  sullen,  hopeless,  moody.     They  will
want  spirits  that  parents  have  helped  to  make  buoyant,  not  that  parents  have  broken.

III.  The  motive  foe  fulfillinq  the  duties  of  family  life  is  Divinb.  Whilst
Beoondary  motives  are  thus  given  to  fathers,  etc,  we  find  in  the  passage  the  highest
motive  is  again  and  again  pressed.  "  In  the  Lord,"  "  Well-pleasing  to  the  Lord,"  "  As
unto  the  Lord,"  etc.  Such  a  life  as  Paul  described  can  only  be  achieved  by  the
force  of  sufficient  motive.  -  And  such  motive  he  supplies.  Here  is  argument  enough
for  such  a  course  of  conduct,  inspiration  enough  for  such  a  spirit  of  family  life.  "In
the  Lord."  There  is  a  wonderful  fulness  of  meaning  in  that  phiase,  as  the  Greek
language  employed  it.  But  not  a  profounder  fulness  than  the  Christian  experience
interprets  when  it  shows  Jesus  to  be  the  Source  of  motive,  the  Standard  of  duty,  the
very  Sphere  of  being  to  the  Christ-loving  man. — ^U.  B.  T.

Vers.  22 — 25. — Rdigioui  regulations  for  master  and  servant.  The  length  of  the
paragraph  on  this  topic  is  probably  partly  the  result  of  Paul's  having  then  and  there  so
much  to  do  with  Onesimus,  the  runaway  slave  whom  he  was  sending  back  to  his
master.  "  Bought  and  adopted  and  in  Christ  a  brother ;  claimed  and  completed,  and
in  Christ  a  man."  But  besides  this  personal  reason,  Paul  must  have  felt  that  there
was,  in  the  state  of  the  Colossian  society  of  the  time,  an  urgent  need  for  this  lengthy
and  detailed  description  of  duty.  And  is  there  not  now?  Are  not  masters  and
servants  in  England  failing  in  their  reciprocal  duties  very  largely  because  they  are
expecting,  as  Dr.  Chalmers  said,  "universal  selfishness  to  do  the  work  of  universal
love  "  ?    Therefore  we  may  well  notice —

I.  The  cHABACTEKiSTica  OF  A  TRUE  SERVANT'S  SERVICE.  It  is  marked  by :  1.
Obedience.  Engaged  for  given  duties,  do  them.  Eefusal  to  do  them,  neglect  in  doiug
them,  is  immoral,  irreligious.  You  cannot  be  a  goud  Christian  aud  a  bad  servant,  2.
Thoroughness.  Not  "eye-service."  This  happy  expression  is  probably  the  apostle's
coinage.  It  describes  obedience  that  is  superficial,  inconstant,  hollow.  3.  Simplicity
of  motive.  "Singleness  of  heart."  Not  having  two  purposes  nor  secondary  aims.  4.
Marntstness.  "  Do  it  heartily."  Whatsoever  ye  do,  work  at  it.  The  lazy  and  lethargic
are  repulsive,  the  enthusiastic  are  noble.

IL  The  characteristics  of  a  true  master's  mastership.  The  duties  of  a  master
are  as  clearly  enforced  as  those  of  the  servant.  "  The  same  light  attempers  various
colours;  so  the  same  principle  regulates  various  duties."  Theie  is  claimed  from  the
master:  1.  Justice.  That  is,  what  the  law  demands,  what  is  legally  ri;;lit  and  square.
There  is,  however,  much  more.  2.  EquMy.  "  What  is  equal."  Equity  is  more  than
law,  more  than  legal  claim.  It  is  a  liberal  interpretation  of  justice  in  couinion  matters ;
a  response  to  the  intuition  of  what  is  right,  even  though  no  law  defined  it  or  enforced
it.  It  was  this  teaching  about  equity  that  was  really  the  insertion  of  the  leaven  that
has  destroyed  slavery  in  Christendom.  What  is  the  touchstone  of  this  equity  ?  Surely
this  golden  rule,  "  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  do  ye  even  the
same  to  them  likewise."

III.  The  motives  both  of  tbub  service  and  of  true  mastership.  The  motives
put  before  both  masters  and  servants  are  two.  1.  They  ioth  sustain  a  common  relation-
ship to  Christ.  (1)  All  are  his  servants.  Servants,  "Ye  serve  the  Lord  Christ;"
masters,  "  Ye  also  have  a  Master  in  heaven."  (2)  All  work  is  done  in  his  sight.
Therefore  do  it  "  fearing  God."  (3)  All  may  be  done  for  his  glory.  "  There  is  no
respect  of  persons."  2.  Christ  will  rightly  deal  out  retribution  and  reward.  With
Christ  is  "  the  reward  of  the  inheritance."  From  Christ  men  shall  receive  for  "  iha
wrong  which  they  have  done."

Our  conclusion  is:  1.  Cherish  a  Christian  ambition  to  serve  well.  2.  Cherish  a
Christian  ambition  to  rule  well, — U.  B.  T.

Vers.  1 — 4. — Present  privileges :  future  glory.  The  apostle  now  proceeds  to  the
application  of  the  grand  truths  he  has  been  expounding.  Note  in  what  a  lofty  stiain
he  begins.  As  in  the  previous  section  he  refutes  practical  errors  by  reminding  of  the
Eublimest  doctrines,  so  here,  before  giving  exhortations  on  special  sins  and  duties,  ha
seeks  to  lift  the  Colossians  to  the  heights  of  that  new  spiritual,  heavenly  life  it  is  theii
privilege  to  live.     (Like  a  commander  encouraging  his  troops  la  the  field  to  uiaintaia


OH.ni.  1— 26.J         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  1»5

the  strictest  discipline  by  motives  suggested  by  the  purest  patriotism  and  the  dignity
of  their  trust.)

I.  The  Chkistiak'b  present  pbivilbses,  1.  "  Te  died."  This  figurative  expressioB
describes  the  complete  change  which  takes  place  in  those  who  are  truly  regenerated
It  is  most  strikingly  illustrated  in  the  conversion  of  an  idolatrous  or  a  profligate  man
But  every  true  convert  dies  to  his  .former  self,  i.e.  U  sepai  ated  from  it  as  by  ,a  death
and  burial.  (Illustrate  from  Eooles.  ix.  5,  6, 10.)  As  a  Christian  martyr,  worn  down  by
the  sickness  and  pain  of  a  long  persecution,  obtains  a  blessed  release  and  separation
from  this  present  evil  world  by  death,  so  is  the  Christian,  by  union  with  Christ,  set
free,  as  by  a  death  and  burial,  trom  two  of  his  most  formidable  foes — the  Law  and  sin.
(1)  We  died  to  the  Law  (Eom.  vii.  4,  6 ;  Gal.  ii.  19).  We  renounced  all  dependence
on  works  of  Law  and  trusted  for  justifiontion  alone  to  the  work  of  Christ.  (2)  Wa
died  to  sin.  We  were  set  free  from  the  love  of  sin  and  are  being  set  free  from  its
power.  Crucifixion,  though  fatal,  was  not  immediately  so.  So  our  "old  man  was
crucified  with  him,  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  done  away  (KwrapynOy),  that  so  we
should  no  longer  be  in  bondage  to  sin  "  (Eom.  vi.  6, 14).

"  It  was  the  sight  of  thy  dear  cross
First  weaned  my  soul  from  earthly  things,"  eto.

2.  "  Te  were  raised  together  with  Christ."  (Eph.  ii.  4 — 6 ;  Gal.  i.  4.)  In  the  world,  not
of  it.  "  We  dwell  in  the  flesh,  but  do  not  live  in  the  flesh  "  (Luther).  The  true  sphere
of  our  life  is  "  heavenly  ^kces."  Does  ihis  seem  mystical  when  spoken  of  ti'adesmen,
engine-drivers,  or  kitchen-maids?  But  if  they  are  Christ's  they  have  a  life  which  is
"  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  It  is  a  still  and  secret  life,  hidden  from  the  world.  The
Christian  has  a  different  spirit  (John  xiv.  17)  and  aim  (1  Cor.  x.  31)  and  strength
(Phil,  iv.  13).  He  is  like  a  palm  tree  in  the  desert,  verdant  and  fruitful,  because  far
beneath  the  sand  the  fibres  of  its  roots  are  enjoying  a  hidden  life  of  moisture  which
kee^  the  tree  alive  in  spite  of  arid  sand  and  cloudless  sky,  3.  Ye  may  "  seek  "  and
"  set  your  mind  on  the  things  that  are  above."  Is  not  this  a  privilege  as  well  as  a  duty  ?
Reflect  on  the  honour  of  being  allowed  to  fix  our  best  thoughts  and  omi  purest  affections
on  persons  and  objects  not  at  all  affected  by  the  change  and  disappointment  and  tran-
sitoriness  of  this  world.  (Like  a  sailor  amid  the  hardships  of  a  long  winter  voyage,
whose  thoughts  and  emotions  are  constantly  turning  to  wife  and  children  in  his  distant
home.  He  does  not  need  to  be  told,  "  You  ought  to  think  of  them  ;  you  m,ust  love
them.")  What  are  "the  things  that  are  upon  the  earth"?  Find  the  answer  in
1  John  iL  16,  17.  Thoy  belong  to  a  state  from  which  we  profess  to  have  been  con-
clusively delivered.  Shall  Lazarus  take  pleasure  in  his  grave-clothes  or  the  healed
demoniac  in  his  fetters  ?  Shall  those  who  profess  to  be  living  a  resurrection-life  with
Christ  "mind  earthly  ihings"?  Eiches?  (Ps.  Ixii.  10;  Prov.  xxiii.  5;  1  Tim.  vi.  7).
Worldly  power  or  fame?  (Ps.  Ixxiii.  18—20;  Isa.  xl.  6—8;  Jas.  i.  10,  11).  Shall
we  cling  to  a  sinking  vessel  when  our  home  is  in  sight?  If  we  find  it  hard  to  enjoy
our  privileges,  let  us  take  the  following  hints.  (1)  Give  more  thought  to  "  the  things
that  are  above  " — ^to  the  great  themes  of  God,  Christ,  heaven,  eternity ;  and  in  the  light
of  these,  look  down  on  the  transitory  trifles  of  this  world.  (2)  Do  more  for  Christ,
who,  "seated  on  the  right  hand  of  God,"  is  doing  so  much  for  us  (Matt.  vi.  33).
(Illustrate  Christ's  manilold  activities  for  his  people  in  that  heavenly  world.)  Eecogniza
that  you  have  a  citizenship  in  the  heavenly  places,  and  therefore  civic  duties  among
them,  (3)  Make  sacrifices  for  Christ  and  eternity.  Treasure  there  as  large  a  propor-
tion as  your  conscience  will  justify  of  money,  time,  and  every  talent  you  possess
(Matt.  vi.  19— 21).

IL  The  Christian's  futubb  gloet.  (Ver.  4.)  This  follows  from  ver,  3.  Con-
cealment witli  Christ  ensures  safety.  Our  future  is  wrapped  up  with  his  (John  xiv.
19).  Our  life  is,  as  it  were,  deposited  with  Christ's  life  in  the  very  sanctuary  of  the
Godhead.  God  will  not  forget  that  trust  (2  Tim.  L  12),  Christ  himself  liveth  ia  us
and  is  our  life.  What  is  awaiting  Christ  ?  A  glorious  manifestation  (Titus  ii,  13 ;
cf,  Acts  iii.  21  and  1  Thess.  i.  10).  That  manifestation  will,  by  reason  of  the  identity
of  Christ  and  his  servants,  be  the  manifestation  in  glory  of  Christians  also, "  the  sons  of
Gkxi"  (Eom.  viii.  19).  (Illustrate  from  contrasts  suggested  by  Isa.  Ix.  14;  Matt,
xiii,  43 ;  John  xvii.  24.)    Christ  is  now  concealed,  and  it  is  our  winter;  his  revelation


t9«  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.         [oh.  m.  1—26

will  brir/g  smnmer  to  our  souls  (2  Thess.  1.  10).  The  glory  in  which  we  shall  be
revealed  was  said  by  the  schonlmen  to  consist  of  the  robe  of  the  soul  and  tlie  robe  of
tlie  body.  1.  There  will  be  glory  for  the  soul.  No  more  sin  (1  John  iii.  2),  or  sorrow
(Rev.  vii.  17),  or  divided  afffctiona,  or  darkness  (1  Cor.  xiii.  12;  of.  Rev.  xxii.  3,  4;
perfect  service,  perfect  satisfaction,  perfect  security).  2.  In  that  glory  the  btidy  shall
share  (1  Cor.  xv.  42 — 44,  53;  Phil.  iii.  21).  "The  resurrection  of  the  dead  is  tlie
confidence  of  Christians"  (Tertullian;  1  Pet.  i.  13).  That  "grace  to  be  brought  unto
us  "  will  brighten  into  glory.     It  will  be  his  glory ;  that  is  enough  for  us. — E.  S.  P.

Vera.  6 — 7. — Sing  of  the  flesh  and  the  sin  of  covetovsness.  Paul,  an  example  to
faithful  preachers,  is  not  satiffied  with  general  exhortations ;  he  is  pointed  and  personal
in  bis  allusion  to  special  sins.  The  great  motive  power  is  in  tlie  preceding  truths
(vers.  1 — 4,  "  Mortify  therefore,"  etc.).  What  neither  Jewish  ceremonialism  nor
Gnostic  teaching  could  secure  (ch.  ii.  23),  Christ  "  our  Life,"  our  "  Hope  of  glory,"
could  effect.  Note  the  use  of  similar  lofty  motives  in  Eom.  vi.  1,  2  ;  xii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  vi.
15,  19,  20.  The  term  "meniber.s"  is  used,  not  jihysically  but  figuratively,  as  is  "old
man  "  in  ver.  9,  including  those  bodily  and  mental  faculties  which  may  be  the  occasion
of  sins  of  the  flesh  and  sins  of  the  spirit.     We  find  first  a  list  of  various —

I.  Sins  of  the  flesh.  (Ver.  5.)  Contrast  freedom  of  the  apostolic  speech  on  such
subjects  and  the  reserve  of  the  present  day,  which  may  be  excessive,  seeing  that  sins  of
intemperance  and  unchastity  are  the  most  frequent  causes  of  Church  discipline.  The
conscience  must  be  instructed  as  well  as  aroused.  Hints  as  to  safeguards  to  be  thrown
around  the  young  by  Christians;  their  duties  to  their  own  sons  and  daughters,  their
apprentices,  and  domestic  servants ;  social  customs,  such  as  "  statute-fairs  "  for  hiring
servants,  "treating,"  crowded  homes,  etc.;  bad  laws  (young  girls  insufficiently  pro-
tected ;  state  recognition  of  vice ;  licensing  laws,  etc.).  The  censure  and  ti eitment  of
offenders  of  both  sexes  should  be  far  more  impartial,  and  profligate  men  be  branded  by
the  indignation  of  Christians  as  one  faint  image  of  "  the  wrath  of  God "  (ver.  6).
While  seeking  to  put  away  these  sins  from  our  midst,  we  must  also  put  to  death  the
very  roots  of  these  prolific  evils  in  our  own  hearts  (Matt,  v,  27,  28).  Govern  the
thoughts.  (Distinguish  between  a  thought  injected  into  the  mind  as  a  temptation,  and
indulged  as  a  sin,  Heb.  iv.  15.)  Guard  all  the  avenues  of  temptation  (of.  Job  xxxi.  1 ;
Ps.  xvii.  3;  Kph.  v.  4):  bad  books;  dangerous  company ;  amusements  that  excite  the
passions ;  intoxicants  (Matt.  v.  29,  30 ;  Bom.  viii.  12,  13 ;  Gal.  v.  ii4).  Let  the
body  and  the  brain  and  the  mind  be  kept  in  healthy  exercise;  this  will  aid  us  to
"kee|i  under  the  body"(l  Cor.  ix.  27).  God  "knoweth  our  frame;"  Christ  "our
Lite  "  has  passed  through  our  temptations.  Elevation  of  spirit  (vers.  1  and  2),  unlike
pride  (Prov.  xvi.  18),  may  guard  UB  from  debasing  ourselves:  "Ye  were  raised  with
Christ;"  "mortify  therefore,"  etc.

II.  The  sin  of  covetousness.  Covetousness  (leKtwtita)  has  been  described  as  "  the
fierce  and  ever-fiercer  longing  of  the  creature  which  has  turned  from  God  to  fill  itself
with  the  inferior  objects  of  sense."  It  is  a  wider  term  than  "  the  love  of  money,"
though  that  " root  of  all  evil "  is  the  most  glaring  foim  of  it  and  the  one  we  take  as
our  illusi ration.  It  is  significant  that  here  and  in  Eph.  v.  5  St.  Paul  couples  covetous-
ness with  the  most  loathsome  sins.  A  covetous  man  is  an  idolater  because  he  loves,
trusts,  and  serves  money  more  than  God.  This  sin  is :  1.  Multiform.  It  is  Proteus-
like in  its  shapes :  the  avarice  of  the  miser,  the  ostentation  of  the  nouveau  riche,  or
"  that  loudest  laugh  of  hell,  the  pride  of  dying  rich."  One  of  its  most  common  and
yet  scandalous  forms  is  withholding  "  more  than  is  meet,"  robbing  God  of  "  the  first-
fruits  of  all  our  increase,"  which  God  claims  under  the  gospel,  though  not  in  the  form
of  Jewish  tithe  (cf.  Prov.  iii.  9,  10 ;  xi.  24 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  1,  2 ;  2  Cor.  viii.  12 ;  ix.  6,  7).
This  lorra  of  covetousness  among  Christians  may  need  to  be  mortified  by  repeated  acts
ot  giving,  though  painful  at  first,  till  duty  becoujcs  privilege  and  tlie  lesson  is  learned,
"It  is  more  blessed  to  give  than  to  receive."  2.  It  is  specious.  It  is  a  subtle  spirit,
needing  great  disoernmi  nl  for  iis  detection  and  great  grace  for  its  expulsion.  It  trans-
forms itself  into  an  angel  of  light,  and  calls  itself  "  prudence "  and  other  deceptive
names.  It  is  said  that  St.  Francis  de  Sales  received  at  the  confessional  a  greater
number  of  persons  than  were  ever  known  to  visit  one  confessor  besides,  but  that  he
did  not  remember  a  single  instance  in  which  covetousness  had  been  confessed.    No


•1.  at  1— 2«.]        THtl  EPlStLE  TO  tflE  C0L0SSlA»8.  Wl

Wondet,  then,  that  Church  densure  for  covetousness  is  exceedingly  rare  (1  Cor.  v.  9).  3.
U  is  odious  to  Ood.  (Ver.  6.)  4.  It  is  ruinouito  the  sard.  (G-al.  vi.  7,8;  Eph.  v.
5,  6 ;  1  Tim.  vi.  9, 10.)  5.  It  needs  ceaseless  vigilance  and  all  the  powers  of  the  heavenly
life  to  mortily  this  "  member,"  which  i&  so  peculiarly  tenacious  of  life.  Christ's  love
and  power  alone  can  avail  (Titus  ii.  14). — B.  S.  P.

Vers.  8-^11.^- 2%e  new  life  in  Christ  the  death-warrant  to  old  sins.  The  apostle  still
emi  loys  the  most  [lowerful  motives  possible  in  his  exhortations  to  personal  holiness.
His  figures  and  illustrations  vary  ("Ye  died;  ye  were  raised  with  Christ;  therefore
put  your  sins  to  death,"  "  Ye  put  off  your  old  nature  and  put  on  a  new  nature ;  thare-
fore  put  away  yan/r  old  sins  ").

I.  Old  Sins  to  be  fuT  away.  From  the  sins  of  the  flesh  Paul  passes  on  to  sins  o(
the  spirit  and  the  tnngiie.  There  are  two  groups.  1.  "  Anger,  wrath,  malice."  Dis-
crimintite  between  these.  'Opyli  may  be  a  right  state  of  mind  (Mark  iii.  5 ;  Eph.  iv.
2G)j  but  is  easily  depraved  into  a  criminal  anger,  or  into  evii6s  (wrath,  passion),  or
Kaicia  (malice  which  wishes  or  seeks  to  do  injury).  In  fact,  all  our  evil  principles  may
be  said  to  be  good  principles  fallen  and  debased.  Selfishness  is  fallen  .selt-love;  envy
is  depraveii  emulation ;  revenge  is  fallen  resentment;  sinful  anger  is  righteous  indigna-
tion degraded  and  debased.  The  lawfulness  of  anger  must  be  determined  by  its
direciion,  its  degree,  and  its  motive.  In  the  daily  struggle  asainst  variuus  forms  of
sinful  anjjer,  we  may  give  the  following  hints.  (I)  When  pasaion  rises  ia  the  soul,  let
it  not  overflow  through  the  lips.  Suppress  the  mutiny  within  the  citadel  (Ps.  xvii.  3;
xxxis.  1 ;  Jas.  i.  19).  (2)  Let  the  battle  be  fought  in  sight  of  the  cross  and  in  memory
of  the  provocations  we  have  given  to  God  (Eph.  iv.  31, 3^).  (3)  Bely  on  Christ's  power
to  save  now  (I  itus  ii.  14).  2.  "Sailing,"  "shameful  speaking,"  lying.  Among  the
commonest  forms  of  these  fruits  of  an  evil  heart  (Matt.  xii.  34).  we  note:  "  Hack-
bitiiig,"  reckless  detraction,  i.e.  seeking  to  draw  a  person  down  from  the  reputation  he
enjoys.  (It  is  not  necessary  or  lawful  to  speak  all  we  know  against  a  person,  thouyh
many  act  as  though  they  were  at  perfect  liberty  to  utter  it,  if  only  it  is  true.)  Attri-
buting wrong  motives — a  very  common  form  of  "  shameful  speaking,"  a  gross  breach  of
"charity"  (1  Cor.  xiii.  7),  and  an  arrogant  claim  to  a  "discerning  of  spirits."  Exag-
gerations; false  advertisements;  conventional  falsehoods  in  business  (Uatt.  ▼.  37;
•^  Cor.  i,  12,  17,  18;  Eph.  iv.  25).

II.  The  death-warrant  of  these  old  sins.  Covet  not,  rail  not,  lie  not,  etc.,
"seeing  ye  have  put  off,"  etc.  Two  truths  are  taught.  1,  We  profess  to  be  enjeying
a  new  life.  So  complete  is  the  change  it  is  described  as  a  change  of  nature  ("  old  mun
.  .  .  new  man"),  A  new  creation  (2  Cor.  v.  17;  Gal.  vi.  15),  a  new  birth,  a  new  resur-
rection. Of  this  new  life  we  learn:  (1)  It  is  Divine  in  its  origin  Q'him  that  created
him").  (2)  Progressive  in  its  nature  ("being  renewed  unto  knowledge"),  like  a
statue  becoming  more  and  more  like  the  ideal  of  the  sculptor;  or  a  youth  rnaiuring
into  manhood;  or  a  pUjil  growing  into  intimate  acquaintance  with  his  master's  deepest
thoughts  (John  xvii.  3 ;  Rom.  xii.  2 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  16 ;  Eph.  iii.  16—19 ;  Phil.  iii.  9—14).
(3)  God-like  in  its  character  ("after  the  image,"  etc.,  Eph.  iv.  24).  A  renewed  saint  is
more  God-like  than  an  unfallen  Adam  (Rom.  v.  21).  The  issue  of  this  progressive
growth  "unto  knowledge"  and  mature  Christian  character  is  seen  in  Eph.  iv.  13 — 16.
Everything  connected  with  that  new  life  is  in  deadly  antagonism  to  every  kind  of  sin,
which  must  be  "put  away,"  like  slothful  habits  by  the  scholar,  or  "weight"  by  tlie
lunner.  iSin  is  like  poison  to  the  new  life  we  profess  to  enjoy,  depressing  vitality  if
it  does  not  extinguish  life  altogether.  2.  Jn  this  life  Christ  claims  supremacy.  (Ver.  11.)
Dr.  Lightfoot  suggests  that  the  distinctions  here  said  to  be  abolished  were  selected  with
special  reference  to  the  circumstances  of  the  Colossian  Church :  to  the  Judaizing  of
some,  to  the  Gnostic  pride  of  others  who  despised  the  unlettered;  and  that  his  relation
at  tlie  time  he  wrote  to  the  slave  Onesimus  led  him  to  add  "  bondman,  freeman."  The
Unity  of  the  race  and  the  brotherhood  of  men  are  distinctly  Christian  doctrines.  "  The
head  of  every  man  is  Christ"  (1  Cor.  xi.  3).  Our  union  and  subordination  to  him
constitute  our  equality  with  one  another  in  the  world  of  grace  (Matt,  xxiii.  8 — 10).
For  all  earthly  distinctions  sink  into  insignificance  compared  with  his  supremacy  and
his  presence  in  us  all.  (1)  "Christ  is  all:"  he  is  "all"  to  God  (oh.  i.  19;  cf.  Isa.
xliii  1;  Matt.  iiL  17),  as  the  only  begotten  Son,  the  one  atoning  Sacrifice  ("the  Lamb  «<


1»8  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [ch,  m.  1— 2&

God  "),  the  only  Mediator,  the  appointed  Judge  (John  v.  22,  23 ;  Acts  xvii.  31).  Con-
trast the  limitations  atlaolied  to  Abraham,  the  friend  of  God  (Gen.  xviii.  18 — 33),  and
M  OSes,  who  was  "  iaitliful  as  a  servant,"  but  could  not  redeem  his  brethren  (Bxod.  xxxii,
32,  33),  and  "  the  fulness  "  of  Christ  (Heb.  ix.  26 ;  x.  10—14).  Bsing  "  all "  to  God,  he
is  all  to  us;  the  Centre  and  Ciroumfereiioe  of  truth;  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  our  life;
"  the  Author  and  Finisher  of  our  faith."  He  is  a  Saviour  in  whom  "  dwelleth  all  the
fulness,"  etc.  (ch.  ii.  9),  "  in  whom  are  hid,"  etc.  (oh.  ii.  3),  who  is  "  full  of  grace  and
truth,"  whose  love  "  passeth  knowledge,"  whose  blood  "cleanseth  from  all  sin,"  and
"  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us,"  etc.  (1  Cor.  1.  30).  (2)  Christ  is  "  in  all " — in  all  of  us ;
for  he  comes  to  save,  to  conquer,  to  reiga,  to  share  his  very  life  with  us  (Gal.  ii.  20).
Where  he  comes,  sin  must  go;  he  can  brook  no  rival;  for  "in  all  things  he  must
have  the  pre-eminence."  And  he  is  in  all  things:  "He  fills  all  things"  (Bph.  i.  23;
iv.  10).  A  sense  of  the  all-pervading  presence  and  power  of  Ohrist  should  (a)  abase
the  Christian  tempted  to  be  proud  of  birth,  purse,  or  brain;  (6)  give  dignity  to  the
lowliest  disciple  in  whom  the  Son  of  God  dwells;  (e)  pledge  us  to  ceaseless  strife
against  every  form  of  sin. — B.  S.  P.

Vers.  12, 13. — The  Christian's  wardrobe.  The  apostle,  having  bidden  the  Colossian
converts  strip  off  the  filthy  rags  of  their  old  life,  takes  them  into  the  Christian's  ward-
robe and  shows  them  some  of  the  robes  of  righteousness,  the  beauties  of  holiness,  the
jewels  of  grace,  with  which  they  may  decorate  themselves.  These  are  the  only  priestly
vestments  in  which  God's  "  royal  priesthood  "  may  appear  "  glorious  in  the  eyes  of  the
Lord."  Nor  should  we  ever  dare  present  ourselves  before  the  Lord  unless  we  are
attempting  to  "  put  on  "  all  these.  (Illustrate  from  "  court  dress,"  or  Matt.  xxii.  11 — 13.)
This  spiritual  investiture  is  urged  on  the  Colossians  by  two  considerations.

I.  Their  relations  to  God.  "Elect,  holy,  beloved."  1.  Elect.  Our  outward
religious  privileges  (1  Cor.  iv.  7)  and  our  inward  spiritual  state  (1  Cor.  xv.  10)  are  the
result  of  a  Divine  choice.  Christian  experience,  no  less  than  God's  Word,  attributes
the  beginning  of  the  new  life  within  us  to  a  work  of  God,  and  therefore  to  apurpose
and  choice  of  God  (2  Tim.  i.  9).  But  for  what  end  has  he  thus  chosen  us  ?  We  find
answers  in  such  words  as  "fruit"  (John  xv.  16),  "holy"  (Eph.  i,  3,  4),  "sanctifica-
tion"  (2  Thess.  ii.  13),  "  obedience"  (1  Pet.  i.  2).  2.  Holy.  Here  is  the  true  idea  of
the  only  Christian  priesthood,  viz.  consecration,  beina;  set  apart  for  service  and  spiritual
sacrifices  to  God.  The  self-deuial  of  the  one  High  Priest  is  our  pattern  and  our
inspiration  (John  xvii.  19 ;  Heb.  iii.  1).  There  are  not,  in  the  New  Testament,  two
groujis  of  virtues,  one  for  the  clergy,  the  other  for  the  laity,  as  (Mr.  Euskin  tells  us)
are  represented  by  some  of  the  mediaeval  poets  and  painters.  All  Christ's  disciples  are
called,  as  priests,  to  be  equally  "saints,"  "holy"  (1  Pet.  i.  14, 15).  3.  "Beloved;"
enjoying  that  special  love  of  complacency  and  delight  of  whicii  Christ  speaks  (John
xiv.  21 ;  xvi.  27).  "  The  order  of  the  words  admirably  corresponds  to  the  order  of  the
things :  eternal  election  precedes  sanctificatum  in  time ;  the  sanctified  feel  God's  love
and  forthwith  imitate  it"  (Bengel).

II.  The  excellence  op  these  Christian  oraoes.  L  ".4  heart  of  compassion"
towanis  those  who  are  in  a  worse  condition  than  ourselves,  whether  caused  by  sin  or
calamity.  A  compassionate  nature  brings  pain  with  it,  yet  it  is  "twice  blessed."
Silver  is  no  substitute  for  sympathy.  Money  sent  by  a  rich  Christian  who  will  not
take  the  trouble  to  "visit  the  fatherless  and  widows"  is  worth  less  than  the  sympathetic
words  and  deeds  of  a  poor  compassionate  neighbour.  Refer  to  Christ  being  often
"  moved  with  compassion  "  and  putting  forth  a  healing  touch.  So  now  Heb.  iv.  15 ;
1  John  iii.  17,  18.  2.  "Kindness"  to  all,  perhaps  especially  to  those  who  are  our
equals  and  need  no  special  compassion  (cf.  G«.l.  vi.  10;  Phil.  iv.  8;  1  Pet.  iii,  8).  A
kind  heart  is  a  cheerful  heart,  and  provides  "a  continual  feast"  (Acts  xx.  35).
3.  "  Humility."  "  There  are  many,"  says  Augustine,  "  who  would  more  readily  give
all  they  have  to  feed  the  poor  than  become  beggars  themselves  before  God."  So
humility  needs  to  go  hand-in-hand  with  compassion  and  kindness.  It  is  fostered  by  a
true  view  both  of  our  own  sinfulness  and  the  dignity  bestowed  upon  us.  We  need  it
in  prosperity  lest  we  become  insolent  to  our  neighbours  (Bsth.  iii.  5 ;  Luke  xviii.  11),
or  even  towards  God  (2  Chrou.  xxvi.  16 ;  Hos.  xiii.  6) ;  and  in  adversity,  lest  we
"  faint,"  et«.  (Heb.  xii.  5—9).    4.  "  Meekness ; "  that  quiet,  gentle  spirit  which  will


CH.  m.  1—25.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  199

calmly  endure  disappointments  or  slights.  It  is  a  source  of  power  (Bccles.  vil.  8).  It
is  not  constantly  vindicating  itself  and  disputing  with  assailants  (Ps.  xxxvii.  5,  6, 11).
When  we  see  the  power  which  meek  spirits  gain  over  others  stronger  and  rougher  than
themselves,  we  see  the  words  fulfilled,  "A  little  child  shall  lead  them."  5  Long-
buffering.  In  regard  to  Divine  afflictions,  see  on  ch.  i.  11.  It  is  more  difficult  to
exercise  it  towards  men  than  towards  God.  In  relation  to  our  fellow-sinners  we  may
learn  from  God's  long-suffering  towards  them.  (See  the  legend  of  Abraham  and  the
fire-worshipper  in  Stanley's  'Jewish  Church,'  i.  21.)  And  if  w.e  are  long-suffering
towards  those  that  sin  against  God,  how  much  more  towards  those  that  offend  us  I  Let
ns  learn  of  God  (Matt.  v.  45 ;  Rom.  ii.  4)  and  of  his  beloved  Son  (1  Pet.  ii.  23).
6.  Forbearance  and  forgiveness.  "  Forbearing  one  another."  This  is  often  the  first
step  towards  frank  forgiveness.  It  may  avert  a  quarrel,  for  which  two  are  needed.
"  To  conquer  one's  self  is  the  greatest  of  conquests,"  says  Plato  (cf.  Pj  ov.  xvi.  32).  This
victory  over  self  aids  us  in  the  victory  over  the  transgressor  (Rom.  xii.  21 ;  e.g.  David,
1  Sam.  xxiv.).  "  Forgiving  each  other,  if  any  man  have  a  complaint  against  any.t
Our  Lord  has  laid  down  the  law  of  offences  among  disciples  (Matt,  xviii.  15 — VI ;
Luke  xvii.  3, 4).  A  Christian  spirit  will  hail  the  signs  of  incipient  repentance,  and  will
exact  no  unreasonable  humiliation.  And  even  towards  the  most  impenitent  offender
we  may  exercise  tlie  most  forgiving  spirit,  like  God,  "ready  to  forgive"  (Matt.  v.
44,  45).  Observe  the  pathetic  plea  urged :  "  Even  as  the  Lord  forgave  you,"  etc.  Our
Master  Christ  still  has  this  power  (Matt,  ix,  6 ;  Acts  y.  31).  He  has  used  it  on  our
behalf,  first  when  we  applied  to  him  with  the  burden  of  all  the  guilty  past,  and  since
then  day  by  day  (John  xiii.  10).  Shall  he  be  so  prompt  and  free,  and  we  be  hssitating
and  reluctant  (1  John  ii.  12)?  And  this  motive  is  as  stringent  as  it  is  pathetic.  Note
the  prayer  taught  (Luke  xi.  4),  the  sommand  given  (Mark  xi.  25,  26),  the  warning
uttered  (Matt,  xviii.  35).  Imagine  an  unforgiving  man  offering  the  prayer  (Matt.  vi.
12),  "As  we  forgive,"  etc.,  and  interpret  it  into  plain  language.  If  we  do  not  forgive^
do  act  let  us  dare  to  pray  (1  Tim.  ii.  8). — B.  S.  P.

Vers.  14, 15. — A  threefold  cord  of  grace.  We  have  here  an  attractive  picture  of  a
toving,  peaceful,  thankful  Christian.

I.  Love.  It  is  compared  to  the  girdle,  put  on  over  the  other  articles  of  attire,  and
helping  to  bind  all  in  their  place.  Christian  love  is  no  mere  natural  emotion  or  self-
interested  affection.  It  is  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit,  whereby  God  is  sincerely  loved  for
his  own  sake,  and  one's  neighbour  for  God's  sake.  To  love  even  our  fellow-Christians
because  they,  are  God's  children  is  not  always  easy,  on  account  of  their  inconsistencies.
But  it  is  eminently  a  Christian  grace  (John  xiii.  35 ;  1  John  v.  1).  It  is  called
"  the  bond  of  perfectness,"  because :  1.  It  is  the  element  of  all  other  graces,  the  sphere
in  which  they  are  exercised.  It  is  like  the  golden  light  in  which  some  summer  evening
landscape  is  bathed,  or  the  green  grass  on  which  the  multicoloured  flowers  are  bloom-
ing. Without  love,  "  knowledge  puffeth  up,"  gifts  are  "  sounding  brass,"  faith  is  idle
(Gal.  V.  6),  zeal  may  be  wildfire,  mercy  weakness,  humility  pride,  and  charity  ostentap
tion.  With  love,  each  of  these  may  be  the  Spirit's  fruit.  It  is  thus  the  bond  of  perfect-
ness, the  distinctive  feature  of  a  complete  Christian  character  (Eom.  xiii.  8;  I  Cor.
xiii.  8, 13 ;  Gal.  v.  14).  2.  Love  is  the  pledge  of  all  other  graces.  For  if  we  dwell  ik
love  and  in  God  (1  John  iv.  16)  we  enjoy  increasingly  the  perfections  of  God.  The
outer  dress  is  generally  the  most  valuable  part,  and  a  sign  that  other  parts  are  present
and  in  keeping  with  it.  So  the  precious  girdle  of  love,  visible  to  all,  is  a  sign  that
other  graces  are  present  and  kept  in  their  place  by  this  "bond  of  perfectness."  Cul-
tivate it  by  charitable  judgments,  by  much  forbearance,  by  seeking  to  win  and  refine
the  less  attractive,  and  to  walk  in  the  path  marked  out  for  us  by  Christ  (John  xv.  12  •
Ept.  V.  2).

II.  Peace.  This  peace  is  described  by  a  most  attractive  name,  •'  the  peace  of  Christ "
(John  xiv.  27),  the  tranquillity  of  a  trustful  child.  The  term  "  rule  "  may  be  under-
stood in  two  senses.  1.  Exert  its  power  to  protect.  (See  Phil.  iv.  7,  where  God's  peace
is  likened  to  a  garrison ;  Ps.  oxii.  7 ;  Isa.  xxvi.  3.)  Peace  gives  strength,  and  strength
peace  (Ps.  xxix.  11).  2.  Sit  as  umpire.  When  in  doubt  in  regard  to  business  specula-
tions, worldly  amusements,  etc.,  we  may  ask,  "Which  course  will  the  peace  of  Christ
ruling  in  my  heart  approve  ?  "    To  such  peace  we  are  called,  but  to  enjoy  it  we  mast


mo  THE  BPIlsTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.         i<m.ttul-^

allow  this  peace  to  rule.  We  shall  then  be  kept  from  falling  (Ps.  cxii.  165),  have
peace  in  conflict  (John  xvi.  33)  and  in  inaction  (Pa.  iv.  8),  through  life  and  in  death
(Ps.  xxxvii.  37).  Peace  is  the  faithful  handmaid  of  love,  which  attends  it  even  in  the
stormier  days  of  life  (Rom.  xv.  13).

III.  Thankfdlnebs.  If  God's  love  is  shed  abroad  and  Christ's  peace  rnles  in  our
hearts,  grateful  feelinj;s  will  well  up  like  sparkling  streams.  And  gratitude  to  Q-od
will  deepen  love  and  preserve  in  peace,  fostering;  forbearance,  pity,  unselfishness,  and
patience  under  those  trials  which  a  loving  Father  appoints  for  our  education. — 'E.  S.  P.

Vers.  16,  17. —  The  power  of  the  Word  and  the  Name  of  Christ.  "  Having  exhorted
them  to  be  thankful,  he  also  shows  them  the  way  "  (Chrysostom).  But  the  connection
is  wider  than  this.  In  ver.  16  the  apostle  shows  how  a  right  use  of  Christ's  gospel
may  promote  the  graces  to  which  he  has  been  exhorting ;  and  in  ver.  17  how  the  right
recognition  of  the  Name  of  Christ  will  be  a  comprehensive  rule  to  aid  us  in  every  duty
of  life.

I.  The  poweb  of  the  Word  of  Christ.  1.  "  Let  the  Word  of  Christ  dwell  in  you
richly  in  ail  wisdom."  If  "  every  word  of  God  is  pure,"  and  tliereiore  both  po^erlul
and  precious,  this  is  pre-eminently  so  with  "  the  word  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel."  To
exert  its  power  it  must  not  be  a  transient  visitor  (cf.  Jer.  xiv.  8),  but  a  resident  in  the
soul,  and  that  "richly."  We  must  welcome  it  impartially — its  doctrines  (Rom.  i.  16,
17,  etc.),  precepts  (Ps.  cxix.  128),  and  promises  (Rom.  iv.'20,  21).  We  must  receive
it  taith  joy  as  a  treasure  we  prize  (Ps.  cxix^  72;  Jer.  xv.  16),  like  sweet  poetry  that
lingers  in  the  memory,  or  a  friend  enshrined  in  the  heart  (Prov.  iv.  21,  22).  We
may  expect  it  to  be  a  power  to  ourselves ;  it  will  promote  in  us  every  kind  of  wisdom,
making  us  "wise  unto  salvation,"  and  enlightening  the  intelligence  as  well  as  the  heai  t
(Ps.  xix.  7,  8 ;  cxix.  130).  One  chief  motive  for  seeking  this  blessed  occupancy  of  the
soul  is  that  we  may  be  useful  to  others.  2.  "  Teaching  and  admonishing  one  another"
etc.  The  picture  presented  is  one  of  unconstrained,  cheerful,  social  religion,  as  in
Acts  ii.  42 — 47;  mutual  counsel,  encouragement,  reproof,  and  interchange  of  experi-
ence (Ps.  cxli.  5;  Mai.  iii.  16  j  1  ThesB.  v.  14;  Heb.  iii.  13;  x.  24,  25,  etc.).  For  this
end  "the  sacrifice  of  praise"  has  an  especial  value.  (Power  of  poetry  and  song:  e.g.
Acts  xvi.  25 ;  Jas.  v.  13.  Pliny's  testimony ;  the  psalmody  of  the  Reformation ;
recent  developments  of  sacred  song,  and  conversions  therefrom.)  Let  us  seek  to  sing
"  with  grace  in  our  hearts,"  so  that  every  hymn  may  be  a  means  of  grace  to  ourselves
and  to  others  (Ps.  1.  23).

II.  The  power  of  the  Name  op  Christ.  We  may  be  said  to  do  or  sufi'er  anything
in  the  Name  of  Christ  when  we  do  it  or  endure  it  in  recognition  of  the  authority  of  the
Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  in  subordination  to  him.  As  all  thoughtful  men  have  some
ruling  passion  in  life — wealth,  fame,  patriotism,  etc. — the  Christian's  will  be  the  will  and
honour  of  his  Divine  Lord.  This  is :  1.  .4  comprehensive  rule.  It  applies  to  words
and  deeds  (1  Cor.  x.  31 ;  1  Pet.  iv.  10,  11).  "  it  is  one  thing  to  be  reproached,  another
to  be  saved,  another  to  be  baptized,  another  to  command,  another  to  pray,  another  to
give  thanks  in  the  Name  of  the  Lord ; "  but  all  may  be  dune  by  his  authority  and  for
his  hononr.  2.  A  valuable  test ;  as  was  "  the  peace  of  Clirist."  (Ver.  15.)  Can  I  do
this  "  in  the  Name  of  Christ,"  "  giving  thanks  to  God"  ?  Illustrate  this  in  relation  to
business  (e.g.  a  godly  grocer  thinking  about  going  into  the  liijuor  trdffio),  amusements,
politics,  etc.  We  are  not  at  liberty  to  take  any  part  of  our  lite  from  under  this  rule.
The  doctrine  that  religion  and  business  are  disconnected  is  a  "damnable  heresy."  3.
A  powtrful  encouragement.  It  dignifies  drudgery,  sanctifies  commerce,  hallows  recrea-
tion. Having  traded  in  the  Name  of  Christ,  we  may  pray  in  that  Name  and  be  assured
of  an  answer  (John  xiv.  14).  We  may  thank  God  for  our  subjecliou  to  the  power  of
that  Name,  which  ennobles  every  service  and  lightens  every  trial  (Bph.  v.  20;  1  Thess.
V.  18).  But  the  first  thing  to  be  done  in  the  Name  of  Christ  is  to  trust  in  him  for
salvation  (Jahn  iii.  18 ;  Acts  iv.  12\  Unless  that  is  done,  nothing  can  be  truly  done
"in  the  Name  of  the  Lord  Jesus"  (John  vi.  29;  1  John  iii.  23).— B.  S.  P.

Vers.  18, 19. — Husbands  and  wives.  Notice  the  honour  given  to  marriage  by  Moses
(Gen.  ii.  23,  24),  and  still  more  by  Christ  (Matt.  v.  31, 32 ;  xix.  3 — 9)  and  his  apostles
(Eph.  ".  22—33 ;  1  Tim.  iv.  3 ;  v,  14  j  Heb.  xiii.  4,  etc.).     Christianity  a  gospel  of


Ml. »!».  1-28.J        TBE  EPTSTLB  TO  THE  COtOSStAlJS.  201

great  joy  to  the  world's  SUffeiing  women.  But  blessins;s  rest  upon  law.  The  nearer
marriage  is  biought  to  God  the  more  sacred  its  duties  become.  In  vers.  18,  19  we
have  in  a  condensed  form  rules  more  fully  set  forth  elsewhere  (1  Cor.  vii. ;  Eph.  v. ;
Titus  ii. ;  1  Pet.  iii.).     We  see  exhortatinns —

I., To  WIVES.  Gathering  together  some  of  the  precepts  scattered  through  the
Epistles,  we  find  k  fuller  summary  of  the  Christian  wife's  duties  at  home  in  Titus  ii.
4,  5  (make  home  the  happiest  place  in  the  world  for  both  husband  and  children).
In  1  Pet.  iii.  1—6  a  contrast  is  drawn  between  bodily  and  spiritual  attire,  between  that
which  may  plense  the  eye  of  frivolous  men  and  womtn  and  that  which  "in  the  sight
of  God  is  of  great  price ; "  not  the  latest  Paris  fashions,  but  "  the  ornami'nt  of  a  meek
and  quiet  spiiit"  (a  lesson  especially  to  Christian  matrons  to  set  a  safe  example  to  their
juniors).  The  "  manner  of  life  "  i>rescribed  in  both  these  passages  may  be  attained  by
a  conscientious  observance  of  the  exhortation,  "  be  in  subjection."  Every  family  must
have  one  head.  Though  "  love  is  the  fulfi  ling  of  the  Law,"  if  the  words  "authority"  and
"subjection"  are  never  to  be  heard  in  the  home,  it  must  be  tlirough  a  conscientious  regard
to  mutual  duties.  This  subjection  is  "  fitting."  "  Doth  not  even  nature  itself  teach  ?  "
The  satire  poured  on  an  imperious  wife,  and  the  sympathy  felt  for  a  widow  deprived  of
her  stay,  supply  answers.  Scripture  teaches  the  pre-eminence  of  the  husband  as
illustrated  by  various  relations  between  the  sexes :  e.g.  tlie  order  of  creation  (1  Tim.
ii.  13),  the  derivation  of  womai  (1  Cor.  xi.  8)',  her  destiny  (G.  n.  ii.  20;  1  Cor.  xi.  7,  9),
her  share  in  the  first  transgression  (1  Tim.  ii.  14)  and  peuaty  (Gen.  iii.  16),  and  their
relative  position  in  the  kingdom  of  grace  (1  Cor.  xi.  3).  Thus  submi-^hion  is  "fitting
in  the  Lord."  And  the  same  words  remind^  us  of  the  only  limit  to  it  (Acts  iv.  19;
V.  29).  Two  motives  are  suggested.  1.  An  ungodly  husband  may  thus  be  won  for
Christ  (1  Pet.  iii.  1 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  16).  2.  An  obedient  wife  is  a  living  t\pe  of  Christ's
obedient  Church,  and  is  thus  a  wittiess  to,  the  reality  of  Christ's  authority  in  both  the
family  and  the  Church.

II.  To  HUSBANDS.  "In  exhortations  the  scales  should  be  equally  poised "  (Ohrysos
tom)  as  they  are  here.  For  what  St.  Paul  has  stiid  to  wives  already  suggests  to
husbands  :  If  our  wives  are  to  be  such  to  us,  "  what  manner  of  persons,"  etc.  V  (2  Pet.
iii.  11).  Turning  to  1  Pet.  iii.  7,  we  see  some  of  the  husbatid's  duties.  "Dwell  with
tliem'"  (tnaking  home  magnetic)  "  according  to  knowledge  "  (the  highest  wisdom  you
can  gain  for  governing  and  uuiding),  "giving  honour,"  etc.  (the  honour  of  esteem,  of
attention  to  the  latest  day  of  lite,  of  confidence,  etc.).  These  duties  are  summed  up
here  in  "love"  (Rora.  xiii.  10).  St.  Paul  does  not  say,  as  the  complement  of  ver.  18,
"Govern  them,"  but  "Love  them."  The  loving  husband  will  secure  the  dutiful  wife.
Motives  are  suggested  both  by  reason  and  revelation.  1.  A  wife  is,  by  God's  appoint-
njent,  part  of  Our  very  selves  (Eph.  v.  31  and  28).  Marriage  is  a  union  of  souls.
"  Bitter  aijainst  them?" — against  those  we  have  taken  into  the  very  shrme  of  our  lives?
Plutarch  tells  us,  "  They  who  did  sacrifice  at  the  rites  of  Juno  took  out  the  gall  of  the
victim  and  threw  it  away,  signifying  by  the  ceremony  that  it  was  not  fit  that  bile  and
bitterness  should  enter  into  the  married  state."  W.  Jay  quotes  Eph.  v.  29  thus :  " '  No
man  ever  yet  hated  his  own  liesh,'  but  many  a  monster  has  done  so."  2.  A  wife  is
the  weaker  vessel  physically,  not  spiritually.  Further  motives,  addressed  to  the  godly,
are:  3.  You  are  "  heirs  ^together  of  the  grace  of  lil'e.''  Disunion  will  hinder  prayers
(Matt,  xviii.  19)  and  progress  in  your  pilgrimage.  4.  A  husband's  love  is  to  be  a  copy
of  Christ's  love  (Eph.  v.  25—27),  self-sacrificing,  purifying,  winning  the  allegiance  of
the  whole  nature.

Liarn :  1.  The  grave  responsibility  of  entering  the  marriage  relation.  Take  no  one
as  a  wife  for  whom  you  cannot  cherish  the  love  of  esteem;  or  as  a  husband  whom  you
cannot  reverence  as  worthy  of  being  a  guide  and  a  stay.  2.  The  duty  of  Christians  to
marry  "  only  in  the  Lord  "  (ver.  17 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  39).  3.  The  preciousuess  of  a  spiritual
bond  which  shall  survive  the  dissolution  of  the  marriage  tie  by  death  (Luke  xx.
35,  36).— E.  S.  P.

Vers.  20,  21. — Children  and  pnrtntt.  The  family  and  the  Church,  the  natural  and
spiritual  home,  are  the  two  most  sacred  associations  on  earth,  having  as  their  Head  "  the
Father  from  whom  every  family  in  heaven  and  on  earth  is  named ''  (Eph.  iii.  15).  The
strength  of  the  nation  and  the  welfare  of  the  world  are  inseparably  bound  up  with


20B  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oh.  m.  1— 2R

families.  Madame  de  Stael,  asked  by  Bonaparte  what  was  the  greatest  want  of
France,  replied,  "Mothers."  Tlie  gospel  brings  to  families  the  blessing  of  Abraham
(Gen.  xvii.  T)  and  of  Jesus  Christ  (Matt.  xix.  13 — 16 ;  Acts  ii.  39).  It  has  messages
to  children  and  to  parents.

I.  The  message  of  the  gospel  to  children.  Children  have  a  place  in  the  kingdom
of  heaven  (Mark  x.  16),  recognized  by  baptism  into  the  Name  of  Christ,  the  Lord  of  all
(Matt,  xxviii.  18 — 20).  Hence  they  are  addressed  as  called  to  be  young  disciples.  The
obedience  of  childhood  to  both  parents  (Prov.  i.  8)  prepares  for  dutiful  love  in  mors
advanced  years  (Prov.  xxiii.  22),  and  teaches  lessons  of  submission  to  the  will  of  tlie
Divine  Father.  Three  motives  are  suggested  in  these  messages.  1.  "  For  this  is  right."
(Eph.  vi.  1.)  There  is  a  fine  ring  as  of  genuine  metal  in  this  motive — the  supremacy
of  duty  irrespective  of  reward.  Obedience  is  but  payment  in  part  of  a  debt  due  to
parents.  2.  "  This  is  well-pleasiny  in  the  Lord.''  Eemembering  the  one  qualification
suggested  by  "  in  the  Lord,"  children  may  enjoy  Enoch's  testimony  (Heb.  xi.  5).  3.
It  has  a  fecial  promise  (Eph.  vi.  2,  3),  which  was  given  to  Gentiles.  Illustrate  from
the  national  persistence  of  the  Chinese ;  from  the  continuance  of  the  Bechabites  (Jer.
XXXV.  18,  19;  and  see  Smith's  'Dictionary  of  the  BiL)le,'  ii.  1008);  and  from  the
tendency  of  obedience  and  purity  in  youth  to  promote  health  and  long  life  in  maturity.
But  the  com  plexity  of  natural  laws  forbids  us  to  consider  this  an  absolute  promise  to
each  individual.  The  most  dutiful  Child  among  men  (Luke  ii.  51 ;  John  xix.  25-^27)
died  young  under  the  law  of  obedience  and  sacrifice  for  others  (John  xii.  24 — 26).

II.  The  message  of  the  gospel  to  pakents.  Combining  ver.  21  and  Eph.  vi.  4,
we  are  reminded  of  the  following  truths.  1.  The  grave  responsibility  of  parents  towards
their  children :  who  bear  on  them  the  image  of  God,  though  marred  by  evil ;  who  belong
to  Christ  and  have  a  place  in  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  yet  are  in  a  world  of  sin ;  who
have  to  be  steered  through  the  perils  of  youth  to  a  Christian  manhood  and  womanhood
which  we  desire  to  be  something  better  than  our  own.  2.  The  privilege  of  recognizing
their  relationship  to  Christ.  Ttiey  belong  to  him.  They  need  not  to  be  brought  into,
but  to  be  brought  up  in,  the  nurture  of  the  Lord.  Christ  (John  i.  9)  is  nearer  to  them
and  speaks  to  them  earlier  than  we  can.  If  we  are  giving  to  them  wise  Christian
nurture  we  should  expect  that  they  will  grow  up  within  the  shelter  of  the  fold
following  the  Shepherd's  steps.  3.  There  is  a  treatment  which  discouraqes  early  piety.
Anything  calculated  to  provoke  to  anger  tends  to  discourage  children  from  believing  they
can  be  young  disciples  and  seeking  to  live  as  such.  Hence  this  caution  to  fathers  (aa
heads  of  the  house  and  as  more  likely  to  abuse  their  authority).  From  which  caution  and
the  precept  in  Eph.  vi.  4,  we  may  gather  such  hints  on  parental  duty  as  the  following.
Make  the  character  and  temperament  of  each  child  a  special  study,  employing  moral
principles  impartially,  but  adapting  treatment  to  individual  cases.  Rule  by  love  and  not
by  fear,  avoiding  the  perils  of  over-indulgence  (1  Sam.  iii.  13;  1  Kings  i.  6)  and  over-
commandment,  never  making  false  threats,  nor  hesitating  to  revoke  a  hasty  command
which  reflection  will  not  justify ;  nor  punishing  under  the  influence  of  passion.  Seek
to  win  the  confidence  of  the  children  in  regard  to  their  spiritual  history.  Do  not  pro-
pose to  them  tests  of  Christian  character  unsuitable  to  their  age,  or  visit  childish  faults
as  though  they  were  grave  moral  delinquencies.  In  choosing  for  them  companions
schools,  occupations,  "  seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God,"  etc.  (As  warning  illustrations,
cf.  Gen.  xiii.  10 — 13;  xix.  14,  31,  etc.;  2  Chvon.  xviii.  I;  xxi.  6.)  In  every  department
of  life  seek  to  combine  the  needed  discipline  (iraiSe^a)  and  instruction  (vouflEtr/o)  with
that  personal  influence  and  example  which  alone  can  make  them  "  the  chastening  and
admonition  ff  the  Lord."  4.  Children  are  a  most  povstrful  and  touching  motive  tt
parental  piety.    (Of.  John  xvii.  19.) — E.  S.  P.

Ver.  22— ch.  Iv.  1. — Servants  and  their  masters.  Many  of  the  "  servant*"  of  the
New  Testament  were  slaves.  Their  general  condition  was  lamentable.  Illustrate  this
from  the  penal  code,  etc.  (Smith's '  Dictionary  of  Antiquities,'  art.  "Servus"),  and  from  the
incident  that  had  recently  occurred  at  Rome  (Tacitus,  'Ann.,'  xiv.  42 — 45,  or  Conybeare
and  HowBon's  '  St.  Paul,'  ii.  468,  n.).  Paul's  connection  with  Onesimus  also  brought  the
subject  prominently  before  his  mind.  Christianity,  by  the  very  divinity  of  its  truths,
tended  to  unsettle  the  mind  of  a  converted  slave  if  his  niaster  were  a  Christiail,  and  still
more  if  he  wer*  a  reckless  heathen.    It  came  like  a  torch  of  truth  into  an  atmosphere


OH.  UL 1—25.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  203

laden  with  the  explosive  materials  of  falsehood  and  fraad.  It  might  easily  have  lit  up
the  flames  of  a  new  servile  war.  But  Jesus  Christ  came  to  effect  the  grandest  revolution,
noiselessly,  by  the  spread  of  Divine  principles  fatal  to  every  wrong  (Isa.  xlii.  2 — 4,
6,  7).  .The  precept.  Matt.  vii.  la,  laid  the  axe  to  the  root  of  slavery,  as  it  also  under-
minded  the  ramparts  of  every  other  ancient  wrong.  Christianity  must  crush  slavery,
or  it  will  be  corrupted  and  vitiated  by  it.  Meanwhile  it  bettered  the  position  of  con-
verted slaves.  It  made  them  masters  of  their  own  consciences.  It  taught  tliem  so  to
prize  their  spiritual  privileges  as  not  to  be  over-anxious  about  their  earthly  lot  (1  Cor.
vii.  21 — 24).  Tlie  same  principles  are  applicable  to  the  present  conditions  of  Christian
servants  and  their  masters.

I.  The  duty  and  dignity  of  Christian  servants.  It  is  significant  that  some  of
the  most  impressive  statements  of  Christian  doctrine  and  duty  are  foimd  in  sections  of
the  Epistles  addressed  to  servants  (vers.  22 — 25  ;  Titus  ii.  9 — 14 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  18 — 25).
In  this  passage  we  see :  1.  The  servanfs  duty.  (Ver.  22.)  We  are  reminded  here,  as
in  the  previous  exhortations,  of  the  qualification  implied  in  the  term,  "  according  to
the  flesh;"  e.y.  Obadiah (1  Kings xviii.  3,4).  Masters  cannot  command  the  consciences
even  of  young  apprentices  (cf.  Matt.  xxii.  21 ;  Rom.  xiv.  12).  God  only  can  adjust
the  shares  of  responsibility  for  a  double  sin  (Job.  xii.  16).  Servants  are  especially
warned  against  a  common  form  of  unoonscientiousness — "eye-service  ;'"  e.g.  wasting  a
master's  time,  or  hiding  up  slovenly  work  done  in  his  absence.  Tlie  fidelity  of  Joseph
(Gren.  xxxix.  3, 6,  22,  23)  may  be  taken  as  a  pattern,  and  Nehemiah's  maxim  (v.  15)
as  a  motto.  2.  The  servant's  privilege.  (Ver.  23.)  Being  bound  to  do  everything  in
the  fear  of  God,  he  may  do  everything  in  the  love  of  God.  The  great  regulating  principle
of  the  Christian  life  may  be  a  motive  and  an  under-current  of  thought  in  every  detail
of  duty  (as  the  love  of  wife  and  children  is  to  a  father  busied  in  commerce).  As  Jesus
was  "about  his  Father's  business"  when  at  the  carpenter's  bench,  and  as  Paul  was
•'serving  the  Lord  Christ"  when  plying  the  needle  or  shuttle,  so  may  Christ  be  served
in  the  kitchen.  (Illustrate  from  George  Heibert's  ' The  Elixir.')  Such  service  being
"  from  the  soul "  will  be  such  as  can  be  presented  to  the  eye  of  the  Divine  Master,  who
is  always  watching  us,  with  that  "  singleness  of  heart "  which  is  the  strength  and  stay
of  every  true  disciple's  character  (2  Cor.  i.  12).  3.  The  servant's  recompense.  (Vers.  24,
25.)  'The  twenty-fifth  verse  reminds  even  down-trodden  slaves  that  the  wrongs  they
endure  will  be  no"  excuse  for  the  wrongs  they  do.  The  law  of  Lev.  xix.  15  is  the  rule
of  the  Divine  Judge.  But  the  encouragement  precedes  the  warning.  The  reward  will
be  proportionate  (Eph.  vi.  8 ;  cf.  1  Cor.  iii.  8).  It  will  consist  of  an  inheritance  (Matt.
XXV.  84 ;  1  Pet.  i.  4),  the  chief  glory  of  which  will  be  its  sinless  service  of  a  Master
who,  by  giving  us  the  honour  of  thus  serving  him  (Rev.  xxii.  3,  4),  will  be  serving  us
(Luke  xii.  37).

II.  The  kesponsibilitt  of  Chetstian  masters.  (Ch.  iv.  1.)  Two  things  are
demanded  even  for  a  slave.  1.  Justice.  This  could  easily  be  refused;  and  human
tribunals,  if  they  could  be  appealed  to,  might  entangle  the  weak,  but  be  powerless  to
restrain  the  strong.  Plato  ('  De  Leg.,'  o.  6)  tells  us  that  the  noblest  specimen  of  justice
is  when  a  man  abstains  from  injuring  those  he  may  easily  wrong.  Christianity  demands
even  more  than  this.  Hence  such  cautions  as  some  of  (he  rules  of  feudalism  suggest :
"  Between  the  servant  and  the  lord  there  is  no  judge  save  God ;  "  "  The  lord  who
exacts  what  is  unjust  from  his  servant  exacts  it  at  the  peril  of  his  soul."  2.  "  That
which  is  equal."  (Cf.  Eph.  vi.  9.)  This  extends  to  slaves  the  protection  of  our  Lord's
"golden  rule,"  and  places  masters  under  this  royal  law.  This  points  towards  emanci-
pation, and  in  most  cases  enforces  it  on  the  enlightened  conscience.  In  our  present
circumstances  the  rendering  of  that  which  is  equal  will  restrain  masters  from  giving
the  lowest  market  price  for  labour  such  as  bare  justice  might  demand  when  that  price
involves  grinding  poverty ;  and  leaving  old  servants  to  "  the  law  of  demand  and  supply."
But  servants  must  live  under  the  same  law,  not  forgetting  the  responsibilities  and  risks
of  capital,  or  nurturing  an  unreasonable  selfishness.  Some  noble  illustrations  of  how
Christianity  leavens  commerce  in  this  aspect  have  been  seen  in  England  during  the
"cotton  famine"  of  1862,  and  in  more  recent  years,  when,  for  the  sake  of  the  work-
people, mills  have  been  kept  running  and  collieries  working  at  a  very  serious  loss.
Observe  the  motive :  "  Ye  have  a  Master  in  heaven,"  "  higher  than  the  highest,"  before
whom  earthly  distinctions  are  but  trifles ;  who  delights  to  observe  every  generous  act ;


«)4  THE  EPtSTLS  TO  TAB  COLOSStANl        toB.m.l-fi&,

who  at  any  time  may  call  master  or  servant  to  give  an  account  of  his  stewardship;
from  whom  we  siiall  need  to  receive,  uut  ngid  jusiice,  but  unmt'iited  mercy,  through
his  own  generous  gift  of  grace  in  Christ  Jesus  (Matt.  v.  7j  vii.  2). — E.  S.  P.

Ver.  1. — Christian  aspiration.  If  we  would  understand  St.  Paul  we  must  often
remind  ourselves  of  his  view  of  the  Christian  life  as  a  union  and  identification  with  the
life  of  Christ  in  its  several  stages.  Tlie  apostle  teaches  that  the  Christian  has  to  live
spiritually  the  same  life  that  Christ  livid  both  spiritually  and  visibly.  He  must
humble  himself  like  Christ,  his  old  self  must  bo  orucifleil,  he  must  be  buried  to  the
world  and  then  rise  again  iu  a  new  life.  Now,  we  are  to  see  how  the  Ascension  follows
the  KesurrectioD ;  how,  as  it  was  in  the  human  experience  of  Christ,  so  spiritually  to
us  there  must  be  a  rising  to  the  tlujigs  above  after  we  have  come  from  the  death  of  sin
to  the  new  Christian  life.

I.  CHWSTIAN  aspiration   SPKINQS  FROM  THE   EXPERIENCE   OP  A  NEW  SPIRITUAL  LIFE.

The  resurrection  must  precede  the  ascension.  Christ  rose  from  the  dead  before  he  was
received  up  into  heaven.  We  have  our  resurrection.  Without  it  we  vainly  strive  to
aspire  to  higher  things.  So  long  as  the  soul  is  dead  in  tiespasses  and  sins  it  can  have
no  power  to  rise  to  the  lieights  of  celestial  experience.  But  this  resurrection  has  taken
place  in  every  true  Christian.  Chrisliauiiy  does  not  satisfy  itself  with  the  death  of  tlie
old  life  of  sin.  It  is  itself  a  new  resurrection-life.  The  destruction  of  old  habits,  evil
pleasures,  a  wicked  will,  etc.,  are  but  the  first  process.  The  very  purpose  of  this  killing
of  the  old  is  to  make  way  for  the  awakening  of  the  new  life.  Christ  could  not  have
risen  if  he  had  not  died.  He  died  that  he  might  rise  again.  We  die  to  sin  that  we
niay  thereby  rise  into  newness  of  life.  The  Christian  lives  with  the  energies,  faculties,
liopes,  and  aims  of  a  new  life.  All  is  not  done  in  the  act  of  the  new  birth.  This,  like
natural  birth,  is  the  beginning  of  greater  thiugs.  The  aspect  of  the  new  life  must  bo
onward  and  upward.

II.  Christian  aspiration  aims  at  the  things  that  are  above.  It  must  soar
aliove  the  sinful  pleasures  and  habits  of  the  past.  It  would  be  undoing  all  the  work  of
redemption  if  the  freed  soul  were  to  let  itself  be  a,c;ain  taken  captive  by  sin.  The
death-agonies  of  repentance  and  the  birth-throes  of  the  new  life  would  be  endured  in
vain  if,  like  a  sow  returning  to  its  wallowing  in  the  mire,  the  soul  went  back  again  to
grovel  in  the  low  and  evil  things  of  its  old  life.  What  is  the  use  of  the  beautiful  wings
of  the  moth  if  it  continues  to  crawl  over  the  garbage  on  which  the  caterpillar  fed?
Moreover,  the  Christian  aspiration  must  carry  him  away  from  ihe  old  narrow  restraints
and  formal  methods  and  laws  of  the  old  life.  It  is  not  for  him  to  go  back  to  "  ordinances"
(ch.  ii.  20).  Ohserve,  however,  that  the  aspiration  is  to  be  to  that  which  is  above,  not
merely  to  that  which  is  future.  The  mere  longing  for  heaven  as  a  home  of  the  future
may  degenerate  into  an  idle  sentiment.  The  true  Christian  aspiratinn  looks  upward
rather  than  forward.  It  seeks  the  heavenly  things  that  may  be  had  already  in  some
degree.  Its  aims  are  for  those  things  which  are  spiritually  higher  and  better  than  the
things  at  present  experienced.  The  Christian  should  prefer  heavenly  treasure  to  earthly
riches;  the  smile  ot  God  to  the  favour  of  man;  truth,  purity,  and  love  to  any  things
that  are  seen  and  temporal.

III.  Christian  aspiration  is  supported  by  fellowship  with  Christ.  Nothing
is  more  difficult  than  active  aspiration.  The  aspiration  of  sentiment  that  looks  up  may
be  easy.  But  the  aspiration  of  life  that  seeks  the  things  that  are  above  is  beyond  our
common  endeavours.  The  wings  of  the  soul  are  leeble.  We  lose  ouiselves  in  the
clouds  of  our  lower  atmosphere  before  we  have  a  glimpse  of  the  stars  above.  Storms
beat  ua  back  again  to  earth,  weak  and  weary  and  sad.  We  can  only  safely  aspire  in
Christ.  As  we  die  with  him  and  rise  Irom  the  grave  of  our  old  selves  with  him,  so
we  ascend  by  continued  fellowship  with  him.    We  may  hold  it  true

"  That  men  may  rise  on  stepping  stones
Of  their  dead  selves  y>  higher  things.'

But  we  find  In  experience  that  the  process  is  slow  and  toilsome.  We  want  a  hand
above  to  draw  us  up.  Now,  as  Chiist  is  already  in  glory,  when  we  seek  to  be  near  to
Christ  we  approach  his  hiiih  estate.  Two  important  lessons  flow  from  this  truth.  1.
We  cannot  remain  in  fellowship  with  Christ  if  we  grovel  among  the  things  of  earth.


OH.  ni.  1—25.]         TUB  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN9.  201


Christ  ascending  to  hnavenly  places  will  leave  us  behind  and  henpnthhis  companionship
unless  we  ascend  to  heavenly  mindedness.  The  worldly  iniiuled  Christian  is  the  Christ-
less  Chiiistian.  2.  But  close  fellowship  with  Christ  is  the  one  way  by  means  of  which
we  may  ascend  to  the  things  which  are  above. — ^W.  P.  A.

Ver.  3. — The  hidden  life.  After  Christ  died  he  was  seen  do  more  by  the  world.  It
is  true  that  for  forty  days  he  appeared  repeatdly  on  earth,  but  only  to  his  own  disciples.
The  world  never  saw  him  after  the  stone  was  rolled  against  the  entrance  of  the  sepulchre
in  Joseph's  uarden  on  the  night  of  the  Crucifixion.  And  soon  he  ascended  to  heaven
to  be  with  God,  and  was  no  longer  visible  even  to  bis  own  followers.  But  he  will  come
again,  when  "every  eye  shall  behold  him."  Now,  a  similar  experience  is  that  of  the
true  life  of  the  Christian.  He  has  died  to  the  old  life  in  the  world  which  the  world
fully  understood.  He  has  risen  to  a  new  life  which  the  world  does  not  understand — a
secret,  internal,  spiritual  life  united  to  the  life  of  Christ  and  hidden  in  God.  But  this
life  will  be  revealed  when  Christ  appears  again.

I.  The  Christian  life  is  hidden.  1.  Its  source  of  supply  is  hidden.  Its  origin
is  mysterious;  for  "the  wind  bloweth  where  it  listeih,"  etc.  And  its  continued  sus-
tenance is  mysterious.  The  same  Spirit  which  feeds  it  gives  its  birth.  The  world  sees
the  fire  in  the  front,  and  they  wonder  that  the  waters  of  adversity  do  not  quench  it ;
but  not  behind,  where  One  is  constantly  pouring  on  the  oil  of  spiiitual  };race.  2.  Its
true  nature  is  hidden.  The  fruits  are  manifest.  The  hidden  natuie  of  the  spiritual
life  is  no  excuse  for  fiuitlessness  in  the  outer  life.     But  the  life  itself  is  not  the  less

.secret.  The  stream  flows  underground,  though  it  proves  its  presence  by  the  fresh
verdure  above.  It  is  known  only  to  the  soul  and  to  God ;  known  perfectly  only  to
God,  for  we  are  mysteries  to  ourselves.  3.  Its  destiny  is  hidden.  We  may  hear  the
deep  murmur  of  the  water  of  life.  But  we  cannat  trace  the  course  of  the  river,  nor  see
where  it  flows  into  the  oeean  of  God's  being.  The  world  does  not  understand  the  aims
and  aspirations  of  the  Christian.  Thus  he  may  be  much  maligned.  Let  him  merci-
fully refrain  from  judging  those  who  in  their  opposition  know,  not  what  they  do.   .

II.  This  life  is  with  Chbist  in  God.  1.  It  is  with  Christ.  That  is  the  essential
characteiistic  of  it.  Union  with  Christ  is  the  cause  of  all  the  glorious  and  mysterious
results  of  Christian  experience.  Christ  is  now  hidden  in  God.  Therefore  his  people
are  spiritually  hidden  with  him.  Better  be  hidden  with  Christ  than  famous  without
him.  There  are  secrets  that  are  delicious  in  their  very  secrecy.  What  can  be  more
happy  than  the  secret  relation  of  Christ  to  the  soul  ?  2.  It  is  in  God.  This  fact
accounts  for  the  secret  character  of  the  life.  God  is  unseeti,  and  all  relations  with  him
are  invisible.  To  be  deep  and  spiritual  our  life  must  go  out  into  the  darkness  that  it
may  find  its  home  in  God.  If  there  is  no  mystery  in  our  Christian  experience,  this
must  be  shallow  and  altogether  earthly.    It  can  have  no  living  relation  to  God.

III.  The  hidden  life  will  be  manifested  in  the  futueb.  We  talk  too  exclu-
sively of  the  revelation  of  evil  experiences  in  the  great  future.  But  many  good  and
glorious  secrets  will  also  be  declared.  The  despised  faithful  servant  of  Christ  will  be
honoured,  the  misjudged  character  will  be  cleared,  the  hidden  life  will  reveal  itself  in
glory.  The  idea  of  a  "spiritual  body"  seems  to  imply  the  visible  appearance  of  the
spiritual  life.  The  manifestation  of  Christ  will  bring  with  it  this  manifestation  of  his
people  (1- John  iii.  2).  Note,  the  doctrine  of  the  hidden  Christian  life  is  placed  between
two  practical  exhortations:  (L)  that  we  should  set  our  mind  on  the  things  that  are
above  (ver.  2) ;  and  (2)  that  we  should  mortify  what  remains  of  the  evil  life  (ver.  5).
— W.  F.  A,

Ver.  11  (last  clause). — Christ  all,  and  in  all.  I.  The  fact.  1.  Christ  is  everything
to  the  Christian.  All  other  interests  sink  into  insignificance  before  him,  as  the  stars
fade  at  the  rising  of  the  sun.  (1)  Christ  is  the  whole  |irice  of  redemption.  We  need
no  additional  grace  to  that  of  his  gospel.  We  have  not  to  supplement  that  gospel  by
the  Law,  or  to  eke  out  the  store  of  grace  with  our  good  works,  or  to  add  the  intercession
of  saints  to  that  of  Christ,  or  to  otter  any  fresh  sacrifices  to  complete  the  atonement.
Christ  cried  on  the  cross,  "  It  is  finished."  He,  and  he  alone,  is  suEBcient  to  bring  fuU
salvation.  (2)  Christ  is  the  one  Lord  of  our  lives.  He  will  accept  no  divided  devo-
tion.   He,  and  he  alone,  has  a  claim  to  rule  over  cui  bearti.    There  is  but  one  King  oi


206  THji   EPISTLE   TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  [ob.  m.  1— 26.

the  kingdom  of  heaven  that  Is  set  up  in  our  midst.  Any  priestly  pretension,  any
dogmatic  teaching,  or  any  political  coercion  that  interferes  with  the  authority  of  Christ,
is  treason  against  Heaven.  (3)  In  Christ  are  all  our  requirements.  To  be  in  him  now
is  the  deepest  peace ;  to  be  with  him  hereafter  is  the  joy  of  heaven.  All  sympathy
for  all  kinds  of  men,  in  all  possible  conditions  of  sorrow  or  of  joy,  may  be  found  in  bim.
All  truth  of  the  highest  Divine  things  may  be  seen  in  him,  the  "  Word  "  of  God.  2.
Christ  fills  everything  for  the  Christian.  He  is  in  all.  (1)  Christ  is  in  the  whole
heart.  All  the  true  Christian's  thought  and  affection  are  filled  with  Christ.  It  is  true
that  Christ  does  not  exclude  natural  human  affections.  It  was  the  fantastic  mistake
of  the  Church  that  a  St.  Catherine,  in  order  to  be  the  bride  of  Christ,  must  be  excluded
from  human  love.  On  the  contrary,  Christ  enters  our  human  affections  and  pervades
them.    In  regard  to  social  intercourse  we  may  say —

"Let  not  my  heart  within  me  bum
Except  in  all  I  thee  discern."

(2)  Christ  is  in  the  whole  of  life.  He  does  not  belong  to  a  small  consecrated  section
of  it,  a  temple  of  holiness,  shut  off  from  the  busy  haunts  of  commerce  and  pleasure.
He  comes  into  our  business,  our  pleasure,  our  mundane  affairs  generally.  He  is  as
much  in  the  office  and  the  workshop  as  in  the  Church.  He  claims  the  six  days  as  much
as  the  Sunday.  (3)  Christ  is  in  each  and  all  of  his  people.  He  is  not  only  in  apos-
tolic leaders  and  pattern  saints ;  he  is  in  little  children,  the  ignorant,  the  insignificant,
the  imperfect,  the  latest  converts  of  a  mission  to  degraded  heatben.

II.  The  coivSEcjuBNOES  of  this  fact.  1.  It  is  a  motive  for  holiness.  If  we  are
new  men  in  Christ,  all  life  belongs  to  him.  There  is  no  room  for  the  indulgence  of  sin.
Any  unclean  spot  is  a  desecration  of  his  temple.  2.  This  fact  hredks  down  the  sepa-
rating harrier  hetween  man  and  man.  Political  distinctions  ("  Greek  and  Jew  "),  religious
distinctions  apart  from  Christ  ("circumcision  and  unciroumcision  "),  distinctions  of  civi-
lization ("barbarian, Scythian"),  social  distinctions  ("bondman,freeman"),  all  melt  before
the  unifying  influence  of  the  common  presence  of  Christ.  3.  This  fact  is  a  motive  for
Christian  charity.  (Vers.  12, 13.)  It  should  lead  to  wider  sympathy  and  warmer  com-
passion ;  to  greater  gentleness,  forbearance,  and  meelmess ;  to  a  more  forgiving  spirit
among  Christians.  Remember  that  as  you  treat  your  fellow-Christian  so  you  are  treat-
ing Christ  (Matt.  xxv.  45).  If  it  is  difficult  to  love  him  for  his  own  sake,  love  him
for  the  sake  of  Christ.  If  there  is  little  of  beauty  in  his  soul  and  much  to  repel  and
annoy  us,  still  consider  that,  though  the  temple  is  not  attractive,  there  dwells  within  it
One  who  is  altogether  lovely.  Love  the  Christ  who  may  be  found  even  in  the  vmcouth
Christian.— W.  F.  A-

Ver.  14. — The  land  of  perfectness.  L  No  Chkistian  characteb  is  perfect  without
LOVE.  There  may  be  wide  knowledge,  stainless  purity,  and  fiery  zeal.  But  the  character
will  be  broken  and  unfinished  if  the  golden  grace  is  missing.  This  has  been  singularly
forgotten  by  the  Church.  Anything  but  Christian  charity  has  been  sought  after.  In
the  very  zeal  for  other  excellences  this  one  has  been  trampled  underfoot.

II.  Love  is  the  crowning  Christian  qeacb.  "  Above  all  these  things  put  on  love."
1.  Love  is  the  highest  pinnacle  of  the  Christian  temple.  Too  often  the  supremacy  has
been  given  to  orthodoxy,  to  negative  purity,  or  to  rigorous  devotion.  It  has  to  be
learnt  that  it  is  better  to  be  heterodox  and  to  love  our  brethren,  than  to  be  sound  in
doctrine  and  selfish  in  heart.  It  needs  also  to  be  more  understood  that  he  who  denies
himself  most  for  his  brother  stands  higher  than  he  who  is  simply  irreproachable  in
behaviour.  2.  Love  is  thus  supreme  (1)  because  it  is  of  the  essential  nature  of  Ood,
who  is  love  ;  (2)  because  it  is  the  source  of  all  other  graces ;  (3)  because  in  itself  it  is
letter  than  anything  else.

III.  Love  binds  together  all  other  Christian  graces.  Without  it  the  character
is  not  only  imperfect,  it  lacks  unity  and  cohesion.  Love  is  like  the  keystone  of  the
arch,  which  both  completes  the  structure  and  holds  all  the  other  stones-  together.  1 .
Love  should  surround  wery  other  grace  as  the  bond  surrounds  the  bundle.  Purity,
truth,  justice,  courage,  temperance,  etc.,  should  all  be  exercised  in  love.  2.  Love
should  bring  ali  other  graces  nearer  toe/ether.  Through  love  we  should  realize  the
relation  between  genoiosit;'  and  justice,  purity  and  liberty,  meekness  and  com'age.    H.


OH.  ml— 25.]  THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa  807

Love  should  malte  a  harmonious  whole  of  the  character.  The  separate  sticks  become
one  bundle  when  tied  up  together.  Love  should  give  unity  of  spirit  and  purpose  to
the  whole  life.  4.  Love  should  perfect  the  strength  of  the  Christian  character.  When
all  the  graces  are  bound  by  the  bond  of  love  they  mutually  rtrengthen  one  another.
Selfishness  distracts,  divides,  and  weakens  life.  The  aoul  that  is  possessed  by  love  is
strong.— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  15. — Peace  the  umpire,  St.  Paul  is  not  exactly  desiring  that  the  peace  of  Christ
may  have  a  large  place  in  the  hearts  of  his  readers,  thiat  it  may  be  unfettered  and
dominant,  that  it  may  govern  all  the  affections  and  passions  of  the  soul,  as  the  trans-
lation in  our  Authorized  Version  would  lead  us  to  read  his  words,  and  as  they  are
commonly  quoted.  Instead  of  the  word  "  rule  "  we  should  read  "  arbitrate."  The
apostle  would  have  this  peace  arbitrating  among  the  conflicting  claims  of  various
interests  and  the  mutually  opposing  forces  of  various  thoughts  and  feelings.  In  fact,
it  is  to  be  an  umpire.

L  Wb  kebd  an  umpire  in  omi  hearts.  The  conditions  of  our  troublesome  inner
life  prove  this  necessity.  1.  2%e  iw»r  of  passions.  Earthly  desire  fights  against
heavenly  aspiration,  bodily  appetite  against  spiritual  hunger,  selfish  greed  against
generous  love,  wild  passion  against  pure  emotion.  2.  T/ie  conflict  of  claims.  Public
claims  conflict  with  private  claims.  Future  interests  do  not  .ngree  with  temporary
advantages.  We  are  drawn  hither  and  thither  by  cross  attractions,  confused  by  a  babel
of  contradictory  voices,  urged  by  the  force  of  a  tempest  of  impulses.  3.  The  distrac-
tion of  doubts.  Our  thoughts  will  not  harmonize.  One  idea  clashes  with  another.
We  hear  no  music  of  the  spheres  in  the  circling  doubts  of  our  troubled  minds.  We
need  an  umpire  to  help  us  to  discover  what  are  true  among  so  many  prophet-voices.

IL  Peace  is  the  umpire  needed  by  our  hearts.  When  we  possess  our  souls  in
quietness  we  are  able  to  see  the  right  and  the  truly  desirable  as  we  never  can  while
we  are  distracted  by  exciting  influences.  1.  Peace  arbitrates  between  the  passio^is.
Like  a  runaway  horse  who  has  taken  the  bit  in  his  teeth  and  rushes  on  blindly  to
destruction,  passion  sees  nothing,  and  the  soul  possessed  by  passion  wrecks  its  highest
interests.  We  must  be  calm  to  know  what  feelings  may  be  indulged  and  what  must
be  curbed.  2.  Peace  arbitrates  between  conflicting  claims.  When  all  claimants  shout
together  it  is  impossible  to  discover  the  rights  of  any.  There  must  be  quiet  in  the
court  of  justice.  There  must  be  quiet  in  the  soul,  that  a  calm  consideration  of  appa-
rently opposed  duties  and  interests  may  be  made.  3.  Peace  arbitrates  between  dis-
tracting thoughts.  While  the  storm  rages  the  sea  is  turbid.  The  waters  must  be  calm
if  we  are  to  look  down  to  the  pearls  that  may  lie  in  their  depths.  We  must  think
quietly  if  we  would  think  truly.

III.  In  Christ  wb  find  the  peace  which  will  be  the  umpire  nbeoed  by  oub
souls.  It  is  vain  simply  to  exhort  the  heart  to  beat  more  calmly.  The  very  effort  to
do  so  only  increases  the  perturbation.  It  would  be  cruel  mockery  for  a  man  to  say  to
one  in  distress  and  tumult,  "  Let  peace  arbitrate  in  your  heart."  You  may  as  well
command  the  wild  waves  of  the  sea  to  hush  themselves  to  rest.  1.  Christ  gives  peace.
He  who  said,  "  Peace,  be  still  1 "  to  the  waters  and  there  was  a  great  calm,  speaks  peace
to  the.  troubled  soul :  "  Come  unto  me,  .  .  .  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  B.  Clirist
gives  his  own.  peace.  The  peace  of  Christ  is  that  which  dwells  in  him.  As  he  desired
that  his  joy  might  be  in  his  disciples,  so  he  also  blessed  them  by  leaving  his  own  peace
as  a  legacy  when  he  departed.  "  My  peace  I  give  unto  you  "  (John  xiv.  27).  Nothing
is  more  wonderful,  nothing  i*  more  beautiful,  than  the  calmness  of  Jesus  among  the
storms  of  human  foes  and  diabolical  temptations  that  beat  upon  him.  Like  the  steady
beams  of  the  lighthouse  shining  calmly  over  a  wild  waste  of  howling  waters,  Christ,
the  Light  of  the  world,  shone  in  quietness  of  soul  over  all  storms  and  tumults.  Now
he  gives  this  his  peace  to  his  people. — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  16. — Psalmody.  Psalmody  held  a  very  prominent  position  in  Jewish  worship,
and  there  are  evidences  from  the  apostolic  writings  that  it  was  not  loss  honoured  in  the
Christian  Church.  Certainly  a  dispensation  which  was  ushered  in  by  angel-anthems,
and  which  surpassed  all  that  went  before  it  in  gladness,  should  not  be  wanting  in  scope
for  praise  and  adoration.    The  Church  that  neglects  psalmody  neglects  a  most  impor-


208  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.         [oh.  m.  1—25

tant  element  of  its  life  and  work,  and  will  assuredly  suffer  in  consequence.  Let  nil
especially  beware  of  the  absurd  notion  that  good  music  is  essentially  allied  to  any
particular  kind  of  teaching,  and  the  most  foolish,  suicidal  policy  of  degrading  the
t.ervice  of  song  because  we  may  not  agree  with  the  doctrines  of  those  people  who
develop  it  most  richly.  Tliis  is  to  leave  to  them  a  monopoly  of  a  pleasing  attraction
and  of  a  function  of  the  Christian  life  which  all  Christians  have  a  right  and  a  duty  to
employ.  If  it  was  wise  not  to  "  let  the  devil  have  all  the  best  tunes,"  it  must  be
unwise  to  permit  those  people  whose  religious  teaching  we  think  erroneous  to  have  all
the  good  music.    Consider  some  of  the  leading  characteristics  of  good  psalmody.

I.  It  should  be  BBAnTiFUL.  This  is  but  an  external  condition,  and  worthless
without  higher  qualifications.  But  it  is  not  unimportant.  1.  We  should  offer  our  bent
tu  Ood.  It  is  unworthy  to  cultivate  good  music  in  our  homes  and  to  seek  the  best
music  for  our  entertainments,  and  to  yet  offer  our  praises  to  God  in  slovenly,  unmusical
tones.  2.  We  should  help  the  expression  rif  our  own  devotion  hy  all  means  in  ow power.
Good  psalmody  will  not  create  devotion  in  an  undevout  heart,  but  it  will  assist  it  in
one  that  is  devout,  while  wearisome  dulness  and  jarring  discords  will  greatly  hinder  it.
3.  We  should  attract  others  to  our  religion.  It  is  not  only  lawful,  it  is  our  dut >■,  to  use  all
means  that  we  may  win  some.  No  means  are  more  eftective  than  good  psalmody.  Now,
this  beauty  of  psalmody  is  evidently  contemplated  by  St.  Paul.  "  Psalms"  lepresent
what  is  sung  to  musical  accompaniments;  "  songs,"  what  is  rendered  in  poetry.  Poetry
and  music  constitute  the  external  beauty  of  psalmody.

II.  It  should  bb  hbaeti'ELT.  "  Singing  with  grace  in  your  hearts."  1.  The  first
condition  is  the  enjoyment  of  Divine  grace.  Psalmody  should  be  the  expression  of
adoration  and  praise  in  response  to  the  grace  of  God.  If  we  have  not  the  grace  we
cannot  tiuly  take  our  part  in  the  Church's  song  of  praise.  Rut  let  us  not  distress  our-
selves with  the  narrow  notion  that  none  who  are  not  cleaily  spiritual  Christians  can
take  part  in  Christian  psalmody.  For  the  grace  of  God  is  so  wide  and  various  that
every  man  has  tasted  some,  and  they  who  have  not  the  highest  grace  have  still  enough
for  devout  thankfulness.  2.  The  praise  must  come  from  the  heart.  Whether  we  have
received  much  or  little  grace  we  must  be  consciously  thankful,  and  must  sing  God's
praises  in  our  souls  if  we  are  really  to  praise  him  at  all.  After  all,  the  music  of  the
heart,  even  if  it  be  sounded  forth  by  a  very  harsh  voice,  is  what  God  most  values.

III.  It  should  be  offered  to  God,  though  also  aimed  at  oub  owk  mutual
iNSTKUCTioN.  1.  The  tirst  great  object  of  psalmody  is  "singing  .  ,  .  unto  God."
This  gives  to  it  its  peculiar  solemn  interest.  W<jrship  is  expressed  by  it,  and  worship
is  the  noblest  act  of  the  soul.  2.  Nevertheless,  indirectly  we  teach  and  admonish  one
another  by  these  songs.  Strictly  didactic  poetry  is  not,  pei  hap-,  i  ither  very  interesting
or  very  instructive.  But  the  experience  of  one  soul  when  breathed  forth  in  song  may
be  heliiful  to  another  soul.  Hence  the  supreme  value  of  the  He'brew  psalms,  those
inimitable  expressions  of  universal  religious  experience.  We  may  receive  in  eong  what
we  would  not  heed  or  feel  when  offered  in  formal  iastruotion. — W.  F.  A.

Vers.  18,  X9l.— Husbands  ami  wives.    (See  on  Eph.  v.  22,  23.)— W.  F.  A.

Yen.  20,  21. — Children  and  parents.    (See  on  Eph.  vi.  1 — 4.) — W.  P.  A.

Ver.  22 — ch.  iy.  1. — Servants  and  masters.    (See  on  Eph.  vi.  5— 9.)— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  24  (last  clause). — The  service  of  Christ.  St.  Paul  is  giving  directions  to  bond-
servants. But  if  they  serve  the  Lord  Christ,  so  also  must  all  otlier  Christians  (ch.  iv.  1).
The  principles  of  conduct  recomnieided  to  the  slaves  may  be  taken  home  to  ounelves
by  all  of  us.

I.  Chbistianitt  is  the  service  op  the  Lobd  Cheist.  St.  Paul,  the  greatest  of
the  apostles,  called  himself  the  "  bond-servant  of  Jesus  Christ."  Christ  spoke  of  his
disciples  as  "servants"  (Matt.  x.  24),  though  he  generously  raised  them  above  the
common  limitations  of  service  by  admitting  them  into  the  confidences  of  friendship
(John  XV.  15).  The  gospel  first  offers  free  \,xiis — grace,  love,  forgiveness,  etc.  But
while  accepting  these  gifts,  and  neither  needing  nor  able  to  make  any  adequate  return,
we  are  not  to  be  nothing  but  recipients.    The  blessings  are  given  to  fit  ua  for  iervice.


CH.  IV.  1—18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.


209


The  Church  is  not  an  almshouse  for  the  indolent ;  it  is  a  hive  of  industry.  Christ  is
Master  as  well  as  Saviour.  The  first  act  of  faith  is  to  receive  the  grace  of  Christ  in
order  that  the  second  may  be  to  obey  his  commandments  (John  xiv.  15).

II.  The  service  of  Christ  extends  to  the  whole  of  life.  It  is  not  simply  a
matter  of  what  we  call  relisjious  affairs,  the  devotions  of  the  sanctuary,  etc.  It  is  not
merely  the  doing  of  work  that  is  called  spiritual,  such  as  preaching,  teaching,  etc.  The
b  ind-servants  are  bidden  to  serve  Christ  in  their  daily  work.  Thfy  are  exhorted  to
work  heartily  as  unto  the  Lord,  in  whatsoever  they  do  (ver.  23).  We  must  serve
Christ  in  our  daily  business.

III.  The  sbbvice  op  Ohmst  must  be  sincere.  1.  It  must  not  degenerate  into
eye-service.  Our  work  is  not  to  please  men,  but  to  serve  Christ.  His  eye  is  ever  on  us.
it  matters  little  whether  men  admire  or  neglect  our  work.  2.  It  must  be  done  in
singleness  of  heart.  Christ  will  take  no  divided  devotion.  We  must  not  be  covertly
seeking  our  own  interests  as  distinct  from  the  interests  of  Christ,  so  as  to  have  a
double,  distracting,  and  often  conflicting  series  of  ends  to  be  pursued.  We  shall  gain
our  own  blessedness  in  the  single-eyed  service  of  Christ,  and  not  as  a  side  issue.  3.
It  must  be  done  from  the  heart.  It  must  be  no  mechanical  work.  We  must  think
about  it  and  put  our  heart  and  scul  into  it.  There  is  a  world  of  difference  between
the  obedience  that  simply  followi  the  word  of  command  as  the  signal  rises  or  falls
when  the  lever  is  moved,  and  the  obedience  that  considers,  feels,  and  adopts  the  wishes
of  the  master,  and  carries  them  ai't  intelligently  and  voluntarily,  as  the  signalman
interprets  ami  follows  the  code  of  directions.

IV.  SuoH  SERVICE  OF  Cheist  ENNOBLES  ALL  WORK.  Work  is  noble  or  mean,  not  so
much  because  of  the  kind  of  things  done,  as  on  account  of  the  motives  that  inspire  it.
A  surgeon  has  to  do  things  which  would  be  disj;usting  in  themselves,  but  which  are
refined  by  the  humane  motives  that  prompt  them.  No  task  undertaken  for  a  pure
jmrpose  can  be  degrading.  The  most  menial  work  done  for  Christ's  sake  is  elevated  to
the  level  of  the  devotion  of  the  angels.

V.  Christ  will  recompense  his  servants  according  to  their  sbbvioe.  "  We  shall
all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ."  This  is  the  judgment  of  Christians.
AVe  are  inclined  to  forget  this  while  varning  publicans  and  sinners  of  their  coming
julgment.  Christians  will  have  to  gife  an  account  of  the  use  nf  their  talent.  1.
Then  deceitful  eye-ser  nice  will  be  exposed  ()>nd  punished.  2.  Thenfaithful,  obscure  devotion
will  b»  revealed  and  rewarded. — W.  P.  A,


EXPOSITION.


CHAPTER  IV.


Ver.  1.— (See  p.  157.)

Vera'.  2 — ti.— Section  IX.  Prater  and
Social  Comvebise.  Tliere  are  added  some
brief  exhortations  of  a  more  general  lenor,
the  contenis  of  which  are  summed  up  in  the
Leading  given  to  this  section.

Ver.  2. — Continue  steadfast  in  prayer,
being  watchM  (or,  wakeful)  therein,  with
thanksgiving  (Kph.  vi  18;  Eora.  xii.  12;
Phil.  iv.  6;  1  Tljess.v.  17, 18;  1  Tim.  ii.  1;
l,uke  xi.  8—10;  iviii.  1—8;  xxi.  36;  Acts
i.  14;  XX.  31 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  13;  1  Pet.  v.  8;
Matt.  xxvi.  41 ;  Mark  xiv.  38).  "  Steadfast
continuance"  in  prayer  is  specially  illus-
trated in  our  Lord's  sayings  on  the  Subject
in  St.  Luke  (eomp.  Acts  i.  14,  where  the
same  peculiar  verb  is  used).  In  Phil,
iv.  6;  1  Thess.  v.  17,  18;  1  Tim.  ii.  1,
again  "  thanksgiving  "  is  associated  with
"  prayer."  Wakefulness  in  prayer  i«  en-
joiaed  by  Christ  in   Matt.   xxvi.   41   and

COLOSSIANS.


Mark  xiv.    88:   compare  the  synonymous

a.ypmvea>,  to  he  sleepless,  used  in  Eph.  vi.  18 ;
Mark  xiii.  33 ;  Luke  xxi.  36 ;  Heb.  xiil.  17.
"  To  be  awake"  is  to  be  alive  in  the  fullest
sense,  to  have  all  the  powers  of  perception
and  action  in  readiness.  The  activity  of  the
Boul  in  prayer  is  to  lie  both  energetic  and
incessant.  "With  [liieially  in,4v,  not  ^era,
as  in  Eph.  vi.  18]  thanksgiving  "  gives  the
pervading  element  or  influence,  in  or  undei
which  the  prayers  of  the  Colossians  were  to
be  offered  (comp.  ch.  i.  12;  ii.  7 ;  iii.  15, 17).
Ver.  3.— Praying  at  the  same  time  also
for  ns  (Eph.  vi.  19;  Eora  xv.  30—32;
1  Thess.  V.  25;  2  Tliess.  iii.  1,  2 ;  Heb.  xiil.
18).  In  Ephesians  and  Romans  the  apostle
implores  prayer  for  himself  ulone,  and  dwells
on  his  personal  ciroum^tanues.  Here  and
in  the  Thessalonian  letters  he  unites  his
fellow-labourers  with  him  in  the  request.
That  God  may  open  to  ns  a  door  for  the
word  (1  Cor.  xvi.  9;  2  Cor.  ii.  12  ;  1  Thess.
i.  9;  ii.  1).    "The  word"  is  the  Word  U


iio


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


[oh.  IV.  1 — 18,


God  which  the  apostle  preaches  (ch.  i.  5, 25 ;
1  Thess.  i.  6;  Gal.  vi.  (i ;  2  Tim.  iv.  2;
Acts  X vi.  6) ;  and  "  a  door "  is  wanted,  in
his  present  difficulties,  througli  wliicli  that
Word  may  freely  pass,  such  as  he  speaks  of
in  1  Cor.  xvi.  9 ;  2  Oor.  ii.  12  (cnmp.  Acts
xiv.  27 ;  Eev.  iii.  8) .  It  is  fanciful  to  give
"  door  "  here  the  sense  of  "  mouth."  The_
"opening  of  my  mouth,"  in  Eph.  vi.  19,
expresses  the  subjective  freedom  (corre-
sponding to  ''  as  I  ought  to  speak,"  ver.  4) ;
"  the  door  for  the  word,"  the  objective
liberty  desired  by  St.  Paul  in  his  imprison-
ment. To  speak  the  mystery  of  Christ,
because  of  which  also  I  am  bound  (ch.  i.  23 —
29 ;  Eph.  vi.  19 ;  iii.  1—13 ;  iv.  1 ;  Phil  i.  12—
14;  Philem.  9;  2  Tim.  ii.  8—10;  Acts  xx.
22 — 24).  Were  his  prison  door  once  opened,
the  ajrostle  would  be  able  freely  to  preach  the
gospel  to  the  Gentiles — for  this  "tlie  m\  stery
of  Christ"  chiefly  signifies  (oh.  i.  25 — 29;
Eph.  iii.  1—8;  1  Tim.  ii.  3—7.)  (On
"  mystery,"  see  note,  ch.  i.  26.)  It  is  this  very
mission  which  makes  him  long  for  freedom,
that  keeps  him  a  prisoner  (ch.  i.  23 ;  Eph.
iii.  13).  He  is  in  the  strange  position  of  an
"ambassador  in  chains"  (Eph.  vi.  19;
Philem.  9,  10:  comp.  2  Tim.  ii.  9).  This
"  I  am  bound "  (singular)  shows  that  the
"for  us"  of  the  former  clause  designedly
includes  others  with  himself.
Ver.  4. — That  I  may  make  it  manifest,  as

1  ought  to  speak  (Eph.  vi.  20 ;  2  Cor.  ii.  17;
iv.  1—6;  v.  11,  20— vi.  10;  Rom.    xil.  6;

2  Tim.  ii.  24—26  ;  iii.  10 ;  Acts  xx.  18—21,
27,  33 — 35).  This  clause  qualifies  the  last ;
the  "  open  door "  is  to  be  asked  for  the
apostle,  that  he  may  make  effective  use  of
it.  The  mystery  has  been  made  manifed  by
God  in  the  mission  of  Christ  (ch.  i.  27;
ii.  15,  note;  2  Cor.  v.  19,  etc.);  but  that
manifestation  has  to  be  made  known  to  the
Gentile  world  (Eph.  iii.  9;  2  Cor.  ii.  14;
Eom.  X.  14).  To  this  end  he  had  received
a  special  manifestation  of  "the  mystery  of
Christ"  (2  Cor.  iv.  6;  v.  19  ;  Gal.  i.  15,  16  ;
Acts  ix.  15,  16 ;  xxii.  14,  15,  21 ;  xxvi.  16—
18).  Sow  the  apostle  conceives  that  he
"  ought  to  speak  "  appears  from  the  parallel
passagen  (see  especially  2  Cor.  v. ;  vi. ;  and
Acts  XX,).

Ver.  5. — ^Walk  in  wisdom  towards  those
without  (Eph.  V.  15—17 ;  1  Thess.  iv.  12 ;
▼  15  ;  1  Cor.  x.  32 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  2 ;  Titus  ii.  8 ;
1  Pet.  ii.  12, 15 ;  iii.  16;  Matt.  x.  16).  (On
"wisdom,"  see  ch.  i.  9,  note;  i.  28;  ii.3;
iii.  16;  this  was  a  chief  need  of  the  Colossian
Church.)  "  Those  without,"  as  opposed  to
Christians — "  those  within  the  pale  ;  "  a
Jewish  mode  of  expression  (Lightfoot):
comp.  1  Thess.  iv.  12 ;  1  Cor.  v.  12,  13 ;
1  Tim.  iii.  7.  From  a  different  point  of  view,
they  are  designated"  the  rest "  in  Eph.  ii.  3 ;
1  Thess.  iv.  13;  ».  ft    This  injunction  ap-


pears in  a  different  form  and  position  in
Ephesians.  Standing  at  the  close  of  the
writer's  exhortations,  and  followed  up  by
the  direction  of  the  next  verse,  it  is  more
pointed  and  emphatic  here.  Buying  up  each
(literally,  the)  opportunity  (Eph.  v.  16 ;  1  Cor.
vii.  29 ;  Gal.  vi.  10 ;  John  xi.  9,  10 ;  Luke
xiii.  32;  Eccles.  iii.  1—8).  In  Eph.  v.  16
the  reason  is  added,  "  because  the  days  aie
ev'il."  In  Dan.  ii.  8  (LS:X)  the  verb
i^ayop&(fD  ("  to  buy  out "  or  "  up,"  a  word  of
the  market)  has  precisely  this  sense  and
connection,  and  the  idiom  occursin  classical
writers.  The  verb  is  middle  in  voice :
"  buying  up  for  yourselves,"  "  for  your  owu
advantage."  In  Gal.  iii;  13  the  compound
verb  is  somewhat  differently  used.  The
opportunity  is  the  fit  time  for  each  step  of
a  well-conducted  walk,  the  precise  juncture
of  circumstances  which  must  be  seized  at
once  or  it  is  gone.  This  wary  promptitude
is  always  needful  in  dealing  with  men  of
the  world,  both  to  avoid  harm  from  them
and  in  seeking  to  do  them  good.  The  latter
thought,  it  may  be,  connects  this  verse  anJ
the  next.

Ver.  6. — (Let)  your  speech  (literally,  teord)
(be)  always  with  grace,  seasoned  with  salt
(Eph.  iv.  29,  31 ;  v.  3,  4;  Titus  ii.  8 ;  Matt,
xii.  34—37;  Luke  iv.  22;  Ps.  xlv.  2).
"  Word"  (\6yos)  has  its  common  acceptation,
as  in  ch.  iii.  17 ;  ii.  23 ;  Titus  ii.  8 ;  2  Tim.
ii.  17 ;  Jas.  iii.  2.  "  With  grace  "  (eV  x^P'^O
gives  the  pervading  element  of  Christian
speech;  as  "in  wisdom,"  of  Christian  be-
haviour (ver.  5).  "  Grace,"  here  without
the  article,  is  not,  as  In  ch.  iii.  16,  where
the  article  should  probably  be  read,  "  the
(Divine)  grace,"  but  a  property  of  speech
itself,  "gracefulness  " — the  kindly,  winning
pleasantness  which  makes  the  talk  of  a  good
and  thoughtful  man  attractive:  comp.  Ps.
xlv.  2  (xliv.  3,  LXX) ;  Eccles,  x.  12  (LXX) ;
Sir.  xxi.  16.  "Salt"  is  the  "wholesome
point  and  pertinency"  (BUicott)  seasoning
conversation,  while  grace  tivoeetens  it.  The
clause  which  follows  indicates  that  "  salt "
denotes  here,  as  commonly  in  Greek  (in-
stance the  phrase,  "  Attic  salt "),  an  intel-
lectual rather  than  a  moral  quality  of  speech.
In  Eph.  iv.  29  the  connection  is  diifevent,
and  the  application  more  general  (comp.
Matt.  v.  13 ;  Mark  ix.  49,  50).  That  you
may  know  how  you  ought  to  answer  each  one
(ver.  4;  1  Pet.  iii.  15;  Phil.  L  27,  28;
2  Thess.  ii.  17).  The  Colossians  were  to
pray  for  the  apostle  that  he  might  "  speak
the  mystery  of  phrist ...  as  he  ought  to
speak ; "  and  he  Mils  them  seek  for  them-
selves the  same  gift  of  ira^fiiiaia,  liberty  of
speech  and  readiness  to  "  every  good  word."
For  their  faith  was  assailed  by  persuasive
sophistry  (cl>.  ii.  4, 8, 23)  and  by  brow-beating
dogmatigni  (ch.  ii.  16, 18, 20, 21).  They  were,


OH.  IV.  11—8.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN3.


«1


like  St.  Paul,  "  Bet  for  tl»e  defence  of  the
gospel,"  placed  in  the  van  of  tl  e  conflict
against  heresy. .  They  needed,  therefore,  "to
have  all  their  wits  about  tl.em,"  so  as  to
be  able,  as  occasion  required,  to  make  answer
to  each  of  their  opponents  and  quesliDners,
that  thoy  might  "contend"  wisely  as  well
as  "  earnestly  for  the  faith."  1  Pet.  iii.  15
is  a  commentary  on  this  verse:  the  paral-
lelism is  the  closer  because  that  Epistle  was
addressed  to  Churches  in  Asia  Minor,  where
(he  debates  out  of  which  Gnosticism  arose
were  beginning  to  be  rife;  and  because,
likewise,  "  the  hope  that  was  in  them "
was  a  chief  object  of  the  attack  made  on
the  Colossian  believers  (oh.  t  5,  23,  27;
ii.  18;  iii.  15).

With  this  exhortation  the  Christian  teach-
ing of  the  Epistle  is  concluded.  In  its  third
and  practical  part  (ch.  iii.  1 — iv.  6)  the
apostle  has  built  up,  on  the  foundation  of
the  doctrine  laid  down  in  the  first  chapter,
and  in  place  of  tlie  attractive  but  faUe  and
pernicious  system  denounced  in  the  second,
a  lofty  and  complete  ideal  of  the  Christian
life.  He  has  led  us  from  the  contemplation
of  its  "  life  of  life "  in  the  innermost
mystery  of  union  with  Christ  and  of  its
glorious  destiny  in  him  (ch.  iii.  1—4),
tlirough  the  soul's  interior  deatli-struggle
with  its  old  corruptions  (vers.  5 — 11)  and  its
investment  with  the  graces  of  its  new  life
(vers.  12 — 15),  to  the  expression  and  out-
ward acting  of  that  life  in  the  mutual  edifi-
cation of  the  Church  (vers.  16,  17),  in  the
obedience  and  devotion  of  the  family  circle
(ver.  18 — ch.  iv.  1),  in  constant  prayerful-
ness  and  sympathy  with  the  ministers  and
suffering  witnesses  of  Christ  (vers.  2 — 4),
and,  lastly,  in  such  converse  with  men  of
the  world,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  distract-
ing debate  by  which  faith  is  assailed,
as  shall  fittingly  commend  the  Christian
cause.

Vers.  7 — IS.^^Section  X.  Personal  Mes-
sages AND  Greetings.  St.  Paul  concludes
his  letter,  first,  by  introducing  to  the  Colos-
siaiis  its  bearer,  Tychious,  along  with  whom
he  commends  to  them  their  own  Onesimus,
returning  to  his  master  (vers.  7 — 9) ;  then,
according  to  his  custom,  he  conveys  greet-
ings from  his  various  friends  and  helpers
present  with  him  at  the  time,  in  particular
from  Mark,  who  was  likely  to  visit  them,
and  from  Epaphras  their  own  devoted  mi-
nister(vers,  10 — 14);  thirdly,  he  sends  greet-
ing to  the  neighbouring  and  important
Church  of  Laodioea,  specially  mentioning
Kympha,  with  directions  to  exchange  letters
with  the  Laodiceans,  and  with  a  pointed
warning  to  Arohippus,  probably  a  Colossian,
having  some  charge  over  that  Church  (vers.
IS —  1 7).  Finally,  he  appends,  with  his  own
band,  his  apostolic  greeting  and  beuedictioi)


(ver.  18).  The  personal  references  of  thii
section,  though  slight  and  cursory,  are  of
peculiar  value,  bearing  themselves  the
strongest  marks  of  genuineness,  and  de-
cisively attesting  the  Pauline  authorship  nf
the  Epistle.  At  the  same  time,  we  gather
from  them  several  independent  facts  throw-
ing light  on  St.  Paul's  position  during  his
imprisonment,  and  on  his  relations  to  other
leading  personages  of  the  Church.

Ver.  7.— All  that  relates  to  me  (literally,
(he  things  concerning  me)  Tyohicus,  the
beloved  brother  and  faithful  minister  and
fellow-servant  (iondman'),  will  make  known
to  yon  (Eph.  vi.  21,  22;  Titus  iii.  12;  2
Tim.  vi.  12;  i.  8;  1  Thess.  iii.  2;  Phil.  ii.
25).  Tychious  appears  first  in  Acts  xx  1,
where  he  is  called  an  "  Asian "  (of  the
Eoman  province  of  Asia,  of  wliich  Ephesus
was  capital),  along  with  Trophimus,  who,  in
Acts  xxi.  29,  is  styled  "  the  Ephesian."  He
accompanied  the  apostle  on  his  voyage  to
Jerusalem  (a.d.  58),  with  a  number  of  others
represen  ti  n  g  diif e  I  en  t  Ch  urohes,  and  depu  tec  I,
as  Lightfoot  thinks,  in  conformity  with
the  directions  of  1  Cor.  xvi.  3,  4,  to  convey
the  contrihutions  raided  for  "  the  poor  saints
at  Jerusalem."  Trophimus  was  with  St.
Paul  in  Jerusalem  (Acts  xxi.  29),  and  so,
probably,  his  colleague  (the  words,  "  as  far
as  Asia,"  in  Acts  xx.  4,  are  of  very  doubtful
autiiority).  He  is  now  with  the  apostle  in
his  imprisonment  at  Borne,  about  to  be  se  it
home  with  these  two  letters  (comp.  Ejih.  vi,
21, 22),  and  in  charge  of  Onesimus,  on  whose
account  the  apostle  sends  a  private  letter  to
Philemon.  In  the  interval  between  the
first  (present)  and  second  imprisonment  (2
Timothy),  the  apostle  revisited  the  Asiatic
Cliurches(so  we  inter  from  1  Tim.  i.  3),  and
Tychious  rejoined  him  ;  for  we  fiiid  St.  Paul
proposing  to  send  him  to  Titus  in  Crete
(Titus  iii.  12),  and  finally  sending  him  from
Borne  once  more  to  Ephesus  (2  Tim.  vi.
12).  These  facts  sustain  the  high  terms  in
which  he  is  here  spoken  of.  "  In  the  Lord  "
belongs  both  to  "  minister "  and  "  fellow-
servant."  This  language  is  almost  identical
with  that  used  of  Epaphras  in  oh.  i.  7  (see
notes).  Tychious  is  "minister"  (Siiicoms),
not  to  Paul  himself  (Acts  xix.  22 ;  xiii.  5,
uTnjpfTTjs),  nor  in  the  official  sense  of  Phil,
i.  1,  but  "of  Christ,"  "of  the  gospel,"  or
"tlie  Church"  (1  Thess.  iii.  2),  as  St.  Paul
himsi-lf  (ch.  i.  23,  25).  He  is  "  a  beloved
brother  "  to  his  fellow-believers,  "  a  faithful
minister  "  of  the  Lord  Christ,  and  "  a  fellow-
servant"  with  the  apostle  (ch.  i.  7;  iv.  10;
Phil,  ii.25).

Ver.  8. — ^Whom  I  have  sent  unto  yon  for
this  very  purpose,  that  ye  may  know  how  it
is  with  us  (liteially,  the  things  about  tu),
and  that  he  may  comfort  year  hearts  (Eph.
vL  22).    Tl»e  «eceived  Text  reads,  by  •


212


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


[oh.  TV.  1 — 18


slight  coTifnsioTi  of  similar  Greek  letters,
that  he  waij  Icnmo  the  things  ahoid  you  (see
1-ighlfout's  "Notes  on  some  Various  Eead-
itigs').  This  is  the  only  clause  exactly
identical  in  Colossians  and  Eplieslana.
There  would  be  great  anxiety  on  St.  Paul's
account  amongst  the  Gentile  Christiana
everywhere,  and  especially  in  the  Asiatic
Churches,  after  the  ominous  words  of  his
address  to  the  Ephesian  elders  (Acts  xx.  22
— 25 :  comp.  vers.  37,  38).  The  Colossians
had  sent  tlirough  Bpaphras  messages  of  love
to  him  (ch.  i.  8).  To  know  that  he  was  of
good  courage,  and  even  in  hope  of  a  speedy
release  (Pliilem.  22),  would  "comfort  their
hearts."

Ver.  9. — With  Onesimus,  the  faithful  and
beloved  brother,  who  is  (one)  of  you  (ver.  7;
Phil  m.  10, 16;  ch.  i.  2;  1  Pet.  v.  12).  "  In
Cliriot  there  is  no  slave"  (ch.  iii.  11).
Onesimus,  like  Epaphras  and  Tychicus,  is  a
livther,  to  be  trusted  and  loved  (comp.
Pliilem.  10 — 17).  Tliis  language  strongly
supports  the  appeal  of  ver.  1,  xnd  would
fuithertlie  pujpose  of  the  apostle's  inter-
cession to  Onesimus'  master.  And  Onesi-
mus even  shares  with  the  honoured  Tychicus
in  the  privilege  of  heing  the  apostle's  mes-
senger I  All  things  that  are  happening  here
they  will  make  known  to  you  (ver,  7 ;  Eph.
\  i.  21).  There  is,  then-fore,  no  need  for  any
detailed  account  of  the  writer's  ciioum-
stances.  The  solicitudo  which  he  assumes
that  these  stranger  Colossians  (oh.  i.  8 ;  ii.
1)  feel  on  his  beh.ilf  shows  how  command-
ing his  aseendanoy  over  the  Gentile  Churches
had  become.

Ver.  10. — Aristarchus,  my  fellow-prisoner,
saluteth  you  (Piiilem.  2,  23;  Phil.  ii.  25;
Bom.  xvi.  7).  Aristarchus,  as  a,  Thessa-
lonian,  accompanied  the  apostle  to  Jeru-
salem, along  witli  Tychicus  tlie  Asian  (Acts
XX.  4),  and  was  his  companion  at  least
during  the  first  part  of  his  voyage  to  Kome
(Acts  xxvii  2).  In  Philm.  23,  24  his  name
follows  thiit  of  Mark  as  a  "fellow- worker"
(comp  ver.  11)  and  of  Epaphras  "my
fellow-prisimer "  (comp.  Rom.  xvi.  7).
'•  Fellow-prisoner "  (oi'x/io^i^TiJj,  captive,
priefmer  of  war)  differs  from  the  "  prisoner  "
(Setrfuos,  one  in  hands)  of  Epii.  iii.  1 ;  iv.  1 ;
PliileBi.  9;  2  Tim.  i.  8.  The  supposition
that  these  men  were  permitted  as  friends  to
shiire  St.  Paul's  captivity  in  turn,  is  con-
jectural (see  Meyer).  Possibly  the  incident
recorded  in  Acts  xix.  29  was  attended  by
some  temporary  joint  imprisonment  of  St.
Paul  and  Aristarchus.  As  "a  soldier  of
Christ  Jesus,"  the  apostle  was  himself
now  "a  prisoner  of  war"  (2  Tim.  ii.  3,  4;
2  Cor.  X.  3 — 6);  and  therefore  those  who
f-hared  his  sufferings  were  his  "fellow-
jirisonersj'as  they  were  his  "  fellow-soldiers"
(I'liiJew   ii  I'Uil.  i.  30)  ftnd  his  "felluw-


Bervants  "  (oh.  i.  7 ;  iv.  7).  And  Mark,  tha
cousin  of  Barnabas,  about  whom  you  received
commandments — ^if  he  should. come  to  you,
welcome  him  (Pliilem.  24;  2  Tim.  iv.  11;
1  I'et.  V.  13).  It  is  pleasant  to  find  John
Mark,  who  deserted  the  apostle  in  his  first
missionary  journey  (Acts  xiii.  13),  and  on
whose  account  he  separated  from  B  irnabas
(Acts  XV.  37 — 40)  ten  years  before,  now
taken  again  into  his  confidence  and  friend-
ship (comp.  2  Tim.  iv.  11).  And  indeed  it
is  evident  that  there  was  no  permanent
estrangement  between  the  two  great  Gentile
missionaries;  for  Mark  is  called  "cousin
of  Barnabas"  by  way  of  recommendation
(comp.  1  Cor.  ix.  6 ;  Gal.  ii.  1,  9, 13).  Mary,
the  mother  of  John  Mark,  was  a  person  of
some  consideration  in  the  Church  at  Jeru-
salem (Acts  xii.  12),  and  through  her  he
may  have  been  related  to  Barnabas,  who,
though  a  Cypriot  Jew,  had  property  near
Jerusalem  (Acts  iv.  36,  37),  and  was  also
highly  honoured  by  the  mother  Churcli
(Acre  ix.  27;  xi.  22—24;  xv.  25,  20).  Mark
is,  moreover,  a  link  between  the  Apostles
Paul  and  Peter.  It  is  to  the  house  of  his
mother  that  the  latter  betakes  himself  on
his  escape  from  Herod's  prison  (Acts  xii.  12).
In  1  Pet.  V.  13  he  appears,  along  with
Silvanus  (Silas),  St,  Paul's  old  comrade,  in
St.  Peter's  company,  who  calls  him  "  my
son."  St.  Peter  was  then  at  Babylon,  where
Mark  may  have  arrived  »t  the  end  of  the
journey  eastwards  which  St.  Paul  here
contemplates  his  undertaking.  The  ^triking
correspondence  of  language  and  thought
between  St.  Peter's  First  Epit-tle  (addressed,
moreover,  to  Churches  of  Asia  Minor)  and
those  of  St.  Paul  to  the  Eplieslans  and
Colossians  {and,  in  an  equal  degree,  that  to
the  Eomans)  suggests  the  existence  of  some
special  connection  at  this  time  between  the
two  writers,  such  as  may  well  have  been
afforded  by  Mark,  if,  leaving  Borne  soon
after  the  despatch  of  these  letters,  he
travelled  in  their  track  by  way  of  Asia  Minor
to  join  St.  Peter  at  Babylon.  At  the  time
of  St.  Paul's  second  imprisonment,  about
four  years  later,  Mark  is  again  in  Asia
Minor  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Timothy,
and  the  apostle  desires  his  services  at  Rome
(2  Tim.  iv.  11).  When  or  how  the  Colossians
had  received  already  directions  concerning
IMark,  we  have  no  means  of  knowing.  His
journey  appears  to  have  been  postponed.
The  apostle  must  before  this  have  com-
municated with  the  Colossians.  The  visit
of  Epaphras  to  Rome  may  have  been  due  to
some  communication  from  him.  "  If  he
should  Come  to  you,  give  him  a  welcome,"  ii
the  request  the  apostle  now  makes.

Ver.  11. — And  Jesus,  called  Justus— the
only  name  of  this  list  wanting  in  Philemon.
Nor  is  this  person  wentioDed   eUewl.eru.


OH.  IV.  1—18.]


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.


213


« Jesua"  ("Joshua,"  Acts  vii.  45;  Heb.  It.
8)  -was  a  common  Jewish  name.  "  Justus  "
("just,"  "righteous")  was  frequently
adapted  by  individual  Jews,  oi  conferred  on
them,  as  a  Gentile  (Latin)  surname  (corap.
Aoj;s  i.  23 ;  xviii.  7) ;  it  implied  devotion  to
the  Ijaw,  and  was  the  equivalent  of  tlie
Hebrew  Zadok  (see  Lightfoot).  Its  Gieek
equivalent,  SlKaios,  is  the  standing  epithet
of  James,  the  brother  of  the  Lord,  and  the
head  of  the  Church  at  Jerusalem;  and  is
empiiatically  applied  to  Clirist  himself
(Acts  iii.  U;  vii.  52;  xxii.  14;  1  Pet.  iii.  18;
1  John  ii.  1).  Who  are  of  the  circumcision,
— these  only  (my)  fellow-workers  unto  the
kingdom  of  God,  (men)  who  have  been  a
comfort  to  me  (Philem.  1,  24 ;  1  Thess.  iii.
2;  Eom.  xvi.  3,  9,  21 ;  2  Oor.  viii.  2S;  Phil.
ii.  25 ;  iv.  3).  Aristarolius,  therefore,  was  a
Jew,  as  well  as  Mark  and  Jesus  Justus.
"  These  only,"  etc.,  must  be  read  as  in  close
apposition  to  the  previous  clause.  This
statement  accords  with  the  apostle's  com-
plaint in  Phil.  i.  15-17;  ii.  19—24;  but
the  still  stronger  language  of  the  latter
passages  seems  to  point  to  a  later  time  when
he  was  yet  more  solitary,  having  lost
Tychicus  and  Mark,  and  perliaps  Ari^ta^-
chus  also,  and  when  he  had  a  more  definite
prospect  of  release.  The  title  "fellow-
worker"  he  frequently  confers  on  his
associates  (see  references).  In  Philem.  24
it  is  applied  to  I  .uke  and  Demaa  nlso.  "  The
kingdom  of  God"  was,  in  ch.  i.  13,  "the
kingdom  of  his  Son ; "  as  in  Epli.  v.  5  it  is
"  the  kingdom  of  Christ  and  God."  On  his
arrival  at  Borne,  St.  Paul  is  described  as
"testifying,  and  preaching  the  kingdom  of
Ood"  (Acts  xxviii.  23,  31:  comp.  Acts  viii.
12 ;  xiv.  22 ;  xix.  8 ;  1  Thesg.  ii.  12 ;  2  l^iess.
i  5).  On  the  force  of  o'Itiv^s  ("  men  who^"
"  such  as  "),  see  oh.  ii.  23 ;  and  for  iyn/iiBriaav
("  proved,"  "beeame  in  point  of  fact "),  comp.
ch.  iii.  15.  Uaprjyopia,  comfort,  a  word  found
only  here  in  the  Greek  Testament,  is  a
medical  term  (compare  "  paregoric  "),  imply-
ing "soothing  relief."

Ver,  12. — Epaphras,  who  is  (one)  of  you,
salnteth  yon,  a  servant  (bondman)  of  Christ
Jesus  (Bnm.  i.  1 ;  Phil.  i.  1 ;  Titus  i.  1 ;
Gal.  i.  10;  2  Cor.  iv.  5 ;  1  Cor.  vii.  22;
1  Tbess.  i.  9;  2  Tim.  ii.  24;  Acts  iv.  29;
Jas.  i.  1 ;  2  Pet.  i.  1 ;  Jude  1 ;  Kev.  i.  1 ;
xxii. 3, 6).  "Of  you,"  like Onesimus  (ver.  9).
He  was  a  native  of  Colossss,  as  well  as  evan-
gelist and  minister  of  the  Church  there
(cli.  i.  7,  8).  "Bondman  of  Christ  Jesus"
is  the  title  the  apostle  so  often  claims  for
himself  (see  references),  only  here  put  by
him  on  any  one  else.  Is  there  an  implied  re-
ference to  Onesimus  (ver.  9),  who  was  "a
bondman  after  the  flesh,"  but  "  the  Lord's
freedman"  (Philem.  16),  while  Epaphras,
"tbe  freemMi,"  ia  "Clirist's  bondman"  (oomp.


1  Cor.  vii.  22)  ?  We  are  reminded  again  of
ch.  ii.  6  (see  note).  Always  striving  on  your
behalf  in  his  prayers,  that  ye  may  stand
fast,  (being)  perfect  and  fully  assured  in  all
the  will  of  God  (ch.  i.  9,  23,  29;  ii.  1,  2,  5;
Bum.  XV.  30;  Eph.  vi.  11—14;  Phil.  i.  27;
iv.  1 ;  1  Cor.  xvi.  13 ;  1  Thess.  iii.  8 ;  2  Thess.
ii.  15).  Epaphras  "sti-ives"  ("wrestles")
for  his  spiritual  charge,  like  the  apostle  him-
self (ch.  i.  29,  see  noto  on  ayanlCo/iai ;  ch.  ii.  1 ;
Bom.  XV.  30;  I;uke  xxii.  44).  Upo(rKapTepfa
in  ver.  2  denotes  the  patient  persistence,
tliis  word  the  intense  energy,  of  prevailing
prayer.  For  "  stand "  (where  Lightfoot,
Westoott  and  Hort,  and  other  critical  editors
read  the  stronger  <sTaST\T(  for  o-TijTe),  comp.
ch.  i.  23 ;  ii.  7 ;  it  is  four  times  repeated  in
the  stirring  appeal  of  Eph.  vi.  11 — 14.  For
Churches  theatened  bj  the  attacks  of  heresy
it  was  above  all  things  needful  ''  that  they
should  stand  fast."  On  "  perfect,"  see  oh.  i.
28 ;  also  eh.  iii.  14 ;  the  word  bears  a  primary
reference  to  "knowledge,"  and  im|.lies  a
fully  instructed  and  enlightened  condition
(Phil.  iii.  15;  1  Cor.  xiv.  20;  Heb.  v.  14;
vi.  1),  attended  with  corresponding  spirit-
ual advancement  (Eph.  iv.  13).  "Fully
assured"  (TreirArj^oifopij/neVoi,  Kevised  Text)
carries  us  back  to  ch.  ii.  2  (see  notes ;  on  this
verb,  compare  Lightfoot's  exhaustive  note).
It  bears  the  same  sense  in  Rom.  iv.  21  and
xiv.  5 ;  a  slightly  different  one  in  Luke  i.  1.
From  the  tenor  of  the  letter  it  appears  that
the  Colosaians  needed  a  deeper  Christian
insight  and  more  intelligent  and  well-
grounded  convictions  respecting  the  truth
"  as  in  Jesua."  "  All  (the)  will "  is  strictly
distributive  {every  will);  OeK-qfia  (ch.  i.  9)
differs  from  our  will  in  having  a  concrete
rather  than  abstract  sense,  denoting  an  act
or  expression  of  vrill.

Ver.  13. — For  I  bear  witness  to  him  that
he  hath  much  labour  {irSmv  for  C^Kov,  Eevised
Text)foryou(oh.i.a9;ii.  1;  Pidl.  ii.  19— 23;
1  Thess.  V.  12,  13;  1  Tim.  v.  17;  1  Cor.  xvi.
15, 16).  Tl6vos  occurs  in  the  New  Testament
besides  only  in  Be  v.  xvi.  10,  11  and  xxi.  4,
where  it  means  "  pain ; "  in  classical  Greek  it
implies  "painful, distressful  exertion"  (oomp.
KOTTiS,  ch.  i.  29).  It  indicates  the  deep  anxiety
of  Epaphras  for  this  beloved  and  endangered
Church.  There  is  nothing  here  to  point  to
"  outward  toil "  (Ligntloot),  any  more  than
in  ch.  ii.  1.  The  apostle  loves  to  commend
his  fellow-labourers  (oh.  i.  7 ;  Phil  ii.  20  —22,
25,  26;  2  Cor.  viii.  16—23).  And  for  those
in  Laodioea  and  those  in  Hierapolis  (vers.
15 — 17 ;  ch.  ii.  1).  The  Church  in  Hierapolis
is  added  to  that  of  liaodicea,  singled  out  in
oh.  ii.  1  as  a  special  object  of  the  apostle's
concern  (on  these  oities.see  Introduction,!  1).
Whether  Epaphras  were  the  official  head  of
these  Ci  lurches  or  not,  he  could  not  but  be
deeply  concerned  in  their  welfare.    Ver.  IJ


§14


THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSlAlJS.


[oh.  it.  1— 1§.


indieates  the  existence  of  a  personal  link
between  the  Churches  of  Colossse  and  of
Laodicea,

Yer.  14. — Luke  the  physician,  the  heloved,
saluteth  you  (Philem.  24;  2  Tim.  iv.  11).
This  reference  to  Luke's  profession  is  ex-
tremely interesting.  We  gather  from  the
use  of  the  first  person  plural  in  Acts  xvi.
1(1 — 17,  and  again  from  xx.  5  to  the  end
of  the  narrative,  tliat  lie  joined  St.  Paul
on  his  first  voyage  to  Europe  and  was  left
behind  at  Philippi;  and  rejoined  him  six
years  after  on  the  journey  to  Jerusalem
which  completed  his  third  missionary  circuit,
continuing  with  him  during  his  voyage  to
Rome  and  his  imprisonment.  This  faithful
friend  attended  him  in  his  second  captivity,
and  solaced  his  last  hours ;  "  Only  Luke  Is
with  me  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  11).  His  being  called
"  the  physician  "  suggests  that  he  ministered
to  the  apostle  in  this  capacity,  especially  as
"  his  first  appearance  in  St.  Paul's  company
synchronizes  with  an  attack  of  St.  Paul's
constitutional  malady  "  (Lightfoot :  comp.
Acts  xvi.  10  and  Gal.  iv.  13 — 15 ;  the  illness
referred  to  in  2  Cor.  i.  8—10  and  iv.  7 —
V.  8  may  partly  have  led  to  Luke's  rejoining
St.  Paul  in  Macedonia).  St  Luke's  writings
testify  both  to  his  medical  knowledge
and  to  his  Pauline  sympathies.  His  com-
panionship probably  gave  a  special  colour-
ing to  the  phraseology  and  cast  of  thought
of  St.  Paul's  later  Epistles.  (On  the  re-
lations of  St.  Luke  and  St.  Paul,  see  a
valuable  Paper  by  Dean  Plumptre  in  the
Expositor,  first  series,  vol.  iv.  pp.  134—156.)
"  The  beloved ''  is  a  distinct  appellation,  due
partly  to  Luke's  services  to  the  apostle,  but
chiefly,  one  would  suppose,  to  the  amiable
and  gentle  disposition  of  the  writer  of  the
third  Gospel.  It  is  not  unlikely  that  he  is
"  the  brother"  referred  to  in  2  Cor.  viii.  18, 19.
Lucas  is  a  contraction  for  Ltuxmus ;  so  that
he  was  not  the  "  Lucius"  of  Acts  xiii.  l,nor,
certainly,  the  "Lucius  my  kinsman"  ot  Eom.
xvi.  21,  who  was  a  Jew.  He  was  probably,
like  many  physicians  of  that  period,  a  freed-
man ;  and,  since  freedmen  took  the  name  of
the  house  to  which  they  had  belonged,  may
have  been,  as  Plumptre  conjectures,  con-
nected with  the  family  of  the  Boman  philo-
sopher Seneca  and  the  poet  Lucan.  And
Demas  (Philem.  24 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  10),  who  alone
receives  no  word  of  commendation — a  fact
significant  in  view  of  the  melancholy  sen-
tence pronounced  upon  him  in  2  Tim.  iv.  10.
His  name  is  probably  short  for  Demetrius.

Ver.  15. — Salute  the  brethren  that  are  in
Laodicea  (ver.  13;  ch.  ii.  1;  Rlv.  i.  11;
iii.  14—22).  Perhaps  the  brethren  in  Hiera-
polis  (ver.  13)  were  not  formed  into  a  dis-
tinct Church  as  yet  (comp.  ch.  ii.  1).  The
Church  in  Laodicea  early  became  a  tinurish-
ing  and  wealthy  community  (Kev.  iii.  17).


And  Nypipha  (or,  Nymphas),  and  the  Ckurch
(literally,  atsemUy)  at  her  (or,  their)  house.
Ni/iipav  may  be  either  masculine  or  feminine
accusative.  The  reading  "her"  (aur^j)  is
adopted  by  Westoott  and  Hort  without
alternative,  and  seems  on  the  whole  the  most
probable.  The  Revised  Text  follows  Tiach-
endorf,  Tregelles,  Meyer,  Alford,  Lightfoot,
who  read  "  their  "  {airuv).  "  His  "  (auToS)
is  evidently  a  later  correction.  Lightfoot
says,  indeed,  that  "a  Doric  form  of  the
Greek  name  [sc.  Ni/jupav  for  NiJ|U^jj>')  seems
in  the  highest  degree  improbable  ; "  but  he
allows,  on  the  other  hand,  that  Nv/ifas  as  a
contracted  masculine  form  (for  Nv/i.^iSa>pos)
"  is  very  rare."  This  person  was  apparently
a  leading  member  of  the  Laodicean  Church,
at  whose  house  Church  meetings  were  held
(comp.  Acts  xii.  12  ;  Philem.  2 ;  Bom.  xvi  5;
1  Cor.  xvi.  19).  "  The  Church  at  her  house  "
can  scarcely  have  been  an  assembly  distinct
"  from  the  brethren  that  are  in  Laodicea."
Both  expressions  may  relate  to  the  same
body  of  persons,  referred  first  individually,
then  collectively  as  a  meeting  gathered  at
this  place.  Others  suppose  a  more  private
gathering  to  be  meant,  as  e.g.  of  Colossians
living  at  Laodicea  (Meyer).  Many  older
interpreters  identified  this  (Church  with  the
household  of  Nymphas.  If  "their"  be  the
true  reading,  the  expression  must  include
Nympha  and  her  family.  Nympha  (or  Nym-
phas), like  Philemon  and  his  family,  St.  Paul
had  doubtless  met  in  Ephesus.

Ver.  16. — And  when  this  letter  has  been
read  among  you,  see  to  it  (literally,  cause)
that  it  be  read  also  in  the  Church  of  (the)
Laodioeaus  (1  Thess.  v.  27).  For  these  two
Churches  were  closely  allied  in  origin  and  con-
dition, as  well  as  by  situation  and  acquaint-
anceship (ch.  ii.  1 — 5 ;  iv.  13).  The  leaven
of  the  Colossian  error  was  doubtless  begin-
ning to  work  in  Laodicea  also.  The  words
addressed  to  Laodicea  in  the  Apocalypse
(iii.  14 — 22)  bear  reference  apparently  to
the  language  of  this  Epistle  (i.  15 — 18) ;  see
Lightfo.it,  pp.  41,  etc.  The  phrase, "  Church
of  Laodiceans,"  corresponds  to  that  used  in
the  salutation  of  1  and  2  Thessaloniaus,  but
is  not  found  elsewhere  in  St.  Paul.  And
that  ye  also  read  the  letter  from  Laodicea.
What  was  this  litter  ?  Clearly  a  letter  from
St.  Paul  which  woidd  be  received  at  Lao-
dicea, and  which  the  Colossians  were  to
obtain  from  there.  The  connection  of  this
sentence  with  the  foregoing,  and  the  absence
of  any  other  definition  of  the  words,  "  the
letter  (from  Laodicea),"  make  this  evident.
Nothing  further  can  be  affirmed  with  oer-
tuinty.  But  several  considerations' point  to
the  probability  that  this  missing  Epistle  is
none  other  than  our  (so-called)  Epistle  to
the  Eplicsians.  For :  (1)  Both  letters  were
a«nt  »t  the  same  time,  and  by  the  laiM


oa.  IV.  1-180         TflE  EPISTr>E  TO  THE  COLOSSlANS.


m


messenger  (Eph.  ri.  21 ;  oh.  iv.  7).  (2)
The  relation,  between  the  two  is  more  in-
timate than  exists  between  any  other  ot  St.
Paul's  writings ;  they  are  twins,  the  birth
of  the  same  crisis  in  the  condition  of  the
Church  and  in  the  apostle's  own  mind.
Each  serves  as  a  commentary  on  the  other.
And  there  are  several  important  topics,
lightly  touched  upon  in  this  letter,  on  which
the  writer  dilates  at  length  in  the  other
(comp.  oh.  i.  9  &  and  Eph.  i.  17,  18 ;  ch.  i.
23  6—25  and  Eph.  iii.  1—13 ;  ch.  i.  18  a,  24  6,
ii.  19  and  Eph.  Iv.  4—16,  v.  23-32 ;  ch.
i.  21,  27,  ii.  11—13,  iii.  11  and  Eph.  ii. ;
cli.  i.  18  ("  Firstborn  out  of  the  dead  "),  ii.
12  ft  and  Eph.  i.  19—23 ;  oh.  iii.  12  ("  God's
elect")  and  Eph.  i.  3—14;  ch.  iii.  18,  19
and  Eph.  v.  22—33).  On  the  other  hand,
the  main  arguments  of  the  Colossian  letter
are,  as  it  seems,  assumed  and  presupposed  in
tho  Ephesian  (comp.  Eph.  i.  10,  20  ft— 23,
ii.  20  6,  iii.  8  ft— 11,  19  6, 17.  136  with  oh.  i.
15—20,  ii.  9,  10 ;  Eph.  It.  14  with  ch  ii.
4,  8, 16—23).  (3)  The  words  eV  'E</)6V^  in
Eph.  i.  1  are  of  doubtful  authenticity  ;  and
there  is  much  in  the  internal  character  of
that  Epistle  to  favour  the  hypothesis,  pro-
posed by  Archbishop  Usher,  that  it  was
a  drcular  letter,  destined  for  a  number  of
Churches  in  Asia  Minor,  of  which  Ephesui
may  have  been  the  first  and  Laodicea  the
last  (oompara  the  order  of  Eev.  ii.,  iii.)  In
that  case  a  copy  of  the  Ephesian  Epistle
would  be  left  at  Laodicea  by  Tychicus  on  his
way  to  ColosssB.  (See  Introduction,  §  6 ;  com-
pare that  to  Ephesians.)  (4)  Maroion,  in  the
middl?  of  the  second  century  (see  TertiiUian,
'  Against  Maroion,'  v.  11, 17),  entitled  the
Epistle  to  the  Ephesians, "  "To  the  Laodi-
oeans."  It  does  not  appear  that  his  here-
tical Tiewg  could  have  been  furthered  by
this  change.  Probably  his  statement  con-
tains a  fragment  of  ancient  tradition,  iden-
tifying the  Epistle  in  question  with  that
referred  to  by  St.  Paul  in  this  passage.  (5)
The  expression,  "  the  letter  from  Laodicea"
would  scarcely  be  used  of  a  letter  addressed
simply  io  the  Laodiceans  and  belonging
properly  to  them ;  but  would  be  quite  appro-
priate to  a  more  general  Epistle  transmitted
from  one  place  to  another.  There  is  extant
in  Latin  a  spurious  epistle  'Ad  Laodicenses,'
which  is  traced  back  to  the  fourth  century,
and  was  vridely  accepted  in  the  Middle
A  ges ;  but  it  is  "  a  mere  cento  of  Pauline
phrases,  stiung  together  without  any  definite
connection  or  any  clear  object "  (Lightfoot).
(On  this  curious  forgery,  and  on  the  whole
subject  of  "  the  Epistle  from  Laodicea,"
tee  Lightfoot's  masterly  discussion,  pp.  274
—300;  also  p  37.)    Meyer,  on  the  other


hand,  in  his  'Introduction  to  Ephesians,'
pronounces  strongly  against  "  the  oiroulat
hypothesis."

Yer.  17. — And  say  to  Aichippus,  Take
heed  to  the  ministry  which  thou  reoelvedst
iu  (the)  Lord,' that  thou  fulfil  it  (Acts  xx.
28;  1  Tim.  i.  18,  19;  iv.  6,  11—16;  vi.  13,
14,  20,  21 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  15  ;  iv.  5).  From  the
connection  of  this  verse  with  the  two  preced-
ing, it  seems  likely  that  "  the  ministry  "  of
Archippus  related  to  theLaorlicean  Church.
Hence  he  is  not  addressed  directly.  If  he
was,  as  we  gather  from  Philem.  1,  2,  the
son  of  Philemon,  whose  house  formed  a
centre  for  the  Colossian  Church  (Philem.  2),
the  warning  would  be  suitably  conveyed
through  this  (jhannel.  In  the  letter  to
Philemon,  the  apostle  calls  him  his  "  fellow-
soldier  "  (comp.  ch.  iv.  10  ;  Phil.  i.  29,  30).
Both  from  this  fact,  and  from  the  emphasis
of  the  words  before  us,  it  would  appeal'  that
his  office  was  an  important  one,  probably
that  of  chief  pastor.  This  warning  addressed
so  early  to  the  minister  of  the  Laodicean
Church  is  premonitory  of  the  lapsed  condi-
tion in  which  it  is  afterwards  found  (Rev.
iii.  14—22) ;  see  Lightfoot,  pp.  42,  43.  (For
"  ministry  "  (Sm/coWa),  comp.  ch.  i.  7,23;  1
Cor.  iv.  1 ,  etc.  For  "  receivei  I,"  comp.  note,  oh.
ii.  6.)  "  In  the  Lord  ; "  for  every  office  in  the
Church  is  grounded  in  him  as  Head  and
Lord  (ch.  i.  18;  ii.  6;  iii.  17,  24;  iv.  7;
Eph.  i.  22 ;  iv.  5  ;  1  Cor.  viii.  6 ;  xii.  5,  etc.),
and  must  be  administered  according  to  hia
direction  and  as  subject  to  his  judgment
(see  1  Cor.  iii.  5 ;  iv.  1—5 ;  2  Cor.  x.  1  /,  18 ;
xiii.  10 ;  Gal.  i.  1 ;  1  Tim.  i.  12  ;  2  Tim.  iv.
1, 2).  "  Fulfil "  (comp.  ch.  i.  26 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  5 ;
Acts  xii.  25).  This  admonition  resembles
those  addressed  tO  Timothy  in  the  Pastoral
Epistles.

Ver.  18. — The  salutation  with  mine  own
hand— of  Paul  (2  Thess.  iii.  17,  18 ;  1  Cor.
xvi.  21—24;  Gal.  vi.  11—18).  So  the
apostle  appends  his  authenticating  signature
to  the  letter,  written,  as  usual,  by  his  amanu-
ensis, himself  inscribing  these  last  words
(see  parallel  passages).  The  Epistle  to
Philemon  he  appears  to  have  penned  him-
self throughout  (Philem.  19).  Bemember
my  bonds  (ch.  i.  24 ;  Pliilem.  9,  13 ;  Eph.
iii.  1,  13 ;  iv.  1 ;  vi.  20  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  9).  This
pathetic  postscript  is  thoroughly  character-
istic (comp.  Gal.  vi.  17).  Grace  be  with  you ;
literally,  the  grace  (comp.  ch.  ill.  16).  The
apostle's  final  benediction  in  all  his  Epistles ;
here  in  its  briefest  form,  as  in  1  and  2
Timothy.  In  the  EphesiMn  benedictton
"  grace  "  is  also  used  absolutely,  2  Cor.  xiii,
14  gives  the  formula  in  its  fuU  litur(iag4
amplitude.


216  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oh.  it.  1— IR


HOMILETICS.

Vers.  2—6. — Sect.  9.  Prayer  and  social  converse.  T.  Praybb.  (Vers.  2 — 4.)  1.  Prayer
muft  he  hahitucU  and  persistent  "  Continue  steadfast  in  prayer — ^keeping  awake
therein"  (ver.  2);  "Ask,  .  .  .  seek,  .  ,  .  knock  "  (Matt.  vii.  7').  It  is  not  an  occasional
exercise  of  the  soul,  called  fortli  by  special  emergencies,  but  the  necessity  of  its  daily  life.
For  that  life  is  a  fellowsiiip  with  God  in  Christ  (ch.  iii.  1 — 3 ;  1  John  i.  3 ;  Joi)n  xiv.  23),
maintained  on  his  part  by  the  continual  communication  of  his  Spirit  (Luke  xi.  13;
Bph.  i.  13;  ii.  22;  Eom.viii.  14—17,  23,  26,  27;  1  Cor.  xii.  4—11;  2  Cor.  xiii.  14),
and  on  ours  by  the  constant  responsive  utterances  of  praise  and  prayer.  (1)  Wherever
two  persons  are  associated  in  a  mutual  life,  there  must  be  converse — interchange  ot
thought  and  feelins  and  service ;  so  (reverently  be  it  said)  it  must  needs  be  where  the  soul
is  "  alive  unto  God."  God  and  the  poul,  the  all-wise,  almighty  Father  and  the  human
cliild,  all  want  and  ignorauce,  having  sjjeech  with  each  other — that  is  the  life  of  religion.
"The  soul  is  a  stupendous  want,  having  its  supplies  in  God"  (comp.  Phil.  iv.  19).
Prayer  is  the  expression  and  the  index  of  the  soul's  vital  appetite.  The  necessity  ot
prayer,  therefore,  must  be  daily  and  regular  in  its  recurrence.  It  will  have  its  "set
times"  and  stated  seasons,  its  chronic  demands  for  satisfaction.  "Evening,  and  morn-
ing, and  at  noon,  will  I  pi  ay,  and  cry  aloud :  and  thou  shalt  hear  my  voice  "  (Ps.  Iv.  17 ;
Dan.  vi.  10 ;  Acts  x.  30) ;  "  Seven  times  a  day  do  I  praise  thee  "  (Ps.  cxix.  164).  It  will
tave  its  appointed  place  of  privacy.  "Enter  into  thy  closet  and  shut  thy  door,  and
pray  to  thy  Father  which  is  in  secret"  (Matt.  vi.  6;  Mark  i.  35).  (2)  Prayer  being  a
Eociiil  as  much  as  a  private'  necessity,  concerned  with  the  Common  as  truly  as  with  the
individual  wants  and  interests  of  men,  the  prayerful  Christian  will  observe,  as  far  as
possible,  all  public  occasions  for  its  exercise,  whether  found  in  the  family,  the  social
circle,  the  community,  the  church  (the  "house  of  prayer"),  or  in  the  events  of  national
life  (laa.  Ivi.  7;  Acts  iii.  1;  vi.  6;  xii.  12;  xvi.  13;  xx.  36;  xxi.  5;  xxii.  17;  1  'I'im.
ii.  8  ;  John  xvii.  1).  (3)  But  prayer,  while  it  fills,  should  overflow  these  limits,  and  may
not  be  confined  within  the  framework  of  mechanical  habit  and  fixed  order.  It  should
find  its  way  into  all  the  interstices  of  life,  seizing  upon  its  vacant  moments  and  leisure
thoughts.  Under  pressing  need,  and  in  the  hurry  and  tumult  of  business,  the  soul
may  send  up  a  short,  swift  cry  for  help,  as  a  winged  arrow  that  finds  its  way  to  the
heart  of  God.  This  is  efaculatory  prayer.  And  in  the  quiet  ongoing  of  ordinary  work
the  mind  may  the  more  easily  maintain  its  secret  converse  with  him  in  whom  it  "  lives
and  moves  and  is,"  making  tlie  common  incidents  of  life  and  the  familiar  sights  and
sounds  of  natnre  reminders  of  his  presence,  and  the  experience  of  every  hour  occasion
for  some  brief  act  of  adoratii>n,  or  confession,  or  supplication,  or  intercession.  This  is
to  "pray  without  ceasing"  (1  Thess.  v.  17);  "to  let  our  requests  be  made  known  unto
God  in  all  things  "  (Phil.  iv.  6).  The  soul's  hidden  life  in  God  is  maintained  by  this
activity,  even  as  the  life-blood  of  the  body  is  vivified  and  cleansed  from  moment  to
moment  by  the  ceaseless  play  of  the  breathing  lungs.  2.  Prayer  must  he  attended  with
thanksgiving.  The  one  must  be  habitual  ai  d  constant  as  the  other.  They  are  two
elements  of  the  same  state,  two  parts  of  the  same  act  (Eph.  v.  29  ;  1  Thess.  v.  17, 18).
(See  homiletics,  sect.  1,  III.  2  (3).)  How  unseemly  it  is  to  come  to  God  with  urgent  peti-
tions for  new  blessings,  when  we  have  made  no  due  acknowledgment  of  those  already
bestowed  !  We  dare  not  act  thus  towards  any  earthly  benefactor.  And  this  thouglitlesa
ingratitude  deprives  us  of  those  strong  arguments  and  cheering  encouragements  which
are  afforded  by  the  remembrance  of  past  mercies.  "  The  Lord  hath  heen  mindful  of
us;"  then  surely  "he  will  bless  us"  (Ps.  cxv.  12);  he  "began  a  good  work  in  you,"
and  you  may  be  "confident,"  therefore,  that  it  is  bis  will  to  "perfect  it"  (Phil.  i.  6).
God  requires  and  expects  that  by  "  offering  praise  "  we  should  "  glorify  him  "  (Ps.  1. 23),
"abundantly  uttering  the  memory  of  his  great  goodness"  (Ps.  cxlv.  7).  To  this  end
every  Christian  is  ordained  a  "  priest  unto  God,"  that  he  may  "  offer  up  a  sacrifice  of
praise  continially,  the  fruit  of  lips  which  make  confession  to  his  name"  (1  Pet.  ii.  9;
Heb.  xiii.  1 5).  And  to  do  this  i.s  in  itself  "  pleasant  and  comely  '"  (Ps.  cxlvii.  1) ;  "  Yea,
a  joyful  and  pleasant  thing  it  is  to  be  thankful."  3.  And  intenession  must  he  joined  to
supplication  and  thanksgiving.  (1  Tim.  ii.  1.)  "Withal  praying  for  us  also,"  says  the
apostle.    And  in  so  aaying  he  embodies  the  appeal  which  our  Christian  brethren  every-


OH.  IV.  1—18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  211

where  make  to  us,  especially  the  ininisters^of  Christ  "set  for  the  defence  of  the  gospel"
(Pliil.  i.  17) ;  and  yet  more  especially  our  fathers  and  teachers  in  Christ,  through  whom
we  have  received  the  word  of  our  salvation,  and  on  whose  fidelity  and  efficiency  our
spiritual  life  so  largely  depends.  The  interests  of  our  own  Church  in  its  special  circum-
stances as  known  to  us;  the  larger  necessities  of  ass"ciated  Churches,  of  the  Chnrch  in
our  own  land,  in  its  colonies  and  dejjendencies  abroad,  in  other  Christian  nations;  ilie
necessities  of  missionary  Churches  amongst  the  heathen,  and  of  the  sheep  of  C'lnist
that  are  "scattered  abroad"  unshepherded ;  the  great  cause  of  the  kingd'  m  of  Christ  in
the  earth,  connected  as  it  is  with  everything  that  concerns  the  i)rogress  and  welfare  ot
mankind;  the  claims  of  "kings,  and  all  that  are  in  authoriiy ;"  of  those  in  "somiw.
trouble,  need,  sickness,  nr  any  other  adversity;"  the  wants  of  "nil  sorts  and  condition*
of  men,"  and  especially  of  our  kiiisiblk,  friends,  an<i  neighbours  ;^all  these  demand  our
intercession  and  seem  to  say  unitedly,  "Withal  praying  for  us  also!"  In  |i,irticular,
and  on  behalf  of  the  gospel,  the  apostle  desirts  the  Colossians  to  pray  (1)  ihiit  lie  m  ly
have  "an  open  door  to  speak  the  mystery  of  Christ"  (ver.  3).  The  world  will  nut
willingly  opeu  its  door  to  Christ.  It  will  leave  him  to  "stand  at  the  door  and  knock"
(Rev.  iii.  20).  It;  has  "  no  room  for  him  "  (Luke  ii.  7)  when  he  comes  to  be  its  guest.
Much  has  yet  to  he  done  to  "  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord."  But  "  the  prayer  of  fai  I  li  "
can  "remove  mountains,"  and  open  doors  that  are  fast  shut.  Obstructions  and  prejudices
are  to  be  broken  down;  hindrances  political  and-  material,  intellectual  and  sentimenial,
to  the  progress  of  Christian  truth,  are  to  be  overcome.  "Every  valley  shall  be  lilled,
and  every  mountain  and  liill  shall  be  brought  low ;  and  the  crooked  shall  become
straight,  and  the  rough  ways  smooth;  and  all  flesh  shall  see  the  salvation  of  God"
(Luke  iii.  4 — 6).  And  this  is  to  be  effected,  in  great  measure,  by  the  prayel-s  'of  "  God's
elect"  (Luke  xviii.  7),  even  as  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  at  the  shout  of  Israel  (Josh.  vi.
1 — 20).  (2)  But  the  open  door  is  of  little  use  unless  the  Church  is  prepared  to  enter  it.
Never,  perhaps,  were  there  in  the  world  so  many  "open  duors  set  before"  the  Church
as  there  are  now,  with  so  few  comparatively  who  are  able  and  willing  to  enter  tl  em.
Favouring  circumstances — liberty  to  preach  and  teach,  a  waiting  people,  a  willing
audience, — all  is  vain  without  some  one  to  "speak  the  word,"  and  to  speak  it  fitly.
"H'lW  shall  they  hear  without  a  preacher  ?  "  (Rom.  x.  14).  And  how  shall  they  hear  unto
salvation  if  the  preacher  speaks  feebly,  or  coldly,  or  confusedly,  without  "  the  demonstra-
tion of  the  Spirit  and  of  power"?  (3)  The  apostle  had  laboured  long  and  with  extra-
ordinary success,  "  more  abundantly  than  they  all "  (1  Cor.  xv.  10) ;  and  yet  felt  his  need
of  the  constant  renewal  of  the  Divine  anointing.  Again  and  again  he  acknowledges  his
dependence  on  the  prayers  ot  the  Church  (Rom.  xv.  30 — 32;  2  Thess.  iii.  1,  2,  etc.).
Nay,  even  Christ  himself  sustained  his  human  strength  of  soul  by  the  constant
refreshment  of  pr.i>er,  and  sought,  in  the  crisis  of  his  annuish,  the  watchful  sympathy
of  his  disciples  (Luke  v.  16;  .lohn  xi.  41;  Matt.  xxvi.  38).  How  much  more  is  this
needful  for  us !  That  ministry  alone  can  be  spiritually  pure  and  strong  which  is  drawn
from  secret  fountains  of  prayer,  and  which  commands  the  sympathetic  intercession  of
all  prayerful  hearers.

II.  The  Christian's  behaviour  towakds  men  op  the  wokld.  (Vers.  5, 6.)  1.  "  Walk
in  wisdom,"  says  the  apostle,  "towards  those  without"  (ver.  5).  Nowhere  is  Christian
wisdom  more  needtd,  and  nowhere  is  it  seen  to  greater  advantage,  than  in  dealing  with
worldly  men.  "Be  ye  therefore  wise  as  serpents,"  says  the  Saviour,  in  sending  his  dis-
ciples on  their  mission  to  the  world  (Matt.  x.  16).  It  is  not  necessary  that  "  the  sons  of
this  world  should  be  wiser  for  their  own  generation  than  the  sons  of  light"  (Luke  xvi.  8).
'J'his  wisdom,  while  resting  on  a  knowledge  of  God  and  of  Christian  truth  (ch.  i.  9 ;
ii.  2,  3),  and  furnished  out  of  his  Word  (ch.  iii.  16;  Matt.  xiiL  62),  requires  a  practical
knowledge  of  men  and  things.  It  "  cometh  down  from  above,"  being  "  asked  of  God  "
(Jas.  i.  5, 17 ;  iii.  13 — 18),  and  is  "  pure,  peaceable,  and  gentle ; "  but  it  has  to  be
I  raotised  in  a  human  world  and  in  the  service  of  men-  as  they  are ;  and  therefore  it
must  be  discerninjr,  well-informed,  and  practical.  The  Christian  should  not  be  inferior
to  any  man  in  his  own  walk  of  life  in  the  knowledge  of  his  busincis  and  of  the  duties
of  his  secular  position.  Indeed,  his  earnestness  and  diligence,  his  calmness  of  temper,
and  fairness  of  judgrnent,  and  soundness  of  conscience,  and  finer  sympathies,  will  usually
give  him  an  advantage  amongst  his  fellows:  "Godliness  is  profitable  unto  all  things"
(1  Tim,  IT  H),    How  often  earnest  aiterapta  to  do  good  misoarry  for  want  of  judgment,


219  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSlANS.         [ott.  tv.  1-18

and  the  Christian  cause  is  damaged  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  by  those  most  anxioua  to
]iromote  it  through  their  unwisdom  and  narrow-mindedness !  "  I  am  become  all  things
to  all  men,"  said  St.  Paul,  "  that  I  might  by  all  means  save  some"  (1  Cor.  ix.  20 — 22).
And  his  bearing  towards  men  of  so  many  diflferent  ranks  and  classes  in  the  strangely
mixed  society  in  which  he  moved,  sJiows  that  tl^iis  was  no  vain  boast.  (1)  The  first
condition  of  success  in  seeking  to  influence  others  for  their  liighest  good,  next  to  an
earnest  desire  to  do  so,  is  that  one  should  understand  them.  And  this  is  impossible  with-
out pains  and  study  and  a  large-hearted  Christian  sympathy.  So  with  the  missionary
amongst  the  heathen;  so  with  the  minister  at  home;  so  with  the  private  Christian
seeking  to  win  to  Christ  his  worldly  friends  or  business  associates;  if  he  is  to  persuade
men  (2  Cor.  v.  11),  he  must  understand  the  truth  in  its  persuasive  power,  and  he  must
understand  men  and  how  they  are  to  be  persuaded.  (2)  But  the  Christian  must  be
wise  for  liimself  as  well  as  for  others.  His  wisdom  must  be  circumspect.  It  is  his  ^rst
business  to  "keep  himself  unspotted  from  the  world"  (Jas.  i.  27);  to  take  care  that,
being  "  in  the  world,"  he  be  not  "  of  the  world  "  (John  xvii.  14 — 18).  He  should  have
"good  testimony  from  them  that  are  without,"  especially  if  he  hold  any  office  in  the
Church  (1  Tim.  iii.  7)  —such  a  repute  as  will  "  adorn  his  Saviour's  doctrine ; "  and  yet
he  must  rejoice  if  "men  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  him  falsely  for  Christ's  sake"
(Matt.  V.  11).  The  wisest  and  most  careful  behaviour  cannot  always  avoid  suspicion,
where  malice  and  slander  are  busy.  2.  To  wisdom  must  be  added  promptness  and
alert  c^tivity.  There  must  be  a  quick  eye  for  ench  opportunity  as  it  arises,  and  an
instant,  vigorous  effort  to  take  advantage  of  it.  The  right  occasion  makes  the  right
action.  A  thing  well  done  or  well  said  at  one  time  may  be  malapropos  if  timed  a
little  sooner  or  later.  (1)  We  must  cherish  a  keen  sense  of  the  value  and  the  shortness  of
time  itself — of  our  own  personal  lifetime,  the  single  opportunity  granted  us  for  doing
God's  work  on  earth,  the  seed-time  fqr  an  eternal  harvest,  "  the  day  "  with  its  "  twelve
hours"  when  the  dav's  work  must  be  done,  or  left  undone  for  ever  (John  ix.  4;  Ps.
xxxix.  4;  xc.  12;  1  Cor.  vii.  29;  Heb.  iii.  7,  13).  (2)  At  the  same  time,  we  must  have
a  proper  understanding  of  the  work  assigned  us,  a  sense  of  our  individual  calling  in  life,
a  recognition  of  the  particular  "will  of  God"  respecting  ourselves  as  from  time  to
time  it  may  be  indicated.  We  must  acquaint  ourselves  with  the  conditions  of  our
time  and  of  our  work,  so  that  each  may  be  fitted  to  the  other,  and  that  we  may  not
waste  our  strength  by  misdirection  or  "  fight  as  one  that  beateth  the  air,"  but  may  bo
able  to  "serve  the  counsel  of  God/or  our  own  generation"  (Acts  xiii.  36).  (3)  And,  finally,
we  must  be  animated  by  a  vigorous,  earnest  spirit — ^unhasting,  unresting — ^neither
dulled  by  sloth  nor  fretted  by  impatience.  So,  "as  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace
of  God"  (1  Pet.  iv.  10),  we  shall  turn  every  moment  and  every  oppoitunity  and  every
endowment  of  our  nature  to  the  best  account,  and  shall  be  able  "at  his  coming"  to
render  back  to  our  heavenly  Master  "his  own  with  usury  "  (Matt.  xxv.  27).  And  this
is  "  redeeming  the  time,"  (ver.  5).  3.  Where  a  wise,  and  wisely  energetic,  Christian  man
has  the  gift  of  apt  and  winning  speech  (ver.  0),  his  Christian  usefulness  is  largely
multiplied.  Indeed,  the  ordinary  talk  of  an  oidinary  Christian,  who  cannot  shine  in  the
brilliant  gifts  of  eloquence  or  wit,  will  at  least  be  free  from  everything  foolish  and  inept,
from  everything  gross  and  ill-mannered.  Though  he  be  but  a  pliiin  and  unlettered  man,
his  conversation  will  manifest  a  thoughtful,  observant  mind,  and  a  pure  and  chastened
disposition.  Living  a  life  of  prayerful  communion  with  God  and  with  eternal  things,
"meditating  in  his  Law  day  and  night"  (Ps.  i.  2),  he  will  be  "taught  of  God;"  and
when  he  speaks,  "the  opening  of  his  lips  will  be  right  words."  It  i.S  astonishing  hovi
tauch  shrewdness  and  kindly  good  sense  and  helpfulness,  how  ranch  of  the  highest  and
homeliest  moral  wisdom,  drawn  from  the  everyday  experience  of  life  and  the  lessons
of  nature,  is  found  sometimes  in  men  who  know  scarcely  any  book  but  their  English
Bible,  and  have  had  little  culture  but  that  which  is  given  by  prayer  (Jas.  i.  5).  A
simple  Christian  man  of  this 'kind  will  often  know  better  than  the  practised  scholar
"  how  to  answer  "  concerning  his  hope,  and  will  baffle  the  qupstionings  of  a  clever  scep-
ticism. And  when  fine  culture  has  been  employed  upon  good  abilities  under  the  teaching
of  the  Spirit  of  truth,  and  large  knowledge  has  been  gathered  from  books  and  men,  the
outcome  in  the  man's  conversation  ought  to  be  something  rich  and  valuable  in  a  high
degree.  (1)  Attractive  speech  is  one  of  God's  "greater  gifts"  (1  Cor.  xii.  31),  to  be  humbly
sought  and  diligently  imprgved  aad  wisely  aud  seriously  used.    There  is  none  moif


c&.iV.l-lg.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  0OLOSS1AN8.  219

commonly  and  lamentably  abused.  How  much  that  is  said  in  Christian  circles  would
be  left  unsaid  if  only  that  which  is  "good  unto  edifyini;"  (Eph.  iv.  29)  were  allowed
to  pass  the  lips !  (2)  But  this  rule  by  no  means  forbids  kindly  humour  and  the  play  of
wit.  Tlie  "salt"  that  "seasons"  conversation  (ver.  6)  contains  these  wholesome  ingre-
dients. A  dull,  uniform  gravity  is  not  the  most  edifying  style  of  discourse.  But  the
purpose  and  the  effect  of  a  Christian  man's  speech  should  always  be  serious,  however
light  and  graceful  the  form  which  on  proper  occasions  it  may  assume.  The  conversation
of  the  social  circle  is  one  of  the  greatest  "opportunities"  to  be  "redeemed"  for  Christ;
and  is  afforded  to  us  all.  And  especially  when  we  meet  those  who  are  not  Christians,
the  prejudiced,  the  sceptical,  the  wavering,  much  may  depend  on  our  being  "ready"
with  "  the  meekness  of  wisdom "  to  "  give  an  answer  to  every  man  that  asketh  a
reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  us "  (1  Pet.  iii.  15).  The  'private  conversation  of  the
Church  in  its  daily  intercour.se  with  the  world  should  be  a  powerful  ally  to  the  public
ministry  of  the  Word  (vers.  4,  6).

Vers.  7 — 18. — Sect.  10.  Personal  message!  and  greeting!.  The  last  section  of  this
letter  is  of  a  more  purely  epistolary  character,  and  is  not,  therefore,  so  directly  available
as  the  foregoing  sections  for  public  instruction,  belonging  to  its  framework  or  setting
as  a  piece  of  Christian  teaching.  Nevertheless,  these  closing  verses  have  their  own
peculiar  interest  and  value — great  value  for  historical  and  critical  purposes,  connecting
the  Epistle  as  they  do  by  the  most  authentic  notes  of  circumstantial  association  with
the  narrative  of  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  bracing  it  firmly  into  the  whole  coherent
structure  of  the  history  of  the  apostolic  Church.  Moieover,  in  the  brief  but  pointed
and  striking  notices  here  given  us,  aided  by  what  we  know  from  other  sources  of  the
persons  mentioned,  we  may  find  not  a  little  of  indirect  and  incidental  profit  "for
teaching,  for  reproof,  for  correction,  for  discipline  in  righteousness"  (2  Tim.  lii.  16).

I.  St.  Paul's  associates.  1.  Tychicus,  the  faithful  messenger.  (Vers.  7,  8:
comp.  Eph.  vi.  21 ;  Acts  xx.  4 ;  Titus  iii.  12 ,  2  Tim.  iv.  12.)  His  association  with  the
apostle  in  his  last  journey  to  Jerusalem,  attended  with  so  many  affecting  circumstances
and  terminating  in  his  long  imprisonment,  seems  to  have  led  to  a  devoted  attachment
on  the  part  of  Tychicus  to  St.  Paul.  After  returning  home,  as  we  may  suppose,  from
Jerusalem,  he  had  journeyed  again  to  Rome,  very  possibly  at  the  request  of  the
Ephesian  Church,  to  assist  and  comfort  the  imprisoned  apostle  and  to  bring  back  news
of  him.  And  he  returns  with  these  three  priceless  letters  in  his  charge  (Ephesians,
Colossians,  and  Philemon),  with  Onesimus  whom  he  is  to  accompany  as  far  as  Colossse,
and  as  the  bearer  of  reassuring  tidings  from  St.  Paul.  Again,  some  years  later,  when  the
apostle's  friends  were  fewer  and  devotion  to  his  cause  still  more  hazardous,  we  find
Tychicus  employed  on  similar  commissions.  (1)  The  apostle  has  found  him  to  be,  what
every  Christian  should  be  to  his  fellow-Christians,  "  a  brother  beloved ; "  what  every
officer  of  the  Church,  whether  in  higher  or  lower  capacity,  must  strive  to  be — "  a  faithful
minister  and  fellow-servant  in  the  Lord,"  faithful  to  the  Lord  and  faithful  in  all
brotherly  love  and  "  good  fidelity "  to  his  fellow-sei-vants.  So  Tychicus  is  a  blessing
both  to  the  apostle  and  to  the  distant  Asiatic  Churches.  (2)  While  the  Christian
depends  for  strength' and  consolation  in  the  first  place  on  the  fellowship  of  Christ  in  the
Spirit  (2  Cor.  i.  3—7 ;  2  Thess.  ii.  16,  17 ;  John  xvi.  33),  yet  how  precious  and  helpful
is  such  communion  as  this  with  Christian  friends  at  a  distance  (1  Thess.  iii.  6 — 10 ;
Phil.  iv.  10;  2  Cor.  vii.  6),  with  faithful  sufferers  in  Christ's  cause,  with  those  who
bring  tidings  and  words  of  cheer  from  brethren  far  off  in  other  lands !  (3)  They  are,
indeed,  "  brethren  beloved  "  who,  like  Tychicus,  pass  from  land  to  land,  from  Church  to
sister  Church,  in  honourable  ambassage,  as  "  tlie  messengers  of  the  Churches  and  the
glory  of  Christ "  (2  Cor.  viii.  23).  2.  Onesimus,  the  converted  slave.  '  (Ver.  9.)  His
position  and  character  will  be  more  fully  discussed  under  the  Epistle  to  Philemon.
(1)  He  is  commended  to  the  Christian  circle  at  Colussie  on  account  of  his  chiracter —
"a  faithful  and  beloved  brother."  The  apostle  had  learned  to  love  and  trust  him,  as
"the  child  of  his  bonds,"  as  "his  very  heart,"  for  his  goodness  and  proved  fidelity  and
helpful  service  to  himself  (Philem.  10 — 13).  Greatly  had  he  wished  to  retain  him,
but  it  was  the  servant's  duty  to  return  to  his  master.  The  qualities  the  apostle  marks
in  him  deserve  equal  respect  from  us  in  whatever  grade  of  life  they  appear.  The
fnaster  who  fails  to  recognize  in  his  loyal  and  humble  Christian  servant  "»  brother


220  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  [oanr.  1— la

belored  in  the  Lord,"  is  wantiiic;  in  the  simplicity  and  elevation  of  the  Christian
character,  and  has  yet  to  learn  that  "  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is  neither  bond  nor  free ''
(oh.  iii.  11;  Gal.  iii.  28).    It  was,  however,  for  Philemon  and  his  Colossian  friends  a  severe
test  of  Christian  conviction  and  of  their  confidence  in  St.  Paul  to  he  required  to  take
back  this  runaway  slave  as  "a  faithful  and  beloved  brother."    (2)  He  is  commended
to  them  by  his  Colossian  origin.    "  Who  is  one  of  you."     It  is  a  natural  and  kindly
feeling  that  prompts  this  reference.     Ties  of  neighbourhood  an^l  early  association,  as
well  as  those  of  kindred,  are  providentially  formed,  and  belong  to  the  divinely  con-
stituted framework  of  human  life  (Acts  xvii.  26).    This  claim  of  Oriesimus  is  not
destroyed  by  his  being  a  slave,  at  the  very  bottom  of  the  socinl  scale ;  nor  was  it  forfeited
by  his  misconduct.     Now  that  he  repents  and  returns,  he  is  to  be  received  by  his
Christian  fullow-townsmen  as  one  of  themselve"!.     3.  Aristarchus,  the  ilevoted  comrade.
(Ver.  10.)    He  was  a  representative  of  the  Macedonian  Churches  (Acts  xx.  4;,  v/ho
were  dearest  to  the  apostle  of  his  children  in  the  faith  (1  Tliess.  ii.  19;  Phil.  i.  5),  in
writing  to  whom  he  laid  aside  his  official  title  and  was  simply  Paul,  whom  alone  he
allowed  to  minister  to  his  personal  needs  (Phil.  iv.  10 — 18;  2  Cor.  xi.  8 — 10).     And
he,  along  with  Luke,  shared  the  hardships  of  the  apostle's  perilous  winter  voyage  to
Home  (Acts  xxvii.  2).     Indeed,  he  had  been  with  him  hefore  he  set  out  from  Ephesus,
and  was  seized  by  the  Ephesian  mob  at  the  time  of  the  riot  there,  heing  evidently  a
person  of  some  note  and  distinction.     We  know  nothing  more  of  his  services  to  the
cause  of  Christ,  heyond  this'  record  of  his  assidnous  and  self-sacrificing  attendance  on
St.  Paul.     How  much  the  apostle,  with  his  physical  infirmities  and  his   sensitive
nature,  owed  to  such  friendship,  and  how  much  the  Church  owes  on  his  account,  we
cannot  tell.     Those  who  may  not  have  great  gifts  for  public  usefulness  may  serve
Christ  most  efiectually  oftentimes  by  strving  his  servants,  by  their  private  friendship
and  aid  cheering  the  hearts  and  strengthening  the  hands  of  those  on  whom  fall  the
heavier  responsibilities  of  the  Church's  care  and  strife,  and  who  but  for  such  timely
help  might  haply  sink  beneath  their  burdens.     Little  as  we  know  of  this  man,  with
what  a  bright  distinction  bis  name  is  marked,  and  what  a  place  of  honour  will  be  his
in  the  hook  of  life,  whom  the  apostle  designates,  "Aiisfarchus,  my  fellow-captive,  who
has  been  a  comfort  to  me"!    4.  Murh,  the  recovered  friend.    (Ver.  10.)     He,  like
Onesimus  to  his  master,  had  been  "  aforetime  unprofitable  "  to  St.  Paul  (Acts  xiii.  13 ;
XV.  36 — 41);  and  his  unprofitableness  had  caused  a  serious  breach  between  the  two
great  Gentile  missionaries.     But  now,  and  again  at  a  later  time,  he  is  marked  out  as
"  useful  lor  ministry"  (2  Tim.  iv.  11).     St.  Panl's  firmness  and  fidelity  in  refusing,  at
whatever  cost,  to  take  with  him  an  untrustworthy  man,  had,  we  may  presume,  helped
to  rouse  in  Mark  a  better  spirit,    (1)  At  any  rate,  the  position  in  which  he  now  appears
and  the  honour  which  belong  to  his  name  in  the  Chinch  of  Christ,  shows  that  <me false
step  or  unworthy  act  in  a  Christian  life  need  not  he  absolutely  fatal  (Gal.  vi.  1).     The
immediate  result  of  any  Inpse  must  be  evil ;  and  it  may  be  followed  throujihout  life  by
painful  consequences.     Yet  Mark,  like  Peter,  rashly  generous  and  apt  to  over-estimate
his  strength  at  first,  when  chastened  and  coirected  by  experiei;ce,  becomes  the  trusted
and  honoured  friend  of  the  two  chief  apostles,  as  well  as  of  his  only  less  illustrious
kinsman  Barnabas.    And  to  him  it  was  given  to  write  the  priceless  second  Gospel,
which,  in  its  freshness  and  simplicity  of  tone,  and  in  its  vivacity  and  dramatic  energy
of  style,  indicates  those  qualities  in  John  Mark  which,  in  spite  of  his  early  failure,
made  him  so  much  valued  and  beloved.    (2)  And  8t.  Paul's  treatment  of  Mark  throws
an  interesting  light  on  his  own  character.    With  all  his  uncompromising  sternness  and
the  intensity  of  his  passionate  nature,  there  was  no  bitterness  or  suspiciousness,  no
cherishing  of  personal  resentment  in  his  heart.     Some  men  will  never  trust  again  a
friend  or  servant  who  once,  under  any  circumstances,  has  failed  them.    But  the  apostle
shows  a  more  Christian  and  a  wiser  disposition.     As  he  bids  others,  so  he  acts  himself,
"  forbearing  and  forgiving  if  he  have  blame  against  any "  (oh.  iii.  13) :  compare  the
crucial  instance  of  2  Cor.  ii.  5 — 11.     As  "the  Lord  forgave"  Peter  who  denied-him,  so
the  apostle  forgives  Mark  who  bad  deserted  him.     And  by  the  way  in  which  he  com-
mends him  to  tl  e  regard  of  this  distant  Church,  he  shows  how  entirely  Mark  has  his
approval  and  confidence.    We  note  also  how  once  more  he  takes  the  opportunity  of  a
kindly  reference  to  Barnabas.     5.  Jesus  Jusiv,s,  a  Catholic-minded  Jew.    (Ver.  11.')
ile  is  koowD  to  us  here  only  ;  but  as  one  of  the  three  (with  Aristarchus  and  Marcus)


OH.  !▼.  1— 18.]    ,    THE   EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIAiilS.  221

wlio  alone  "of  the  circumcision"  were  the  apostle's  "fellow-workers  unto  the  kingdom
of  God,"  and  "a  comfort  unto  him."  Aristarchus  and  Mark  were  old  friends  and
associates  of  St.  Paul,  uttaohed  to  him  by  many  ties.  Jesus  Justus,  we  are  inclined  to
think,  was  a  Christian  Jew  of  Koine,  and  in  that  case  was,  it  appears,  the  only  member
of  that  community — a  tolerably  lurge  one,  as  we  should  gather  from  the  Ejiistle  to  the
Romans — who  heartily  supported  the  apostle  in  this  hour  of  his  need  and  danger.
Many  of  the  Jewish  brethren  at  Rome  openly  opposed  him  (Phil.  i.  16) ;  others  regarded
him  with  a  cold  and  suspicious  indifference.  At  a  later  period  he  has  sorrowfully  to
say  of  his  friends  at  Rome,  "All  forsook  me"  (2  Tim.  iv.  16).  But,  whether  Jesus
Justus  belonged  to  Rome  or  not,  the  fact  that  he  was  found  at  this  time  by  St.
Paul's  !?ide  says  a  great  deal  for  his  courage,  as  well  as  for  his  largeness  of  heart
and  enlightened  views.  The  three  pillar-apostles  at  Jerusalem  rather  acquiesced  in
St.  Paul's  principles  and  the  policy  he  had  pursued  than  actively  supported  them
(Gal.  ii.);  and  their  professed  followers  in  the  Jewish  Churches  denounced  them  and
set  up  a  counter-agitation.  If  for  no  other  reason,  tlien,  it  was  fitting  that  the  name  of
this  Jesus  should  he  honourably  recorded.  To  the  apostle  who  had  been  in  so  many
"perils  from  his  own  countrymen"  and  "from  false  brethren"  (2  Cor.  xi.  26),  every
"fellov-labouier  of  the  circumcision"  was  an  especial  "comfort."  His  cognomen
Justus  attests  his  reputation  amongst  his  compatriots  for  legal  str.otness  and  upright-
ness; and  this  high  character  would  make  his  attachment  to  St.  Paul  the  more  valuable.
6.  Epaphras,  the  earnest  minister.  (Vers.  12,  13.)  With  the  name  of  Bpaphras  we
are  familiar  already  (see  homiletics,  sect.  1,  II.  2).  Though  absent  from  his  people,  he
is  none  the  less  concerned  for  their  welfare.  When  he  can  do  nothing  less,  he  can  pray
for  them  all  the  more.  We  note:  (1)  The  intensUy  of  his  minist'-rial  solicitude;
"always  striving  [wrestling]  for  you  in  his  prayers  "  (ver.  12) ;  "  he  hath  much  [painful]
labour  for  you"  (ver.  13).  The  critical  state  in  which  he  had  left  his  charge  at  Colossae,
the  insidious  and  ominous  character  of  the  i  rrors  introduced  amongst  them  and  with
which  he  had  found  it  so  difficult  to  cope,  were  constantly  weighing  u|)on  his  mind,
and  kept  him  unceasingly  active  in  earnest  wrestlings  of  prayer  for  his  people's  souls.
(2)  The  extent  of  his  care.  "  Var  you,  and  for  them  in  'Laoilicea,  and  for  them  in
Hierapolis."  The  neighbouring  cities  with  their  little  Christian  flocks,  exposed,  or
likely  to  be  exposed,  to  the  same  perils  that  threatened  Colossaj,  sliare  his  solioitude.
And  the  responsibility  of  the  Christian  minister  cannot  at  any  time  be  strictly  confined
to  his  own  itnmediate  charge.  Each  member  shares  in  the  joys  and  griefs,  the  dangers
and  trials,  which  belong  to  the  whole  body  of  Christ.  And  Churches  bordering  on  his
own  and  connected  with  his  people  by  ties  of  acquaintanceship  and  frequent  inter-
course must  especially  attract  his  pastoral  sympathies  and  intercession.  (3)  The  aim
of  his  ministry.  "  'I'hat  ye  may  stand  perfect  and  fully  assured  in  all  the  will  of  God  "
(ver.  13).  This  is  the  end  of  Christ's  redemption  and  of  his  whole  administration  of
the  Church  (oh.  i.  22).  This  was  the  end  of  the  apostle's  labours  (ch.  1.  28,  29).
Every  true  Christian  minister  will  set  the  same  mark  before  him,  namely,  the  individual
ahd  collective  perfection  of  his  people  in  all  that  goes  to  make  up  a  complete  Christian
manhood  (['"ph.  iv.  13).  And,  partly  as  resulting;  from,  partly  as  contributing  to,  their
moral  perleoiion,  he  must  seek  that  their  Christian  convictions  may  be  deeiiened  and
confirmed,  may  be  more  intelligently  as  well  as  more  heartily  and  practically,  and  so
in  every  way  more  surely,  held  (Eph.  iv.  13—16)  (See  homiletics,  sects.  1,  III.  1 ;  3,
I. ;  and  4,  I.  2).  7 .  Luke,  the  beloved  physician.  (Ver.  U.)  Of  all  the  apostle's  friends,
none  was  dearer  to  him  or  more  serviceable  than  St.  Luke.  He  was  with  him  to  the
very  last  (2  Tim.  iv.  11).  His  writings,  while  they  keep  the  writer^  personality  modestly
out  of  sight,  betray  in  him  a  man  of  a  careful  and  diligent  habit  of  mind,  of  con-
siderable breadth  of  culture,  and  of  a  tender  and  sympathetic  heart.  The  Acts  of
the  Apostles  show  him  to  have  been  a  warm  and  admiring,  yet  impartial,  friend  of  St.
Paul.  And  his  Gospel  is  penetrated  with  that  Pauline  universalism  which  both  he  and
his  master  first  found  in  Christ.  The  apostle  probably  owed  not  a  little  to  Luke'.s
medical  care.  And  we  are  all  indebted  to  this  quiet  and  skill'ul  physician,  who  under-
stood so  well  St.  Paul's  peculiar  temperament  and  the  value  of  his  life  to  the  Church,
and  whose  intelligence  and  special  training-  made  his  comiianionship  so  pleasant  and
so  useful  to  the  apostle.  The  medical  profession  is  that  which  stands  nearest  to  the
ministry  of  Christ  in  the  hotiours  of  self-sacrifice  and  devotion  to  humanity.    Th«r»  is


222  THS  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  [oh.  it.  1—18,

no  vocation  that  demands  a  higter  combination  of  intellect'ial  and  moral  powers,  or
that  puts  a  greater  strain  upon  a  man's  best  qualities.  It  may  bring,  and  often  does
bring,  the  physician  into  a  sympathy  with  the  mind  and  with  the  mission  of  Christ
closer  and  more  real  in  some  respects  than  any  other  work  can  do.  Its  best  services
are  beyond  all  material  and  earthly  reward.  Exercised  by  a  wise  and  faithful  Christian
man.  it  becomes  a  ministry  of  unspeakable  blessing  to  soul  as  well  as  body,  reaching,
as  did  Christ's  miracles  of  healing,  the  soul  oftentimes  through  the  body.  MediecA
men  Christ,  "  the  good  Physician,"  claims  above  other  men  for  his  followers  and
fellow-workers.  8,  Demas,  the  lacksUder.  (Ver.  14 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  9,  10.)  This  man
must  have  been  valued  greatly  by  the  apostle,  to  be  mentioned  in  such  company.
In  his  second  imprisonment  he  urgently  requires  'i'imothy's  presence,  "  because  Demas
had  forsaken  him."  He  appears  to  have  depended  hitherto  upon  Demas,  and  to  have
prized  his  aid.  Demas  had  chosen  his  lot  with  the  persecuted  apostle,  and  for  some  time
served  him  steadily  and  well ;  and  then  at  the  last,  when  the  need  was  greatest,  he
deserted  him,  not  through  fear  of  danger,  it  appears,  but  for  the  sake  of  worldly  gain — ■
"  having  loved  this  present  world."  Whether  he  was  ever  restored  to  Christian  fidelity
or  not,  we  cannot  tell.  His  case  is  so  much  worse  than  Mark's,  in  that  the  latter  gave
way  to  fear  under  sudden  impulse,  and  in  the  unexpected  hardships  and  dangers  of  his
first  probation ;  while  Demas  seems  to  have  forsaken  the  apostle  deliberately  and  heart-
lessly, and  when  he  was  no  mere  novice  in  the  service  of  Christ.  He  is  an  example  of
those  in  whom  the  good  seed  takes  root  and  grows  through  the  frosts  of  spring  to  a  fair
summer  promise,  and  then  "  the  cares  of  the  world,  and  the  deceitfulness  of  riches,  and
the  lusts  of  other  things  entering  in,  choke  the  word,  and  it  becometh  unfiuitful"
(Mark  iv.  19),

II.  The  message  to  Laodicba.  (Vers.  15 — 17.)  This  passage  assumes  a  peculiar
interest  in  connection  with  the  after  history  of  the  Laodicean  Church,  and  the
terrible  rebuke  addressed  to  it  by  Christ  in  Eev.  iii.  14^-22.  It  is  the  only  instance  in
which  the  apostle  salutes  one  Church  in  writing  to  another.  If  the  letter  received  from
him  by  the  Laodiceans  was  our  (so-called)  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  inasmuch  as
there  is  no  particular  greeting  to  any  Church  appended  to  it,  we  can  understand  why
he  should  add  this  kindly  salutation  here.  The  Churches  of  the  Lycus  valley  were  hO
closely  linked  together  that  tlie  state  of  one  was  to  a  large  extent  the  state  of  all.  We
are  not  surprised,  therefore,  that  the  contagion  of  the  Colossian  evil  spread  to  Laodicea.
In  that  wealthy  and  luxurious  city  it  bore  disastrous  fruit,  in  the  corruption  that  Christ
himself  through  St.  John  alterwards  denounced  in  his  Apocalyptic  message.  (1)  The
Colossians  and  Laodiceans  are  bidden  to  exchange  Epistles  (ver.  16),  as  they  share  the
apostle's  greetings  and  alike  excited  his  anxiety  (ch.  ii.  1).  Their  similar  condition
and  common  dangers  called  for  the  same  warnings  and  instructions,  and  the  two
Epistles  largely  explain  and  supplement  each  other.  Ard  indeed,  wherever  local
circumstances  permit,  as  in  the  Ireedom  and  ease  of  communication  amongst  ourselves
it  is  so  largely  possible.  Christian  intercourse  should  be  promoted,  concerted  measures
should  be  taken,  the  forces  of  the  Church  should  be  combinid  in  resistance  to  the  spread
of  error  and  the  contajiion  of  vice.  "  Union  is  strength."  (2)  Nympha  {ov  Nymphat)
is  greeted  by  name  ("Ver.  15),  according  to  the  apostle's  custom,  who  loves  to  single  out
for  honour  those  who  serve  the  Church  by  the  readiness  by  which  they  place  their
house  and  means  at  her  service  (1  Cor.  xvi.  15,  16 ;  Eom.  xvi.  3 — 5, 23).  (3)  The  most
significant  sentence  of  this  passage  is  the  warning  addressed  to  Archippus  (ver.  17),
whom  we  suppose  to  have  held  an  office  of  trust  in  the  Church  at  Laodicea.  He  is  the
son  of  St.  Paul's  honoured  friend  Philemon,  and  had  been  on  some  former  occasion
(probably  at  Ephesus)  so  closely  associated  with  the  apostle  in  circumstances  of  labour
and  danger  that,  in  writing  to  his  father,  he  calls  him  "  my  fellow-soldier."  And  yet
symptoms  of  negligence  have  appeared  in  his  conduct  of  affairs  at  Laodicea,  that  call
forth  the  gentle  yet  serious  admonition,  "  Take  heed  to  the  ministry  that  thou
receivedst  in  the  Lord,  that  thou  fulfil  it."  How  grave  his  responsibility  if  this  warn-
ing failed  to  take  effect,  and  if  the  all  but  apostate  state  of  the  Laodicean  Church  soma
years  afterwards  was  in  any  degree  due  to  the  unfaithfulness  of  its  first  pastor  1

III.  The  apostle's  farewell.  (Ver.  18.)  These  brief,  affecting  words  proceed  from
the  author's  own  hand,  the  large  and  difScuit  characters  themselves  a  reminder  of  hia
afflict'ons  in  the  gospeL    1,  He  bids  the  Colossians  remember  his  bonds  (comp.  Phjleia.


CH.IV  1—18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSMANS.  223

10, 13 ;  Phil.  i.  7, 17 ;  Eph,  iii.  1, 13 ;  vi.  20 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  9, 10 ;  see  homiletics,  sect.  3, 1. 4)
— so  sore  a  trial  to  him,  so  great  an  advantage  and  glory  to  them,  calling  for  their
tender  and  prayerful  sympathy,  and  for  their  most  regardful  heed  to  all  that  he  had
written.  2.  He  wishes  thorn  grace — grace  first  and  last  (oomp.  ch.  i.  2, and  homiletics);
the  grace  they  had  received  already  (ch.  i.  6,  12,  21,  27  ;  ii.  6  ;  iii.  12,  13  ;  Eph.  i.  3)
being  the  pledge  and  the  earnest  of  all  the  fulness  of  that  "superaboun<iing  grace"
which  reigns  "  thvoi  gli  lightcuasness  uijIo  eternal  life  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord"
(Eom.  v.  20,  21 ;  2  (Jor.  ix.  8 ;  Kph.  i.  3 ;  John  L  16).


HOMrrji<:s  by  various  authors.

Ver.  1. — The  duties  of  masters.  "  Masters,  render  unto  your  servants  that  wMoh  is
just  and  equal ;  knowing  that  ye  also  have  a  Master  in  heaven."

I.  The  duty  of  masters.  It  is  here  enforced  only  on  its  positive  side.  1.  Justice.
Masters  must  give  their  servants  wfiat  is  acc'  rding  to  contract,  or  according  to  what  is
just  in  itself,  as  to  work,  wages,  food,  correction,  and  example.  2.  Equality.  Masters
sometimes  treat  servants  unequally  in  demanding  inconvenient  service,  an  unreasonable
amoimt  of  work,  in  withholding  wages.  They  ought  to  treat  them  so  that  they  may
serve  them  cheerfully  and  efficiently.

II.  The  reason  to  enforce  this  duty.  "Knowing  that  ye  also  have  a  Master  in
heaven."  God's  majesty  and  man's  authority  stand  tojiether.  The  Lord  in  heaven
is  the  Master  of  masters,  and  will  avenge  the  wrongs  they  may  inflict  on  their  ser-
vants.—T.  C.

Ver.  2. — Exhortation  to  constant  prayer.  The  apostle  then  gives  some  special  con-
cluding exhortations:  "  Continue  steadfaot'v  in  prayer,  watching  therein  with  thanks-
giving."

I.  The  duty  op  peesbveranob  in  prayer.  1.  This  does  not  imply  that  we  are  to
devote  all  our  time  to  prayer ;  for  it  would, be  inconsistent  (1)  with  other  duties;  (2)
with  man's  mental  and  moral  nature;  (3)  with  the  design  of  prayer  itself.  2.  It
implies  that  we  are  to  he  often  engaged  in  prayer.  (1)  There  is  nothing  more
sanctifying  and  refreshing  and  strengthening  to  the  soul.  (2)  Continuance  in  prayer
brings  larger  blessings  from  on  high.  (3)  I'he  Scripture  contains  many  examples  of
continuance  in  prayer  (David,  Daniel,  Paul,  our  Lord  himself).  (4)  The  delay  in  the
finswers  to  prayer  ought  to  lead  us  to  persevere  therein,  because  (a)  it  may  lead  to
a  deeper  sense  of  waut ;  (i)  our  faith  and  patience  need  to  be  tiled ;  (c)  the  time  for  the
answers  may  not  have  come.

II.  The  duty  of  watchfulness  in  prayer.  1.  We  must  he  watchful  as  to  the
spirit  of  prayer,  not  indolent  and  leniips.  2.  We  must  watch  for  arguments  in  prayer.
3.  We  must  luatch  for  suitable  prayivg  seasons.  4.  We  must  watch  against  watchless-
ness.  5.  We  must  watch  for  the  answers  to  prayer.  6.  Remember  Ghrisfs  example  as
he  watched  in  prayer.     (Matt.  xiv.  23,  25.)

III.  The  duty  of  joikisg  thanksgiving  with  our  supplications  and  cue  watch-
ing. 1.  We  must  always  in  prayer  give  thanks  for  mercies  received.  (Phil.  iv.  6 ;
1  Thess.  V.  16,  17.)  2.  We  must  thank  him  in  praises.  3.  Qod  answer*  according  to
our  gratitude  for  mercies  received. — T.  0.

Vers.  3,  4. — Prayer  for  the  apostle  and  his  companions.  "  Withal  praying  for  us
also,  that  God  may  open  imto  us  a  door  lor  the  word,  lo  speak  the  mystery  of  Christ  for
which  I  am  also  in  bonds ;  that  I  may  make  it  manifest,  as  I  ought  to  speak."

I.  Even  the  greatest  in  the  Church  needs  the  pbaybes  of  the  least.  1.  It  is
the  duty  of  the  people  to  pray  for  their  ministers.  2.  It  makes  prayer  profitable  to
interest  ourselves  in  the  welfare  of  otliers  by  intercessions  for  them  at  a  throne  of  grace.
3.  The  progress  of  the  gospel  depends  much  upon  the  prayers  of  the  saints.  (2
Thess.  iii.  1.)

IL  The  subject  of  the  prayer.  It  wag  that  the  apostle  and  Timothy  and
Epaphras  might  have  abundant  opportunity  of  preaching  the  gospel,  as  well  as  liberty,
power,  aud  success.    The  prayer  implies:  1.  That  Ood  can  open  a  way  for  thegvupe'l


t24  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oh,  nr.  1— la

among  the  hearts  of  men.  It  was  the  Lord  who  opened  Lyilia's  heart  (4cts  xvi.  14),
and  "opened  the  door  of  faith  to  the  Gentiles"  (Acts  xiv.  27).  2.  That  Ood  could
liberate  the  apustle  from  prison  as  a  condition'  of  carrying  on  his  a/postolic  work.  3,
That  the  apostlt^s  imprisoum'-nt  was  caused  by  his  devotion  to  the  "mystery  of  Christ,"
which  was  the  admi>sion  of  the  Gentiles  to  salvation  on  equal  ternns  with  the  Jews,  or,
in  other  words,  "  Christ  in  them  the  Hope  of  glory  "  (ch.  i.  27).  He  would  not  have
heen  in  prison  if  he  had  heen  preaching!  a  gospel  with  Judaic  restrictions.  His  bonds
were  due  to  the  strength  of  Jewish  prejudices.  But  "  the  truth  of  the  gospel"  was  so
dear  to  him  that  lie  was  content  to  suffer  lor  it,  and  even  to  forego  the  opportunities  of
enlarged  usefulness  out  of  prison.  4.  That  he  might  be  able  to  use  his  opportunities  with
boldness  and  success.  People  ought  to  pray  that  their  ministers  may  he  able  to  preach
tne  Wi  rd  with  power  (1  Thess.  v.  5) ;  with  urgency  (2  Tim.  iv.  2,  3,  5) ;  with  patience,
constancy,  and  fear  (1  Cor.  iv.  9;  2  Cor.  vi.  4;  iv.  8);  with  faithfulness  (1  Cor.  iv.  2);
with  zeal  (2  Cor.  v.  11 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  12), — approving  themselves  in  the  sight  of  Gtod  to
their  hearers'  consciences  (2  Cor.  ii.  17). — T.  0.

Ver.  5. —  '/he  hehaviour  of  Christians  in  the  world.  "  Walk  in  wisdom  toward  them
that  are  without,  redeeming  the  time."     Consider —

I.  The  persons  who  abe  to  be  influenced  by  cue  walk.  "  Them  that  are
without."  Chiistians  are  those  who  are  within  (1  Cor.  v.  12).  Unbelievers  are  "  with-
out " — outside  tho  Church,  without  God,  without  Christ,  without  hope  in  the  world.
They  are  those  whom  "  God  judgeth  "  (1  Cor.  v.  13).  B'  lievers  ought  to  have  regard
to  such  persons,  not  only  in  their  prayers,  but  in  the  wisdom  of  their  personal  walk.

II.  The  natubb  and  impoetance  of  the  believek's  walk  befobb  the  wobld.
"  Walk  in  wisdom, . . .  redeeming  the  time."  1,  It  is  a  wise  walk.  "  Be  ye  wise  as  ser-
pents" (Matt.  X.  16).  Zeal  is  not  enough.  Love  is  not  enough.  Walk  circumspectly,
so  as  to  give  no  offence  or  put  occasions  of  "eproach  in  the  way  of  sinners.  This  is
done  by  believers  (1)  walking  in  the  light  or  God's  Word  (Ps.  cxix.  1) ;  (2)  walking
in  all  faithfulness  of  their  calling  (1  Thess.  iv.  11, 12  ;  1  Tim.  vi.  1)  ;  (3)  ■walking  in
love  to  one  another,  without  murmurings  or  disputings  (Phil.  ii.  15,  IS))  ;  (4)  walking
in  meekness  toward  all  men  (Titus  iii.  1,  2 ;  Jas.  iii.  13) ;  (5)  walking  in  all  patience
and  constancy  under  rebuke  or  injury  (1  Pet.  iii.  13 — 16).  2.  Such  a  walk  is  influ-
ential toward  unbelievers.  (1)  A  believer  ought  to  be  more  careful  of  his  walk  beiore
them  than  before  believers.  (2)  Snch  a  walk  has  a  winning  effect  upon  the  world,  which
thus  sees  the  reality  of  true  religion.  Believers  are  to  be  "  living  epistles  of  Christ,  known
iind  read  of  all  men  "  (2  Cor.  iii.  3).  (3)  A  foolish  walk  will  cause  the  enemy  to
blaspheme.  3.  Believers  ought  to  seek  constant  opportunities  of  obeying  this  command.
"  Eedeeming  the  time."  External  oppoitunities  are  to  be  sought  for,  and  never  to  be
neglected.  Ministers  must  preach  while  the  door  is  open;  people  must  pray  at  every
opportunity  (Eph.  vi.  18;  Lukexxi.  36).  They  must  walk  in  the  light  before  the
night  comes.    The  times  may  not  always  be  favourable. — T.  C.

Ver.  6. — The  importance  of  seasonable  speech.  "  Let  your  speech  be  always  with
grace,  seasoned  with  salt,  that  ye  may  know  how  to  answer  each  one."  The  conver-
sation of  believers  is  to  have  reference  to  "  those  without "  as  well  as  their  personal
behaviour.

I.  The  natubb  of  seasonable  speech.  1.  It  is  to  be  "  always  with  grace."  (1)
h  it  to  spring  out  of  some  grace  of  God  in  the  heart,  such  as  knowledge, joy, love,  fear;
to  b^  seasoned  with  the  recollection  of  God's  grace  to  us  in  Christ  (Ps.  xl.  11);  and  to
minister  grace  to  the  hearers  (Eph.  iv.  29).  2.  It  is  to  consist  of  gracious  words.  (1)
N'  t  woids  o'  railing,  or  blasphemy,  or  corruption  ;  (2)  but  words  that  are  (a)  seasonable
(Prov.  XV.  23),  (J)  wholesome  (Eph.  iv.  29),  (c)  kindly  (Prov.  xxxi.  26),  (d)  hopeful.

3.  The  conversation,  of  believers  is  to  le  uniformly  with  grace.  The  precept  is  always
in  force.  Much  depends  upon  the  continuity  of  a  gracious  habit  of  talk.  It  is  to  be
exercised  in  all  places,  at  all  times,  yet  with  due  regiird  to  what  is  seasonable  or  timely.

4.  It  is  to  be  seasoned  with  salt.  It  is  not  to  be  insipid  and  without  point,  so  as  to  be
incapable  of  edifying  man's  spirit.  It  must  have  penetrative  force,  either  for  the  pur-
]iose  of  directing  the  inquirer  or  answering  the  scoffer.  "  The  tongue  of  the  wise  is  aa
iliiiicu  silver ; "  "  The  heart  of  the  wise  teacheth  his  mouth,  and  addetb  learning  to  bis


CH.  IV.  1—13.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  0OLOSSIAN8.  tSt

lips"  (Prov.  X.  20 ;  xvi.  23).  Our  Lord  aaid, "  Every  one  must  be  salted  with  fire,  every
sacrifice  must  be  salted  with  salt"  (Mark  ix,  49).  The  person  is  salted  first;  the  salt
is  found  in  his  words  and  deeds  afterwards.

IL  The  end  of  seasonable  speech.  "  That  ye  may  know  how  to  answer  eaclv
one."  This  implies :  1.  ^  hat  the  truth  will  be  spoken  agamnt.  (1)  It  is  the  heritage  of
"the  sect  everywhere  spoken  against  "(Acts  xxviii.  22).  (2)  It  is  hard  for  carnally
minded  men  to  understand  it,  and  therefore  they  gainsay  it.  (3)  There  are  moa  who
♦•hold  down  the  truth  in  unrighteousness"  (Rom.  i.  18).  2.  'fhat  believers  are  to
learn  how  to  give  a  right  answer  to  ohj'  dors.  Wo  are  to  "  give  a  reason  of  the  hope
that  is  in  us  with  meekness  and  fear  "  (1  Pet.  iii.  15).  It  must  be  done  (1)  prayerfully ;
for  "  the  answer  of  the  tongue,"  as  well  as  "the  preparation  of  the  heart,"  "  is  from  the
Lord  "  (Prov.  xvi.  1).  (2)  With  faith  in  Goil's  promise  and  hope  (Pa.  cxix.  42 ;  Matt.
X.  19).  (3)  With  a  good  conscience  (1  Pet.  iii.  16).  Thus  obj  ctors  will  be  put  to
shame  who  "  falsely  accuse  our  good  conversation  in  Christ."  (4)  With  a  due  con-
sideration for  the  circumslances  of  each  objector,  whether  he  be  sincere  or  insinceie,
ignorant  or  malicious.  We  are  "to  answer  each  one"  according  to  the  necessities  of
each  case  (I'rov.  xxv.  11 ;  xxvi.  4,  6).— T.  01

Vers.  7—9. — The  bearers  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Oolossiani.  Though  the  apostle  had
but  few  friends  at  this  time  in  Home  to  comfort  him  in  his  "bonds,"  he  spares  two  of
them  to  comfort  the  Culossians.

I.  The  persons  who  oarby  the  Epistle  to  Colossjb.  Tychicus  and  Onesimus.
1,  Tychicus.  (1)  His  history.  He  was  a  native  of  Asia  Minor  (Acts  xx.  4),  and  pro-
bably of  Ephesus  (2  Tim.  iv.  12).  He  accompanied  the  apostle  at  the  close  of  his  third
missionary  journey  (Acts  xx.  4).  He  was  now  again  with  the  apostle  at  Rome,  near
the  end  of  the  first  Eoman  ca|)tivity;  and  he  appears  again  with  him  at  the  very  end
of  the  apostle's  life,  when  the  apostle  is  sending  him  to  Crete  and  to  Bjihesus  (Titus
iii.  12 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  12).  The  name  Tychicus  appears  on  Eoraau  inscriptions  as  well
as  on  inscriptions  in  Agia  Minor.  (2)  His  character  and  work.  He  receives  three
titles  of  distinction  and  praise,  (a)  A  beloved  brother,  in  relation  to  the  whole  Chris-
tian Church;  (6)  a  faithful  minister,  in  relation  to  his  evan<;elislic  services  to  the
apostle  (Acts  xx.  4);  (c)  a  fellow-servant  in  the  Lord,  a  co-operator  with  the  apostle
in  Christian  labours.  2.  Onesimus.  This  was  doubtless  the  runaway  slave  of  Phile-
mon, whose  conversion  is  recorded  in  the  Epistle  to  that  Colnssian  brother.  (1)  He
was  a  native  of  Ci  Jossas — "  who  is  one  of  yon."  (2)  His  changed  character — "  the  wi  th-
ful  and  beloved  brother."  (a)  He  was  lately  unfaithful,  now  he  is  faithful ;  he  was
lately  an  object  of  contempt  and  dislike,  he  is  now  an  object  of  love,  (b)  The  repent-
ance of  a  sinner  is  a  fact  to  be  gratefully  recorded.  His  former  sins  ought  to  be  no
disparagement  to  his  present  standing  and  repute.  "  Where  God  forgives,  men  should
not  impute."  (c)  The  apostle  is  aot  ashamed  of  a  pour  slave,  and  commends  him  to
the  love  of  the  Church.

II.  The  design  of  the  sendino  op  Tychioub  and  Gsbsimus  to  CoLOSSiB.
"  Whom  I  have  sent  unto  you  for  this  very  purpose,  that  ye  may  know  our  estate,  and
that  he  may  comfort  your  hearts."  There  ate  two  objects.  1.  To  make ,  known,  the
affairs  of  the  apostle  and  of  the  Roman  Church.  It  was  not  necessary,  therefore,  that
he  should  give  them  any  information  about  himself  or  the  cause  of  Christ  in  Borne.
The  Colossians  would  hear  all  by  word  of  mouth.  2.  To  comfort  the  hearts  <f  the
Oolossians.  They  would  comfort  them  (1)  by  tiieir  very  presence ;  (2)  by  brin:4iiig  the
Epistles  from  Rome ;  (3)  by  their  news  concerning  the  apostle;  (4)  by  their  pi aotieal
exhortations,  enforcing  the  doctrine  of  the  Epistle  and  the  duty  of  perseverance  in  faith
and  grace  to  the  end. — T.  G.

Vers.  10, 11. — Greetings  from  three  loyal  friends  of  the  apostle.    The  Epistle  ends

with  salutations,  first  Irom  three  Jews,  and  then  Irom  three  Gentih  s.

I.  Thb  thrke  Jewish  friends  op  thb  apostle.  1.  Aristarchns.  "Aristarchus
my  lellow-prisoner  salutetli  you."  He  was  a  native  of  The^salunica  (Acts  xx.  4),  wh«
accompanied  the  apostle  in  his  third  missionary  journey.  He  was  seized  along  with  the
apostle  at  Ephesus  (Acts  xix.  29),  and  accompanied  him  in  his  voynj^o  to  llonie  (Acts
xxvii.  2),    He  now  shared  the  apostle's  imprisonment  at  Borne.    Adver;6ity  does  uut

COLOSSLANS  .  4


226  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oh.  iv.  1— 1&

lessen  his  affection  for  the  apostle.  2.  Marcus.  "  And  Mark,  the  cousin  of  Bamahas^
(touching  whom  ye  received  commandments ;  if  he  come  unto  you,  receive  him)."  This
was  the  author  of  the  second  Grospel,  who  was  associated  with  the  apostle  in  his  earlier
missionary  labours,  and  afterwards  forsook  him  at  Pamphylia,  under  circumstances  that
led  to  a  rupture  between  Paul  and  Barnabas  (Acts  xv.  39).  .  He  is  now  affectionately
commended  to  the  Colossians — for  he  had  evidently  recovered  the  confidence  and  love  of
the  apostle — as  "  one  useful  to  him  for  the  ministry  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  11).  Mark  was  now
resident  in  Borne.  It  is  not  possible  to  know  what  were  the  commands  which  the
apostle  had  sent  to  the  Colossians  concerning  him  ;  probably  they  were  to  bespeak  a
hospitable  reception  for  him,  as  the  Pauline  Churches  may  have  suspected  his  fidelity.
3.  Jesusi  "  And  Jesus,  which  is  called  Justus."  He  is  only  mentioned  in  this  place.
He  is  not  probably  the  same  as  Justus  of  Corinth  (Acts  xviii.  7).  He  was  attached  to
the  apostle.  It  is  curious  that  a  disciple  who  bore  the  name  of  our  Lord  should  have
also  borne  his  title  of  "  the  just  one."

II.  The  apostle's  high  commendation  of  the  three  friends.  "These  only
are  my  fellow- workers  unto  the  kingdom  of  God,  men  that  have  been  a  comfort  unto
me."  1.  They  were  Jews.  "Who  are  of  the  circumcision."  2.  They  were  exceptions
to  the  rule  of  anti-Pauline  animosity  on  the  part  of  Ohristian  Jews.  The  exception  is
limited,  probably,  to  thbse  Jews  in  Enme,  who  preached  Christ  "  through  strife  and
envy,"  hoping  thus  to  " add  afSiction  to  his  bonds"  (Phil.  ii.  20).  But  these  three
comforted  him  by  hearty  co-operation  and  their  kindly  sympathies.  The  best  and
greatest  men  need  the  comfort  of  the  very  humblest,  who  in  their  turn  rebuke  the
conduct  of  those  who  grieve  God's  servants  and  are  thorns  in  their  sides. — T.  C.

Vers.  12 — 14. — Oreetings  from  thee  Qentile  friends  of  the  apostle.  I.  Bfaphras.
1.  Eis  relation  to  the  Colossians.  "Who  is  one  of  you."  A  native  of  their  city,
like  Onesimus.  2.  His  office.  "A  servant  of  Jesus  Christ" — a  title  often  applied
to  the  apostle  by  himself,  and  once  ap|ili<'d  to  Timothy  (Phil.  i.  1) — to  indicate  liis
considerable  services  in  the  cause  of  Christ's  gospel.  He  was  the  founder  of  the
Church  at  Colossse.  3.  Eis  love  to  them.  "  Always  wrestling  for  you  in  prayers
that  ye  may  stand  fa.«t,  perfect  and  fully  assured  in  all  the  will  of  God."  His  love  was
manifest  in  his  constant  and  anxious  prayers  I'or  his  flock.  Consider ;  (1)  The  manner  of
his  prayers.  "  Always  wrestling  for  you  in  prayers."  (a)  He  was  in  an  agony  of  prayer
for  them  (o)  because  of  the  greatness  of  the  danj;erstliat  encompassed  them;  (;8)  because
of  the  fear  of  his  prayers  being  lost ;  M  because  of  the  tendemt  ss  of  his  love  for  them.
He  was  truly  "  fervent  in  spirit."  (6)  He  was  always  wrestling  in  prayer  for  them,
(o)  We  must  he  constant  in  prayer  (1  Thess.  v.  16).  (/S)  It  maintains  fervency  of
spirit.  (7)  It  has  the  greater  prospect  of  a  favourable  answer.  (2)  The  matter  of  his
prayers.  "That  ye  may  stand  fast,  perfect  and  fully  assured  in  all  the  will  of  God."  It
is  a  prayer  for  the  stability  of  the  Colos.-<ians,  in  view  of  the  possible  dangers  of  apostasy.
"  Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall "  (1  Cor.  x.  12).  "  God  is
able  to  establish  us '"  (1  Cor.  xv.  1).  This  stability  is  manifest  in  two  things,  (a)
Maturity.  "  Perfect."  Bpaphras  prays  that  the  flock  may  stand  fast  in  a  complete  and
universal  obedience.  This  they  cannot  do  without  labouring  for  much  knowledge
(1  Cor.  xiv.  20),  exercising  themselves  in  the  Word  of  righteousness  (Heb.  v.  14),  allow-
ing patience  to  have  her  perfect  work  (Jas.  iii.  1 ;  i.  5).  (6)  Firm  persiiasion.  "  Fully
assured  in  all  the  will  of  God."  There  was  to  be  no  vacillation  or  falling  away,  but  •
Blare  conviction  of  the  truth  of  God's  will.  The  Judaeo-Gnostics  made  a  pretension  to
s  perfection  of  wisdom,  and  found  its  sphere  in  the  secrets  of  heavenly  existence.
Believers  find  it  in  the  sphere  of  God's  will.  4.  Eis  zealouf  labours  for  the  welfare  ut
ail  the  Churches  in  the  Lycut  valley.  "  For  I  bear  him  witness,  that  he  hath  much
labour  for  you,  and  for  them  in  Laodicea,  and  for  them  in  Hierapolis."  He  was  probably
the  founder  of  all  three  Churches,  which  were  within  a  short  distance  of  each  other.
The  apostle  commends  him  to  the  Colossians  that  he  may  increase  their  respect  and
love  for  him  on  his  return  from  Rome.

II.  Luke.  "  The  beloved  physician."  This  was  the  evangelist,  who  had  travelled
with  the  apostle  on  his  last  journey  to  Jerusalem  (Actsxxi.  1),  and  then  from  Jerusalem
to  Home  two  years  later  (Acts  xxvii.  2),  and  now  again  was  in  his  company.  He  wai
apparently  the  apostle's  only  companion  at  the  end  of  his  second  imprisonment  (2  Tim.


3h.it.  1—18.]         THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  OOLOSSIANS.  227

iv.  11) :  "  Only  Lnke  is  with  me."  He  was  donbly  beloved,  both  as  physician  and
evangelist,  for  the  weak  health  of  the  apostle,  both  in  prison  and  out  of  it,  needed  his
professional  care.

III.  Demas.  1.  He  was  probably  a  Thessalonian.  (2  Tim.  iv.  10.)  Twice  again
his  name  occurs  in  company  with  that  of  Luke  (Philem.  24 ;  2  Tim.  iv.  10).  2,
There  is  here  a  hare  mention  of  his  name,  without  a  word  of  commendation.  Perhaps
the  apostle  had  an  iiisight  into  his  real  character.  His  name  occurs  significantlj'  last  of
all  among  the  six  who  greet  the  Colossians.  3.  He  deserts  the  apostle  in  the  near
prospect  of  his  end,  "  Demas  hath  forsaken  me,  having  loved  this  present  world  "  (2
Tim.  iv.  10).  Yet,  at  present,  he  keeps  his  standing  among  the  companions  of  the
apostle  and  receives  a  due  recognition.— T.  0.

Vers.  15 — ^17. — Salutations  and  parking  counsels  to  friends.  "  Salute  the  brethren
that  are  in  Laodicea,  and  Nymphas,  and  the  Church  that  is  in  their  house."

I.  The  saldtation.  1.  To  the  brethren  of  Laodicea,  who  are  called  also  "  the  Ohwch
in  Laodicea."  The  apostle  had  a  deep  interest  in  them,  because  they  were  exposed  to
the  same  spiritual  dangers  as  the  Colossians.  They  dwelt  in  a  rich,  commercial  city,
and  seem  to  have  degenerated  spiritually  many  years  afterwards  (Rev.  iii.  14 — 16),
2.  To  A'yinphas  and  the  Church  in  their  house.  This  was  an  eminent  Christian  of
Laodicea,  probably  a  rich  man,  and  certainly  full  of  zeal  for  the  cause  of  God,  for  his
house  was  the  meeting-place  of  a  Church.  He  was  evidently  a  centre  of  religious  life
in  this  important  locality.

II.  HiB  corwsEL  TO  THE  CoLossiANs.  "  And  when  this  Epistle  hath  been  read
among  you,  cause  that  it  be  read  also  in  the  Church  of  the  Laodiceans ;  and  that  ye  also
read  that  from  Laodicea."  1.  The  nearness  of  these  Churches  to  each  other,  as  well
as  their  exposure  to  the  risks  of  the  same  heretical  teaching,  explains  this  counsel.  The
letter  from  Laodicea  was  probably  the  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians,  which  was  of  an  ency-
clical character,  and  was  now  carried  by  Tychicus  to  the  Churches  of  Proconsular  Asia,
2.  It  is  the  privilege  as  well  as  the  duty  of  private  Christians  to  read  the  Scriptures.
(John  V.  39.)  3.  This  is  a  plain  proof  that  the  Scriptures  are  to  he  read  publicly  in  the
Church.    (Acts  xiii.  15.)

ill.  His  individtjal  couNSBii  to  Archippus.  "  And  say  to  Archippus,  Take  heed
to  the  ministry  which  thou  hast  received  in  the  Lord,  that  tliou  fulfil  it."  1.  The
position  of  Archijipus.  He  was  a  member  of  the  household  of  Philemon,  and  probably
his  son  (Philem.  2).  -He  held  some  ofBce  in  the  Church,  for  he  is  called  "  a  fellow-
soldier  "  of  the  apostle.  If  he  was  a  minister  at  Laodicea,  as  some  suppose,  the  counsel
addressed  to  him  throws  a  significant  light  upon  the  condemnation  of  the  Laodiceans
many  years  afterwards  for  their  lukewarmness.  If,  however,  he  was  a  minister  at
Colossi,  as  is  more  natural,  the  apostle's  counsel  recognizes  the  right  of  the  Colossian
Christians  to  exercise  discipline  or  reproof  in  the  case  of  their  teachers.  2.  The
admonition  to  Archippus.  He  was  to  fulfil  his  ministry.  (1)  It  was  a  ministry
received  by  him.  (a)  He  was  not  self-appointed,  (b)  He  received  it,  not  only  from
the  Lord,  but  in  the  Lord,  whose  grace  prepared  him  for  it  and  kept  him  in  it.  There-
fore his  responsibility  was  all  the  more  serious.  (2)  It  was  a  ministry  to  he  fulfilled.
He  was  "  to  make  full  proof  of  his  ministry  "  like  Timothy  (2  Tim.  iv.  5).  He  was  to
"  stir  up  the  gift  of  God  "  (2  Tim.  ii.  6).  He  was  to  hold  on  till  the  end,  shaking  off
lethargy  and  listlessness,  showing  the  people  the  whole  counsel  of  God,  refuting  all
sorts  of  sins  and  eri-ors,  and  being  "  instant  in  season,  out  of  season  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  2)
in  all  labours  for  Christ.  (3)  There  was  need  for  the  apostle's  wwrning  counsel.
"Take  heed."  This  individual  warning  would  not  have  been  sent  in  an  Epistle
designed  for  the  whole  Church  if  there  had  not  been  some  failure  of  effort  or  duty  on
the  part  of  Archippus.  There  is  always  need  for  ministers  to  "  take  heed  to  theii
ministry,"  considering  (a)  the  dignity  of  their  office ;  (5)  the  value  of  immortal  souls  ,
(c)  the  risks  to  which  the  flock  are  exposed  from  errors,  sin,  and  worldliuess  j  (d)  the
account  that  is  to  be  given  to  God. — T.  C.

Ver.  18. — Autograph  salutation.    "  The  salutation  of  me,  Panl,  with  mine  own  hand

Remember  my  bonds.    Grace  be  with  you."

L  TEK  AUTOQBAPa   WAS  TO  ATTEST  THE   A0THSNTIOITT  OF  THE   EpIBTLI.


22g  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE   C0L0SSIAN8.        [cH.  it.  I— 18.

TI.  The  reference  to  hib  imprisonment  was  to  bespeak,  not  only  theib  sym-
pathy,  BUT  THEIR  INCREASED  INTBREgT  IN  THE  QOSPEL,       "  He  who   IS   Suffering   foi

Christ  has  a  right  to  speak  on  behalf  of  Christ."

IIL  His  pabtinq  word  is,  "  Grace  be  with  yott."  He  has  exalted  God's  grace.
He  prays  that  the  Colossians  should  not  lose  the  grace  they  had  received,  that  it  should
abide  with  them  for  ever,  as  the  spring  of  power,  holiness,  and  fidelity  to  truth.— T.  C.

Vers.  2 — 6. — The  life  of  prayer  and  sympathy.  Having  shown  how  Christianity
elevates  the  household,  Paul  next  encourages  the  Colossians  to  prayerful  and  sympa-
thetic lives.  They  shall  find  themselves  in  contact  with  others  in  the  walks  of  public
service,  and  they  are  to  go  forth  to  meet  others  prayerfully,  sympathetically,  graciously.
Public  lite  can  only  be  properly  utilized  when  based  upon  constant  prayerfulness.

I.  Consider  what  constant  prayer  is.  (Ver.  2.)  It  is  liugering  at  the  source  of
inspiration  that  our  souls  nmy  be  fitted  for  their  public  work.  It  ig  the  attitude  of  felt
dependence  upon  God — the  confession  that  without  his  grace  we  can  do  nothing.  It
is  the  abiiegation  of  self-confidence  and  the  prostration  of  the  soul  before  the  Lord.
It  is  the  secret  of  public  power.  Hence  Paul  exhorts  the  Colossians  to  be  always
praxerful,  and  to  be  grateful  as  they  prayed.  If  they  have  the  sense  of  obligation
implied  by  thanksgiving  and  a  sense  of  need  expressed  by  prayer,  they  shall  be  fitted
for  public  work.  Frayerless  and  thankless  souls  only  miss  and  mar  the  opportunities
of  usefulness  afforded  them.

II.  They  must  pray  fob  others  as  well  as  themselves,  espeoiallt  foe  the
imprisoned  preacher.  (Vers.  3,  4.)  Intercession  will  be  a  large  part  ot  enlightened
prayer.  It  is  so  in  the  Lord's  Prayer.  For  prayer  makes  us  unselfish.  We  only  seek
the  supply  of  personal  need  that  we  may  be  public  benefactors.  Hence  we  recognize
at  once  the  piivilege  and  duty  of  intercession.  All  men  need  our  prayers.  Kings  and
those  in  authority,  as  well  as  those  in  more  private  stations,  need  our  intercession.  But
aniong  all  the  subjects  of  our  intercession,  none  deserve  better  from  their  fellows  than
the  preachers  of  the  gospel.  They  are  the  most  important  and  influential  persons  in
the  world.  And  their  utterance  is  of  more  moment  than  that  of  stfutesmen  or  of  kings.
Hnnce,  when  Paul  asks  an  interest  in  the  intercessions  of  the  Colossians,  it  is  that  he
may  be  enabled  to  speak  the  mystery  of  Christ  with  increasing  boldness,  and  may  have
a  door  of  utterance  opened  widely  to  him.  The  Inost  important  message  for  mankind
is  the  gospel.  The  intercessions  of  saints  should  largely  be  that  preachers  may  be
delivered  from  all  limitations  in  the  utterance  of  their  message,  and  may  issue  from
every  "  imprisonment "  into  the  large  liberty  and  impassioned  utterance  of  the  gospel.

III.  They  are  to  embrace  their  opportunity  of  usefulness  wisely.  (Ver.  5.)
Prayer  and  intercession  will  greatly  help  in  this  respect.  It  is  when  we  enter  upon
our  opportunity  with  the  sense  of  the  overshadowing  presence ;  it  is  when  we  believe
that  God  is  with  us  and  with  all  our  fellow-workers,  for  whom  we  have  interceded,  that
we  can  hopefully  embrace  the  opportunity.  How  many  chances,  to  use  the  world's
term,  have  we  lost  just  through  deficiency  in  prayer  1  We  have  been  like  the  disciples
in  the  valley,  helpless  before  the  lunatic  child  because  prayerless  before  the  opportunity
came ;  whereas,  had  we  been  transfigured  with  our  Muster  on  the  mount,  we  should
have  had  no  difficulty  in  improving  our  opportunity  and  being  most  helpful  unto
«thers.

IV.  Above  all  things  they  abb  to  cultivate  a  gracious  conversation.
(Ver.  6.)  The  filthiness  of  the  conversation  in  heathen  lands  is  beyond  conception.
The  ear  is  more  rudely  assailed  than  even  the  eye.  Hence  the  necessity  of  rousing
converts  to  a  gracious  convereation.  When  the  oaths  and  impurity  and  maledictions,
not  to  speak  of  the  idle  words  of  heathenism,  are  given  up,  and  in  their  stead  considerate,
kindly,  gracious  words  always  spoken,  then  the  world  wonders  at  the  change  and  is
impressed  and  improved  by  it.  In  other  words,  the  Colosiians  are  to  speak  out  of
hearts  steeped  in  prayer  and  filled  with  the  Spirit.  If  we  would  take  up  and  practise
this  idea,  that  we  ought  to  speak  and  live  as  inspired  men,  the  world  would  soon
surrender  to  the  claim  of  Christianity.  Alas!  the  saints  are  often  anything  but  inspired
in  I  heir  convei  sation,  and  it  is  no  wonder  that  the  world  is  not  much  moved  by  them.
Until  we  realize  our  responsibility  in  this  matter  more,  the  kingdom  of  God  cannot  b«
much  hastened. — R.  M.  K.


m.  IV.  1—18.]  THB>  EPISTLE  TO  THE  0OLOSSIAN8.  229

Vers,  7 — i8,-^The  apostle's  entourage.  At  the  time  when  this  Epistle  was  written
Paul  had  a  considerable  band  about  him.  Though  a  prisoner  in  Bomts  he  lias  gattiered
round  him  a  troop  of  friends.  The  time  has  not  come  when  he  bus  to  say,  "  Only-
Luke  is  with  ine '  (2  Tim.  It.  10).  It  is  interesting  to  notice  those  he  has  at  this  time
around  him.

I,  The  letter-carriers.  (Vers.  7 — 9.)  These  are  Tychicus  and  Onesimus.  They
carry  each  a  letter — Tychicus  this  letter  to  the  Church,  Onesimus  the  letter  for  Philemon.
The  freeman  and  the  slave  are  to  journey  together  as  brothers  in  tlie  Lord,  carrying
tidings  of  the  imprisoned  preacher  and  the  loTe-tokens  in  his  Epistles.  What  beautiful
harmony  has  Paul  summoned  forth !  Christianity  recognizes  not  the  distinctions  of
the  world,  but  bond  and  free  realize  their  unity  in  Christ.

IL  The  Jews.  (Vers.  10,  11.)  He  has  with  him  as  "  fellow-prisoner"  Aristarchus,
the  faithful  companion  who  had  risked  himself  in  the  theatre  at  Ephesus,  and  who
seems  to  have  voluntarily  shared  the  imprisonment  with  the  apostle.  Mark  also,  the
cousin  of  Barnabas,  is  with  him,  not  very  reliable  or  certRin  in  his  movements,  but
with  whom  Paul  has  long  ago  made  up  his  quarrel  and  can  dwell  in  peace.  Jesus  also,
another  Jew,  a  loyal  citizen  as  his  additional  name  Justus  implies,  is  with  Paul,  and
they  are  such  genuine  converts  from  Judaism  as  to  be  most  comforting  "  fellow-workers
unto  the  kingdom  of  God."  The  large-hearted  Jewish  apostle  has  attracted  to  his
side  magnanimous,  large-souled  Jews  also  to  co-operate  in  the  missionary  enterprise.

IIL  The  Gentiles.  (Vers.  12 — 15.)  We  have  three  Gentiles  as  a  set-off  to  the
three  Jewish  companions.  These  are  Bpaphras,  who  has  come  from  Colossaa  to  aid  the
work,  aad  who  seems  to  have  been  a  specially  prayerful  man,  making  his  native
district  the  burden  of  his  constant  intercessions.  Next  there  is  "  Luke,  the  beloved
phyeician,"  the  medical  attendant  and  fast  friend  for  many  years  of  the  great  apostle.
It  was  he  who  lingered  with  him  during  his  second  imprisonment,  when  all  tlie  rest
had  forsaken  him,  and  who  saw  his  end.  His  writings,  the  Gospel  according  to  Luke
and  the  Acts  of  the  Apostle^  constitute  him  the  "  Josephus  of  the  Chrisiian  Church,"
and  form  the  natural  and  ipdispensable  introduction  to  the  Pauline  Epistles.  And,
lastly,  we  have  Demas,  whose  loyalty  had  not  been  tested  at  this  time  fully,  but  whose
sad  history  is  written  by  Paul  later  on  in  the  biief  words,  "  Demas  hath  forsaken  me,
having  loved  this  present  worli  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  10).  It  would  thus  appear  that  just  as
Jesus  had  a  Judas  in  his  band  of  disciples,  so  Paul  had  a  Demas  in  those  attracted  to
his  side.  The  best  of  men  cannot  exclude  the  insincere  from  the  work  in  which  they
need  "  fellow-workers."  And  it  is  best,  for  the  hostile  at  heart  are  admirable  witnesses
of  the  private  life  of  the  Christian  leaders.  Neither  Judas  nor  Demas  ever  bore  bad
witness  about  their  masters  1

IV.  The  public  use  to  be  made  op  this  Epistlb.  (Vers.  15,  16.)  It  wag  to
be  handed  about  to  neighbouring  Chnrchen,  and  other  letters  sought  in  exchange.
Paul  was  writing,  not  for  Colossa;  alone,  but  for  all  Churches  to  which  his  Epistle  would
come.  It  was  therefore  a  public  Epistle.  The  letter  Onesimus  had  in  his  pocket  was
private.  It  was  intended  for  Philemon  alone,  and  yet,  blessed  be  God,  it  too  has
become  public  projierty.  But  the  other  Pauline  Epistles  were  meant  by  their  author
to  bs  public  documents.  We  may  well  rejoice  that  such  precious  literary  remaini
have  come  down  to  us.

V.  The  special  salutation  to  Archippus,  the  mutisteb  ik  OHARaB.  (Ver.  17.)
This  must  have  been  a  solemn  and  yet  a  salutary  word.  The  ministry  had  been
received  "  from  the  Lord,"  as  some  put  it,  Archippus  looked  past  apostle  and  all
terrestrial  officials  to  Jesus  as  his  Master,  and  it  was  a  ministry  in  the  Lord  he  had
received.  But  at  the  same  time  he  will  receive  cordially  such  an  exhortation,  and  his
responsibilities  shall  in  consequence  be  more  carefully  discharged.  It  is  in  increased
ministerial  conscientiousne-is  that  the  progress  of  a  Church  is  to  be  realized.  And  thus
it  is  with  pathetic  warning  the  interesting  Epistle  ends.  As  the  apostle  puts  his
bold  signature  to  the  document  and  asks  to  have  his  bonds  reiiiembered,  this  Epistle
of  the  captivity  goes  forth  complete  to  the  world-wide  mission  intended  by  the
Spirit.-B.  M,  B.

Verg.  2 — %/^Prayer  and  prudence.    I.  Pratbf.    1.  Cfeneral.   (1)  SSead/astnesi

in  prayer,    "  Continue  steadfastly  i\  prayer,"    There  is  the  same  direction  in  Rom.


2d0  THE  EPISTLE  tO  THE  COLOSSIANa  [«■■"•  1—**

xH.  12,  "  Continuing  steadfastly  in  prayer."    We  shall  not  be  able  to  carry  out  the
direction  unless  we  pray  from  principle.     And  that  implies,  not  only  that  we  have
a  deep  conviction  of  the  obligation  of  prayer,  but  also  that  we  bare  a  distinct  concep-
tion of  the  form  which  the  obligation  is  to  take,  as  to  our  times  of  prayer  and  our
subjects  of  prayer.    Having  an  intelligent  conviction  of  the  duty,  we  are  to  hold  to  it
steadfastly,  in  the  face  of  all  temptations  to  interrupt  it.     It  is  said  of  the  disciples
after  the  Ascension,  that  they  continued  steadfastly  in  prayer.     They  had  a  special
subject  of  prayer,  and  they  held  to  it  uninterruptedly  for  ten  days,  until  it  was
answered  in  the  descent  of  the  Holy  Ghost.     (2)  Wakefulness  m  prayer.     "  Watching
therein."    This  is  brought  in  as  an  element  without  which  steadfastness  would  be
of  no  nse.     Prayer  is  a  duty  in  which  our  whole  being  is  to  be  awake.    There  is  to  be
the  absence  of  all  sleepiness  whatsoever.     Especially  are  we  to  be  wakeful,  spiritually.
We  are  to  be  wakeful  to  the  truth  and  promise*  of  God.     We  are  to  be  wakeful  to  our
own  wants.     We  are  to  be  wakeful  to  the  wants  of  others.     And  not  only  are  we  to
be  wakened  up  in  the  directions  noted,  but  wakened  up  so  that  our  powers  have  full
play.     We  have  in  Jacob  one  whose  wakefulness  was  kept  up  to  the  highest  point
through  the  hours  of  night  till  he  obtained  the  blessing.    "  With  thanksgiving."
Thus  again  is  the  subordinate  feature  in  the  Epistle  introduced.    The  thought  is,  that
we  are  to  be  wakeful  toward  God  for  benefits  obtained.    Wakefulness  toward  God  for
past  benefits  is  the  best  state  of  preparation  for  the  reception  of  future  benefits.    2,
Particular.    "  Withal  praying  for  us  also."    They  were  not  only  to  pray  for  them-
selves, for  others,  about  other  affaiis,  but  specially  for  Paul  and  his  coadjutors,  and  as
he  here  directs.    (1)  Immediate  object.    "  That  God  may  open  unto  us  a  door  for  the
Word,  to  speak  the  mystery  of  Christ,  for  which  I  am  also  in  bonds."    Next  to  having
the  Word  is  having  a  door  opened  for  the  Word,  i.e.  an  unhindered  opportunity  for  its
going  forth.     By  the  Word  was  meant  more  particularly  the  mystery  of  Christ,  i.e.  the
gospel  with  reference  to  the  Gentiles.    The  mystery  was  to  go  forth  in  it  being  spoken.
In  regard  to  that  he  was  hindered  at  present.    For  not  only  was  he  called  to  speak  the
mystery  of  Christ,  but  also  (so  much  had  he  entered  into  it)  to  be  in  bond^  for  it.
And  others  were  detained  with  him.    And  he  prayed,  and  wished  them  to  pray,  for
his  liberation  from  captivity,  that  he  and  the  others  might  go  forth  with  the  mystery.
(2)  Ulterior  object.    "  That  I  may  make  it  manifest,  as  I  ought  to  speak."    The
situation  of  the  apostle  here  has  been  described  as  tragic.    He  was  possessed  with  a
burning  desire  that  the  Gentiles  might  have  the  gospel.    He  had  exalted  ideas  of  the
requirements  of  his  apostolate.     He  was  conscious,  too,  of  the  apostolic  energy  stirring
within  him.    There  was  a  certain  outlet  for  that  energy.     For  he  was  allowed  to  speak
the  Word  to  all  that  came  unto  him.    And  he  was  enabled  to  write  this  Epistle  and
other  Epistles,  which  have  laid  the  Church  under  lasting  obligation.    But  he  wanted
to  make  the  mystery  manifest  on  a  far  wider  scale.    He  wanted  to  have  freedom  in
moving  from  place  to  place,  in  combating  error  on  the  spot;  in  forming  Churches.
And  it  was  in  this  his  restrained  position  that  he  asked  to  be  assisted  by  their  prayers.
II.  Duty  to  them  that  abe  without.    How  is  a  Christian  society  ^to  advance
its  ends  with  them  that  are  outside  ?    1  hat  is  a  question  which  has  not  lost  its  impor-
tance.    1.   Walk.    "  Walk  in  wisdom  toward  them  that  are  without,  redeeming  the
time."    It  is  said  in  Bphesians,  "  Look  therefore  carefully  how  ye  walk,  not  as  unwise,
but  as  wise ;  redeeming  the  time,  because  the  days  are  evil."  It  is  the  same  precept  here,
with  special  application  to  them  that  are  outside.    (1)   Wisdom.    One  end  for  which
a  Christian  society  exists  is  self-preservation.    It  was  very  important  for  them  to  act
so  that  they  did  not  unnecessarily  bring  persecution  upon  themselves.     Another  and
higher  end  for  which  a  Christian  society  exists  is  extension.    For  this  end  zeal  is  neces-
sary, but  at  the  same  time  it  must  be  zeal  tempered  with  discretion.    Christian  wives
would  naturally  be  deeply  interested  in  the  conversion  of  their  heathen  husbands,  but
how  did  the  Apostle  Peter  enjoin  them  to  act?    " In  like  manner,  ye  wives,  be  in  sub-
jection to  your  own  husbands ;  that,  even  if  any  obey  not  the  Word,  they  may  without
the  Word  be  gained  by  the  behaviour  of  their  wives;  beholding  your  chaste  conver-
sation coupled  with  fear."    The  position  of  the  members  of  a  Christian  society  ii
similar.    We  have  to  win  over  them  that  are  outside.     Where  the  Word  by  itself  fails
(men  obeying  not  the  Word),  we  may  do  this  without  the  Word,  viz.  by  our  Christian
behaviour,  by  quietly  and  steadily  showing  what  our  religion  is,  especially  in  th«


OH.  IV,  1-18.]        '  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  231

productiun  in  us  of  those  elements  whicli  those  outside  can  more  readily  appreciate —
purity,  honour,  charitableness,  unselfishness,  gentleness.  There  is  action  of  a  mors
direct  kind  tnward  them  that  are  outside,  for  which  wisdom  is  needed.  The  apostles
supply  a  remarkable  instance  of  failure  in  this  respect.  Not  sure  of  their  action,  they
referred  it  to  Christ.  "  Master,  we  saw  one  casting  out  devils  in  thy  Name,  and  he
followed  not  ui,  and  we  forbade  him,  because  he  foUoweth  iiot  us."  This  man  was
certainly  at  an  outside,  but,  as  on  the  way  to  higher  things,  Christ  said,  "  Forbid  him
not:  for  there  i^  no  man,  that  shall  do  a  miracle  in  my  Name,  that  shall  lightly  speak
eyil  of  me.  For  lie  that  is  not  against  «s  is  for  us."  This  saying  of  our  Lord  throws
great  light  on  what  should  be  the  manner  of  our  procedure  toward  tliem  that  are
without.  We  are  to  accept  of  the  slightest  acknowledgment  of  Christianity.  We  are
to  turn  back  no  one  whose  face  seems  turned  in  the  riglit  direction,  though  he  does  not
yet  join  himself  to  us  or  work  by  our  methods.  This,  and  not  the  mistaken  "  We
forbid  you,"  is  the  way  to  encourage  men  toward  our  pesition.  (2)  Urgi  nay.  For  the
end  of  self-preservation,  the  moment  was  to  be  well  thouglit  of  by  tl.e  Colossians.
For  the  unwise  use  of  one  moment  they  might  have  to  suffer  for  years.  So  for  the
end  of  winning  over  them  that  are  outside,  the  moment  is  to  be  well  thought  of  by  us.
We  are  not  to  contract  debt  in  connection  with  it.  We  are  to  make  it  our  own  for  our
end.  We  are,  to  leave  nothing  undone  to  persuade,  to  entice,  them  that  are  without  to
come  within  the  pale  of  the  Christian  Church.  We  are  ever  to  be  acting  as  on  a
motion  of  urgency,  viz.  the  salvation  of  our  fellow-travellers  to  eternity,  during  their
brief  time  of  probation.  2.  Speech.  There  are  given  three  qualities -of  good  speech,
with  primary  reference  to  them  that  are  outside.  (1)  Pleasingness.  "  Let  your
speech  be  always  with  grace."  There  is  a  pleasing  and  an  unpleasing  way  of  saying
a  thing.  We  are  to  study  to  have  always  a  pleasing  mode  of  speech.  It  is  said  of
Jesus  that  they  wondered  at  the  words  of  grace  which  proceeded  out  of  his  mouth.
The  reference  was  not  merely  to  the  contents  of  the  words,  but  also  to  the  winning
form  in  which  they  were  put.  (2)  HeaKkfulneas.  "  Seasoned  with  salt."  The
language  proceeds  upon,  the  conception  of  speech  as  an  article  of  food,  or  as  kaving
nutriment  in  it  to  be  communicated.  The  idea  of  pleasingness  is  carried  forward  in
the  flavouring.  It  is  to  be  flavoured,  so  as  not  to  be  insipid.  But  the  salt,  with  which
the  flavouring  is  to  be  effected,  adds  the  idea  of  health  fulness.  By  salt  in  speech,  we
may  understand  seriousness  of  aim.  Even  in  our  moments  of  rest  and  of  social  eajoy-
ment  we  are  to  have  a  feeling  of  the  solemnity  of  life.  We  are  to  occupy  our  conver-
sation with  things  according  to  their  relative  importance.  We  are  to  show  a  preference
for  the  useful.  We  are  not  to  use  speech  to  communicate  poison,  but  to  communicate
right  sentiments.  We  are  to  show  that  we  attach  supreme  importance  to  the  gospel  of
Christ.  Thus  is  healthfulness  to  be  combined  with  pleasingness.  (3)  Aptnest.  "  That
ye  may  know  how  ye  ought  to  answer  each  one."  The  idea  of  pleasingness  is  still
carried  forward,  and  is  further  to  be  combined  with  aptness.  In  those  days  questions
were  often  put  to  the  Christians  about  their  religion.  They  were  expected  to  be  able
to  give  an  account  of  the  articles  of  their  faith,  of  the  facts  of  Christianity,  of  its
institutions,  of  benefits  derived,  of  losses  entailed.  These  questions  were  not  always
put  by  sincere  inquirers.  They  were  often  put  from  curiosity  or  with  evil  intention.
In  no  case  were  they  to  show  resentment.  They  were  always,  with  all  pleasingness,
to  give  the  answer  which  the  question  demanded,  in  the  hope  that  it  might  commend
itself  to  the  inquirer.  In  these  days  questions  are  not  so  often  put  to  Christians.  It
would  be  well  if  they  were  oftener  put,  and  if  we  could  put  the  right  answer  in  pleasing
form.— B.  F.

Vers.  7 — 18. — The  personai.  I.  Affaibs  of  the  apostub.  He  givea  l»i»  reason
for  not  entering  on  these  in  his  letter.  The  paragraph  is  similar  in  construction  to
Eph.  vi.  21,  22.  The  difference  is  confined  to  two  points.  1.  The  designation  of
Tychicu?  as  fellow-servant.  "  All  my  affairs  shall  Tychicus  make  known  unto  you,
the  beloved  brother  and  faithful  minister  and  fellow-servant  in  the  Lord :  whom  I
have  sent  unto  you  for  this  very  purpose,  that  ye  may  know  our  estate,  and  that  he
may  comfort  your  hearts.''  He  characterizes  what  Tychicus  was  in  the  Lord,  «'.«.
within  the  sphere  where  Christ  appoints  and  animates.  Within  that  sphere  he  had  ohe
qualities  which  made  him  beloved  as  a  brother  (an  important  point  in  a  mission).    He


282  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oH.iv.  1—18.

had  also  the  qualities  which,  as  they  made  him  fit  to  he  entrusted  with  the  gospel,  also
made  him  fit  to  he  entrusted  with  a  mission  from  the  apostle.  He  was,  besides,  a
fellow-servant  on  an  eqnRlity  with  the  apostle  in  being  at  the  call  of  the  Master  in
services  to  Churches,  and  they  were  to  receive  him  at  Colossse  in  the  Lord's  name.  His
mission  extended  beyond  the  mere  bearing  of  the  letter  (which  is  not  mentioned),  to
conveying  intelligence  regarding  the  circumstances,  spirit,  work,  prospects  of  the
apostle  and  others  with  him,  as  would  he  fitted  to  cheer  their  hearts.  2.  The  associa-
tion of  Onesimus  with  Tychicus.  "  ']'op;ether  with  Onesimus,  the  faithful  and  beloved
brother,  who  is  one  of  you.  They  shall  make  known  unto  you  all  things  that  are
done  here."  Onesimus  is  mentioned  as  affectionately  as  Tychicus.  The  only  differ-
ence is  the  absence  of  any  official  designation.  His  being  called  "brother"  illustrates
the  principle  laid  down  by  the  apostle  in  tliis  Epistle,  that  there  is  not  bondman  nor
freeman.  The  renewal  after  the  image  of  God  had  commenced,  and  was  going  on,  in
this  slave.  And  therefore  he  acknowledges  him  as  a  brother.  Frominence  is  given
to  his  being  a/aziA/wZ  brother.  He  had  formerly  been  unfaithful,  in  the  service  ren-
dered to  his  master  Philemon,  and  in  running  away  from  that  service.  He  had  been  so
effectually  transformed  that  alrendy  (and  much  time  cannot  have  elapsed)  Paul  can
vouch  for  his  trustworthiness.  His  being  called  "beloved  hiother"  shows  that  he  had
exliihited  singular  qualities  of  heart,  which  is  very  touchingly  brought  out  in  the
Epistle  to  Philemon.  The  interesting  circumstance  is  mentioned,  that  Onesimus  was
one  of  them,  a  native  of  CoIossm  (we  may  understand),  one  whose  name  was  to  be
added  to  their  roll  of  membership,  and  who  would  be  no  mere  nominal  addition,  but  an
addition  to  their  working  strength.  Paul  trusted  him  in  much,  after  having  trusted
him  in  littles,  when  he  associated  him  with  Tychicus,  not  only  in  hearing  the  letter,
but  in  declaring  to  the  Church  at  Colosssa  all  things  which  were  done  at  Rome.

II.  Saldtatioks  foe  the  Colossianb.     1.  From  three  Jewish  Christians.    (1)  Ari-
efarchus.     "  Aristarchus  my  fellow-prisoner  saluteth  you."    That  he   was  an  active
helper  of  the  apostle,  may  be  gathered  from  his  being  classed  in  the  Epistle  to  Philemon
among  his  fellow-workers.     The  beautiful  thing  regarding  him  is,  that  he  is  so  near  to
the  apostle  in  seasons  of  danger.     For  his  connection  with  him,  he  was  subjected  to  the
violence  of  the  multitude  in  Bphesus.    Then  a  plot  of  the  Jews  brings  him  into  con-
nection with  the  apostle.     Then  he  appears  as  a  companion  of  the  apostle  on  his
journey  as  a  prisoner  to  Rome.    And  here  he  is  styled  "  fellow-prisoner."    He  was  not
ashamed  of  the  apostle's  chains.     He  was  not  afraid  to  endanger  his  own  life  for  his
sake     From  the  fact  of  bis  being  styled  "  fellow-worker "  and  Epaphras  "  fellow-
prisoner  "  in  the  Epistle  to  Philemon,  which  was  transmitted  along  with  the  Epistle  to
('/olosaas,  it  has  not  unreasonably  been  concluded  that  Paul's  friends  voluntarily  shared
his  imprisonment  by  turns.    (2)  Mark.    "  And  Mark,  the  cousin  of  Barnabas  (touch-
ing whom  ye  received  commandments ;  if  he  come  unto  you,  receive  him)."    It  was  an
honourable  circumstance,  which  Paul  with  good  feeling  notes,  that  Mark  was  connected
with  Barnabas.    He  seems  to  have  been  included  within  the  apostolic  circle.    He
began  his  Christian  career  by  divesting  himself  (in  no  monastic  spirit)  of  the  emlarrass-
ment  of  riches.    "  He  was  a  good  man,  and  full  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  of  faith."    He  had
the  advance  of  Paul  in  Christian  service,  and  generously  introduced  him  to  the  Church
at  Jerusalem,  and  afterward,  when  the  work  could  not  be  overtaken  at  Antiooh,  know-
ing the  fitness  of  Paul,  he  went  forth  to  Tarsus  to  seek  for  him,  and  when  he  had
found  him,  brought  him  on  to  Antioch.     For  a  long  time  they  laboured  conjointly,
and  for  a  time  we  read  of  Barnabas  and  Paul  as  though  the  older  in  service  exercised  an
influence  over  the  younger,  not  yet  fully  conscious  of  his  powers.    But  their  plans
diverged  with  regard  to  the  kinsman  of  Barnabas  who  is  mentioned  here;  and  so  sharp
was  the  contention  between  these  good  men  that  they  parted  asunder,  one  from  the
other.     It  may  be  assumed  that  Mark  was  blameworthy  in  not  going  with  them  to  the
work.     He  was  apparently  swayed  at  the  time  by  some  reason  of  personal  convenience.
Whether  Paul  or  Barnabas  was  right  in  regard  to  his  again  being  associated  with  them
in  service,  is  a  different  question.    It  appears  from  this  notice  that  Mark  had  won  his
way  back  into  the  apostle's  confidence.    Already  commandments  touching  him  had
been  sent  on,  and  now  there  is  bespoken  for  him  a  favourable  reception,  should  it  fall  in
with  his  plans  to  pay  a  visit  to  Colossse.    (3)  Jeaws  Justus.  "  And  Jesus,  which  is
called  Justui."    He  lived  a  life  upon  which  light  shall  one  day  be  cast.    All  that  we


OH.IV.  1— 18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANa  M8

know  of  him  h  from  the  notice  here.  He  commended  himself  to  the  apostle,  as
interested  in  the  health  of  tlie  Colossian  community.  And  lie  coniea  in  for  his  share  of
commendation  in  the  language  which  follows,  T/ie  ihne  commended.  "  Who  are  of
the  circumcision :  these  only  are  my  fellow-workers  unto  the  kingdom  of  God,  men
that  have  been  a  comfort  unto  me."  There  would  be  unbelieving  Jews  at  liome  who
would  not  bo  Borry  for  his  chains.  But  there  were  others  (apparently)  who  had
advanced  from  Judaism  to  Christianity.  It  might  have  been  expected,  on  common
Christian  grounds,  that  these  would  have  shown  sympathy  'with  him.  It  is  against
them  (by  implication)  that  he  makes  complaint.  He  does  not  deny  altogether  that
they  were  helpers,  but  they  were  not  his  fellow-helpers ;  they  were  not  his  fellow-helpers
toward  the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  wide  sense  in  which  he  understood  it.  They  stood
aloof  from  him  because  of  his  estimate  of  the  Law.  All  the  more  honour,  then,  to  the
three  in  Rome  who,  free  from  prejudice,  had  stood  by  him,  and  been  a  comfort  to  him
when  he  needed  it.  2,  From  three  Gentile  Christians.  {!)  Epaphras.  "  Epaphras,  who
is  one  of  you,  a  servant  of  Christ  Jesus,  saluteth  you."  This  Kpaphras,  who  (probably
after  he  had  come  under  the  influence  of  Paul  at  the  Asiatic  centre,  Bphesus)  foundi^d
the  Colossian  Church,  was  himself  a  Colossian.  He  was  formerly  styled  "  fellow-servant;"
here,  without  relation  to  others,  he  is  styled  "  a  servant  of  Christ  Jesus."  It  would  be
absurd  to  translate  it  "  bondrservant,"  though  il  holds  that  Christ  is  absolute  Disposer  of
his  servants.  Epa[ihras  was  a  servant  in  an  official  sense,  at  the  call  of  Christ  for  special
service  in  the  Churches.  As  their  minister,  he  is  naturally  the  first  of  the  Gentile  three
who  sent  their  salutations  to  the  Colossian  Oliurch.  The  character  in  which  he  appears
here  is  that  of  a  minister  absent  for  a  time  from  his  jioclt.  (o)  His  pray  erf ulness.
"Always  striving  for  you  in  his  prayers,  that  ye  may  stand  perfect  and  fully  assured
in  all  the  will  of  God."  A  minister  is  sometimes  necessitated,  by  the  state  of  his
health,  to  be  absent  from  the  sphere  of  his  work  proper.  In  these  ciroumstances  his
great  resort  is  prayer.  Paul  had  difficulty  in  telling  how  greatly  he  strove  for  as
many  as  had  not  seen  his  face  in  the  flesh.  Here  he  tells  how  Epaphras  was  always
striving  for  the  Colossians  in  his  prayers.  How  much  they  must  have  been  in  his
thoughts,  that  they  came  so  much  into  his.prayers,  and,  when  they  did  come,  occasioned
so  much  xorestUngt  It  was  a  comprehensive  object  for  which  he  wrestled.  It  was
that  they  might  stand  perfect  and  fully  assured  in  every  separate  will  of  God.  If  we
think  of  a  single  division  of  time  or  single  set  of  circumstances,  the  prime  necessity  is
to  know  the  will  of  God  regarding  it.  If  we  think  of  our  relation  to  that  will,  it
implies  three  things.  We  must  not  only  know,  but  must  stand  without  wavering  in
the  will  of  God.  Then  we  must  stand,  not  in  part,  but  in  the  whole  of  the  will  of  God,
relative  to  time  and  circumstances.  Lastly,  we  must  not  only  stand  in  the  whole  of  the
will,  but  have  the  full  assurance  that  we  are  standing.  This  last  is  the  climax  of  our
relation  to  it.  Beyond  all  knowledge  and  rightness  of  disposition,  it  is  to  be  desired,  for
our  own  comfort,  that,  before  and  in  the  doing  of  the  Divine  will,  we  have  an  unwaver-
ing persuasion  that  it  is  really  the  Divine  will,  and  no  ignis  fatuus  of  our  own  imagina-
tion, that  we  are  following.  This,  indeed,  is  containel  in  promise:  "  And  thine  ears
shall  hear  a  word  behind  thee,  saying,  This  is  the  way,  walk  ye  in  it,  when  ye  turn  to
the  right  hand,  and  when  ye  turn  to  the  left."  (b)  His  Idbow.  "  For  I  bear  him  wit-
ness, that  he  hath  much  labour  for  you,  and  for  them  in  Laodicea,  and  for  them  in
Hierapolis."  There  is  a  very  beautiful  association  with  the  name  Mizpah :  "  The  Lord
watch  between  me  and  thee,  when  we  are  absent  one  from  another."  The  Lord's
servant,  Paul,  was  witness  between  Epaphras  and  the  Colossians,  and  he  vouches  for
their  rnlnister's  laioia-  in  his  absence.  It  is  a  word  which  approaches  In  meanmg  to
"anguish."  It  comprehended  much  more  than  his  prayers.  He  was  often  engaged',  by
himself  and  in  consultation  with  Paul,  on  the  Colossian  problem.  He  was  often  aeea
(when  not  sharing  the  apostle's  confinement)  about  the  city  after  business  affecting  the
Colossian  Church.  Nor  was  his  burdensome  labour  confined  to  the  one  Church.  It
extended  to  the  Church  of  Laodicea,  and  to  the  Church  of  Hierapolis.  These  were
Churches  in  the  neighbourhood.  The  three  towns  were  situated  in  the  valley  of  the
Lyous.  Colossffi  was  the  least  important  of  the  three,  but  it  was  there,  probably,  that
by  means  of  Epaphras  the  gospel  had  been  first  received,  and  from  which,  by  his  means
also,  the  gospel  had  been  extern  led  to  Laodicea  and  to  Hierapolis.  If  we  understand  his
having  had  an  equal  interest  in  the  formation  of  the  three  Churcheis,  it  was  only  natural


2S4  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN3.  [ch.  it.  1-ia

that  his  anxious  labour  extended  to  the  three.  (2)  LvJce.  "  Luke,  the  beloved  physi-
cian." What  is  the  ideal  of  a  physician?  He  is,  in  the  first  place,  one  who  enters
thoroughly  into  the  duties  of  his  profession.  He  is  one  who  keeps  abreast  of  medical
knowledge,  and  may  be  able  at  some  sacrifice  to  make  contributions  to  it.  He  is  one
who  has  skill  in  the  practice  of  his  profession,  and  does  not  grudge  labour,  fatigue,  even
exposure  to  danger,  in  seeking  to  remove  disease  and  alleviate  pain.  Such  a  physician
has  in  his  hands  the  means  of  powerfully  attaching  men  to  him,  by  services  rendered  to
them.  He  is  also  one  who  has  Cliristian  sympathies,  who  enters  into  the  spirit  and
follows  the  example  of  him  who,  while  ministering  to  men's  bodies,  ministered  also  to
men's  souls.  He  is  one  who  embraces  the  opportunities  which  his  profession  presents
of  speaking  words  of  wa,rning  and  of  comfort.  He,  who  thus  attaches  men  to  him  by  a
double  bond,  may  well  be  called  the  beloved  physician.  The  third  Gospel,  and  the  Acts
of  the  Apostles,  bear  evidence  to  the  general  culture  of  Luke.  It  has  been  made  out
that  the  first  of  these  bears  evidence  of  special  medical  knowledge.  It  may  be  inferred
that  Luke  rendered  to  Paul  valuable  professional  assistance.  He  may  have  been,  under
God,  the  means  of  saving  his  life.  From  his  being  called,  in  the  Epistle  to  Philemon,  a
"  fellow-helper,"  it  may  be  inferred  that  his  help  to  the  Christian  cause  was  not  confined
to  his  professional  services  nor  to  his  literary  services,  but  that  he  directly  took  part  in
the  proclamation  of  the  gospel.  (3)  Demas.  "  And  Demas  salute  you."  Prom  the
honourable  mention  of  him  here,  and  from  his  being  numbered  among  the  fellow-helpeis
in  the  Epistle  to  Philemon,  it  is  evident  that  at  this  time  he  stood  in  the  confidence  of
the  apostle.  When  we  remember  his  subsequent  deseitiun  of  the  apostle  ("  Demas
forsook  me,  having  loved  this  present  world  "),  it  is  remarkable  how  he  is  mentioned
here  without  any  epithet  such  as  "  beloved  "  or  "  faithful."

III.  Salutations  FOR  THE  Laodioeans  to  be  commdnicatbd  bt  the  Colossianb.
"  Salute  the  brethren  that  are  in  Laodicea,  and  Nymphas,  and  the  Church  that  is  in
their  house."  It  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  there  should  be  a  Church  gathering  con-
nected with  a  private  house.  Where  there  was  a  place  of  general  gathering  for  a  Church
at  that  time,  it  would  be  very  unimportant.  We  can  understand  that,  as  a  rule,  there
would  be  little  gatherings  from  evening  to  evening,  in  private  houses,  of  Christians  in
the  immediate  neighbourhood.  These  at  times  would  grow  into  lurge  gatherings.  The
apofitle  had  never  been  at  Laodicea,  but  he  may  have  seen  Nymphas.  He  had  at  least
heard  of  him,  and  he  had  pleasant  associations  with  him  and  the  little  gathering  in  his
house.  And,  among  the  brethren  in  Laodicea,  he  singles  them  out  for  his  salutations.
The  medium  of  the  apostle's  salutations  to  the  Laodicean  Church  was  to  be  the  Colos-
sian  Church.  They  were  as  a  Church  to  say,  "  We  in  Paul's  name  salute  you."  It  was
an  act  fitted  to  promote  good  fellowship  between  the  two  Churches.

IV.  Beading.  "  And  when  this  Epistle  hath  been  read  among  you,  cause  that  it  be
read  also  in  the  Church  of  the  Laodiceans  and  that  ye  also  read  the  Epistle  from
Laodicea."  This  letter  was  to  be  read  at  a  general  gathering  of  the  Church  in  Colossse.
There  was  another  letter,  which  had  been  addressed  at  a  previous  period  to  the  Church
at  Laodicea  (salutations  only  are  sent  at  this  time).  It  was  not  the  will  of  the  Head
of  the  Church  that  the  letter  should  be  preserved.  The  apocryphal  letter  to  the
Laodiceans  is  only  a  cento  made  out  of  Paul's  writings.  There  would  be  what  was
peculiar  in  each  of  these  letters,  but,  being  addressed  to  neighbouring  Churches,  there
would  be  much  that  was  adapted  to  them  both.  And  so  he  instructs  that  both  should
be  read  in  both  places.

V.  Instroctions  for  Archipptts  bt  the  Church.  "  And  say  to  Archippus,  Take
heed  to  the  ministry  which  thou  hast  received  in  the  Lord,  that  thou  fulfil  it.  We  are
not  told  what  the  ministry  was,  but  the  probability  is  that  he  ministered  in  the  gospel
in  the  absence  of  Epaphras.  It  cannot  with  certainty  be  inferred  that  he  had  shown
remissness  in  his  duties.  It  is  an  injunction  which  may  be  laid  on  a  minister  in  any
circumstances.  It  is  specially  to  be  laid  on  a  minister,  in  view  of  a  more  critical  con-
dition of  the  Church  to  which  he  ministers.  There  are  advantages  and  incitements,  but
there  are  also  difficulties  and  temptations  connected  with  a  sacred  position.  The
interests  involved  are  very  great,  and  it  is  fitting  that  we  should  seek  to  fulfil  that
service  which  we  have  received  in  the  Lord,  with  a  deep  feeling  of  our  responsibility
to  the  Lord.  In  the  fact  of  the  injunction  being  laid  on  Archippus  by  the  Church,
there  is  an  implied  rebuke  of  the  hierarchical  spirit.


CH.  IV.  1—18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE!  C0L0SSIAN3.  235


VI.  Conclusion.  "  The  salutation  of  me  Paul  with  mine  own  hand.  Eemembei
my  bonds.  Grace  be  with  you."  The  apostle  has,  from  necessity  of  his  position,
employed  an  amanuensis.  When  the  amanuensis  has  done  his  work,  Paul  takes  th«
pen  in  hand,  and  adds, "  The  salutation  of  me  Paul  with  mine  own  hand."  And  feeling
tte  difficulty  of  using  the  pen  in  consequence  of  his  bonds,  he  adds,  very  naturally  and
Tery  affeotingly, "  Remember  my  bonds."  This  bore  evidence  to  the  depth  of  his  interest
in  them  and  in  the  truth.  He  had  not  the  paths  of  dalliance  trod.  He  had  gone  the
length  of  bonds.  It  is  principally  to  be  regarded  as  a  powerful  enforcement  of  all  that
he  has  said,  including  his  request  that  they  should  pray  for  his  liberation.  There  is
added  the  briefest  form  of  benediction :  "  Grace  be  with  you."  Never,  however  pressed
for  space  or  inconvenienced,  can  he  leave  out  the  thought  of  the  Divine  bestowil  on  us
in  our  unworthiness. — R.  P.

Vers.  2 — 4. — An  exhortation  to  prayer.  Paul  had  been,  as  we  have  seen,  describing
noble  and  difficult  duties  of  husbands,  children,  etc.  He  evidently  felt  they  were  so
noble  that  they  ought  to  be  attained,  and  yet  so  difficult  that  he  must  at  once  suggest
one  way  to  their  attainment.  He  has  shown  the  goal,  now  he  shows  the  path.  That
path  is  prayer.  Husbands,  wives,  all  who  would  become  what  I  have  desciibed,  "con-
tinue in  prayer."    In  his  exhortation  to  |)rayer.we  may  notice —

I.  Some  elements  in  all  teue  prateb.  And  pf  these  elements  there  ia,  in  the
very  front :  1.  Constancy.  "  Continue  steadfastly,"  as  the  Eevised  Version  has  it.
Not  fitfully,  occasionally,  irregularly,  but  with  steady  constancy,  pray.  (1)  There
ought  to  be  constancy  because  of  the  need  there  is.  The  need  is  perpetual,  for  the
duties  to  be  discharged  to  which  prayer  alone  can  help,  and  the  dangers  to  be  avoided
from  which  prayer  alone  can  deliver,  are  ever  with  us.  (2)  There  can  be  constancy,
because  the  opportunity  is  always  granted.  There  are  avenues  of  religious  help  a  man
may  close  against  his  brother,  but  not  this.  ,  Excommunicated,  exiled,  tortured.
Imprisoned,  he  can  still  pray.  Wherever  God  is  and  a  human  soul  is,  there  prayer  can
bo.  So  Daniel,  Jonah,  Stephen,  found.  2.  Wakefulness.  "  Watching."  Not  as  a
B!.<cper,  but  as  a  sentry,  must  the  man  be  who  prays.  Understanding,  emotion,  will,
must  be  awake,  as  he  who  guards  the  city  is  awake  to  hear  the  first  footfall  of  a  foe,  to
catck  the  first  shadow  of  a  danger.  Not  in  dreamy  lethargy  can  men  pray.  "  No
arrow  of  prayer  can  reach  the  sky  that  does  not  fly  from  a  heart  strongly  bent  as  some
elastic  bow."  ,3.  Gratitude.  "  With  thanksgiving."  Thus  the  conception  of  prayer
is  widened,  beyond  that  of  mere  petition,  to  that  of  intercourse.  Prayer  becomes  a
Eucharist.  Indeed,  thanksgiving  ig  the  crown  and  goal  of  prayer.  Elsewhere  the
apostle  similarly  exhorts,  "  In  everything  by  prayer  and  supplication  with  thanksgiving

-  let  your  request  be  made  known  unto  God."

II.  A  SPECIAL  SUBJECT  FOE  INTERCESSION.  Paul  thus  bcspeaks  prayer  for  himself
and  his  fellow-workei's  both,  to  link  himself  in  humbleness  of  heart  to  the  Oolossians.
It  is  as  though  he  said,  "  I  need  prayer  as  well  as  you."  And  doubtless  he  also  asks
their  prayers  because  he  is  conscious  of  necessity  for  such  help  as  prayer  can  bring."
For  himself  and  his  fellow-workers  he  asks :  1.  Prayer  that  they  may  have  opportunity
for  work.  "  That  God  may  open  unto  us  a  door."  To  the  mystery  of  the  gospel  there
is  the  great  obstacle  of  minds  closed  by  prejudice,  hearts  closed  by  antipathy.  The
preacher,  like  his  Lord,  has  to  stand  at  the  door  and  knock.  2.  Prayer  that  shall  he
sympathetic  with  their  sorrows.  For  he  reminds  them  that  he  is  "  in  bonds."  In
every  one  of  the  Epistles  of  his  captivity  the  apostle  mentions  this  coupling  chain
which  he  felt  to  be  thwarting,  galling,  humiliating.  And  their  prayers  must  seek
either  that  the  chain  be  broken  or  the  prisoner  strengthened  to  endure.  3.  Prayer
ihtXt  they  may  haVe  fitness  for  their  work.  The  one  pressing  want  of  their  condition
was  "  boldness."  Sometimes  the  main  want  is  wisdom,  sometimes  patience,  sometimes
gentleness.  Here,  because  of  all  that  was  around  him  and  before  him,  he  felt  the
supreme  want  was  courage.  And  indeed,  when  is  this  not  wanted  by  those  who  have
to  proclaim  such  a  message  as  the  gospel,  to  such  souls  as  proud,  selHsh,  self-willed  men,
for  such  a  Master  as  the  Christ  who  travails  till  victory  is  won  ? — D.  E.  T.

Vers.  5,  6. — I%e  Christian  and  the  world.    We  have  here  some  suggestions  as  to

1.  The  Chkistian's  eelationship  to  the  woeld.    It  is  implied :  1.'  That  he  is  ta


23«  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  C0L0SSIAN8.  [oh.  iv.  1— 1&

he  diitinct  from  the  world.  To  him  all  "  men  of  the  world  "  are,  in  character,  aims,
pursuits,  to  be  as  "  them  that  are  without."  There  is  to  be  a  contrast  between  him
and  them  as  between  those  who  are  "  within  •  and  those  who  are  "  without "  the
assembly  of  tlie.rijjhteous,  the  Church  of  the  loving  and  the  pure.  But  it  is  taught :  2.
That  he  is  to  have  intercourse  with  the  world.  This  is  in  contradiction  to  the  Colossian
heresy  of  asceticism,  and  in  contradiction,  too,  to  the  pietism  that  some  sects  affect  in
England  to-day.  "  Walk  in  wisdom  toward  them  that  are  without."  This  is  the  very
opposite  of  walking  away  from  them,  in  separation,  into  seclusion.  Indeed,  on  this
point  we  notice  that  seclusion  from  the  world  is ;  (1)  Impossible.  Even  those  who
shun  the  social  and  political  life  of  the  world  are  drawn  into  its  commerce  very  willingly
and  in  their  best  mo(jds  into  its  philanthropy  also.  (2)  Undesirable.  It  leads  either
to  bigotry,  as  of  the  Pharisees,  or  to  fragile  life,  as  of  hot-house  plants.  (3)  Unlike
Jesus  Christ.  The  streets,  the  cities,  the  houses  of  men,  and  of  sinful  men,  their  feasts,
and  their  funerals,  were  frequented  by  the  Holiest,  who  has  left  us  an  example  that
we  should  folluw  in  his  steps.  3.  What  is  to  mark  the  intercourse  of  the  Christian
with  the  world.  Two  directions  are  given :  (1)  "  Walk  in  wisdom."  This  is  more  than
knowledge,  more  than  discretion.  It  is  a  right  use  of  knowledge,  of  the  knowledge  of
Gild  and  of  man.  In  that  element  of  godly  thoughtfulness  a  Christian  man  is  to  move.
(2)  "  Hedeeming  the  time."  In  the  time  you  spend  with  men,  buy  np  the  time  and
make  the  best  use  of  it  for  themselves  and  for  yon.  No  squandering  of  anything  so
precious  as  their  time  and  yours  is  to  be  permitted  in  your  intercourse  with  men.
Thus  it  is  taught  the  Christian  must  have  to  do  with  the  world.

II.  The  Christian's  conversation  with  the  world.  It  is  to  he  distinguished
by  "  grace,"  pleasantness  of  the  highest  sort — "  salt,"  pungency  of  the  truest  kind.  In
a  sentence,  we  may  say  the  influence  of  his  conversation  is  to  be  good.  1.  Because  it
is  to  be  persuasive.  The  higher  form  of  "  grace,"  Divine  aceeptableness,  may  be  implied
here.  The  other  form  of  it,  human  convincingness,  is  certainly  indicated.  For  this  it
must  be  appropriate,  (1)  as  to  topic,  (2)  as  to  time,  (3)  as  to  manner.  2.  Becau.se  it  is
to  be  distinctive.  Not  talk  of  tasteless  insipidity,  making  no  impression,  but  conver-
eation  ai  clear  and  definite  in  purifying  influence  as  Christ  meRnt  the  disciples  them-
selves were  to  be  when  he  said,  "  Ye  are  the  salt  of  the  earth."  "  Certain  it  is,"  says
Jeremy  Taylor,  "  that  as  nothing  better  can  do  it,  go  there  is  nothing  greater  for  which
Ood  made  our  tongues,  next  to  reciting  his  praises,  than  to  minister  comfort  to  weary
souls.  And  what  greater  pleasure  can  we  have  than  that  we  should  bring  joy  to  our
brother,  who  with  his  weary  eye  looks  to  heaven  and  round  about,  and  cannot  find  so
much  rest  as  to  lay  his  eyelids  together?  Then  thy  tongue  should  be  tuned  with  heavenly
accents,  and  make  the  weary  soul  to  listen  for  light  and  ease.  This  is  glory  to  thy
voice,  au'i  employment  fit  for  the  brightest  angel.  I  have  seen  the  sun  kiss  the  frozen
earth,  which  was  bound  up  with  the  images  of  death  and  the  cold  breath  of  the  north,
ind  then  the  waters  break  from  their  enclosures,  and  melt  with  joy,  and  run  in  userul
channels.  So  is  the  heart  of  a  sorrowful  man  under  the  discourses  of  a  wise  comforter.
He  breaks  from  the  despairs  of  the  grave;  he  blesses  God,  and  he  feels  his  life  returning,
jod  is  pleased  with  no  music  below  bo  much  u  in  the  thanksgiving  songs  of  rejoicing,
comforted  persons." — ^U.  E.  T.

Vers.  7—18. — Christian  greeting.  As  we  read  this  last  paragraph  of  our  Epistle,  we
are  struck :  1.  With  the  humanity  o/ovr  holy  religion.  There  is  a  natural  tone  about
tlie  ending  of  every  one  of  Paul's  letters ;  there  is  the  naming  of  men,  the  greeting  o(
friends,  the  talk  about  personal  affairs.  If  the  Bible  were  concerned  only  with  systems,
institutions,  theories,  doctrines,  arguments,  it  would  never  be,  as  it  surely  is,  the  great
hi  art-book  of  the  world.  Its  cliarm  is  its  humanness.  And  it  is  so  of  Christianity
Vieciiuse  its  Founder  and  its  Theme,  its  Alpha  and  its  Omega,  is  the  Son  of  man.
2.  With  the  mutual  fellowship  of  the  early  Churches.  Between  the  Christians  at  Rome
an<i  at  Colossae,  thougli  the  waters  of  the  Mediterranean  rolled  between  them,  there
was,  as  these  greetings  indicate,  intimate  and  intelligent  personal  fellowship.  Passing
from  these  introductory  considerations  of  the  great  principUg  to  be  found  here,  let  us
notice  three  things  about  Christian  greetings.

I.  True  Christian  gebbtino  beckons  vert  ltttlb  of  sooiaIi  position.  Who
would  know,  from  the  form  of  thegreeting,  how  vastly  different  were  the  social  positi  xf


OH.  IV.  1-18.]  THE  BPI8TLB   TO  THE   CX)LOSSIANS.  887

of  Epaphriis  the  Ooloasian  citizen,  Luke  the  cultured  Jewish  physician,  and  Oneslmui
the  runaway  slave ?  It  has  been  well  said,  "Men  are  not  united  to  the  Church  of
Christ  by  reason  of  similarity  of  calling,  of  knowledge,  or  of  position ;  not  as  rich  or
poor,  learned  or  ignorant,  but  as  possessors  of  a  common  human  nature,  of  common
feelings,  sorrows,  joys,  and  hopes.  Once  within  its  pale,  his  riches  drop  from  the  rich
man,  and  his  poverty  from  the  poor,  and  each  beholds  a  brother  soul."

II.  Tetjb  Christian  gbbetinq  bkcoqnizbs  fully  the  ikdividualism  of  hbk.
There  is  here  no  dealing  with  the  mere  mass,  the  group ;  no  speaking  of  all  with  the
same  tones  of  unctuous  endearment  as  is  common  in  some  Churches  to-day.  No ;  each
has  a  separate  niche  in  the  esteem  and  affection  of  the  apostle.  In  the  light  of  this
greeting  we  see  the  Church  is  not  a  huge  piece  of  mechanism,  but  a  family  of  dissimilar
though  related  souls.

III.  Tbue  Christian  obebtino  honoubs  obbatlt  Christian  service.  The  only
letter  of  introduction  to  a  Church  Paul  ever  wrote  is  to  commend  not  some  wealthy
or  famous  man,  but  a  converted  runaway  slave.  His  epithets  of  praise  are  not  those
that  describe  rank  or  riches,  or  even  culture,  but  usefulness.  That  he  honours,  and
that  the  Church  of  Christ  ought  above  all  else  to  honour:  come  the  day  when  it  will.
Amen.— U.  B.  T.

Vers.  2—4:.^Oonditions  of  auccesB  in  prayer.  St.  Paul  draws  the  attention  of  the
Colossians  to  two  things.

I.  General  conditions  of  suoobss  in  pbatbr.  1.  Perseverance,  "  Continue  stead-
fastly in  prayer."  It  is  part  of  our  spiritual  education,  teaching  us  dependence,  trust,
and  patience.  No  "  stock  "  of  blessings  given,  but  daily  grace,  bread,  etc.  Blessings
may  be  withheld  for  a  time  because,  in  our  present  spiritual  state,  we  cannot  receive  the
full  supply  we  shaU  be  capable  of  after  the  discipline  of  persevering  prayer.  The  gift  will
be  in  proportion  to  our  faith  (cf.  Matt.  ix.  29 ;  Mark  viii.  22 — 25).  Hence  the  many
exhortations  to  perseverance  by  parables  (Luke  xi.  5 — 9  ;  xviii.  1 — 8),  precepts  (Rom.
xii.  12 ;  Bph.  vi.  18 ;  1  Thess.  v.  17,  etc.),  and  recorded  examples  (Gen.  xxxii.  24 ;
Bxod.  xxxii.  9 — 14;  Matt.  xv.  21—28;  Acts  i.  14;  ii.  1 — 4,  Paul's  prayers
(Phil.  i.  4 ;  2  Tim.  i.  3,  etc. ;  oh.  iv.  12).  Story  of  James  the  Just  (Eusebius,  bk.  ii.  23).
If  time  forbids  long  continuance,  there  may  be  energy  in  brevity  and  steadfastness  in
persistent  renewal  of  prayers  (Ps.  Iv.  17 ;  oxix.  164,  etc.).  2.  Watchfulness.  Be  watch-
ful during  prayer,  for  the  constant  enjoyment  of  the  inestimable  privilege  tends  to
routine,  and  our  spiritual  foes  are  ever  ready  to  distract  our  minds  and  spoil  our  prayers.
Chrysostom  aaith,  "  The  devil  knoweth  how  great  a  good  prayer  is."  The  messenger
prayer  is  too  often  despatched  without  any  definite  message.  "  Ye  know  not  what  ye
ask ; "  "  Ye-  have  not  because  ye  ask  not."  Contrast  our  Lord's  prayers  and  St.  Paul's
with  the  vague,  sleepy  supplications  we  know  too  much  about.  If  we  thus  watch  in
prayer  we  may  watch  after  it,  expecting  the  blessings  which  are  on  their  way  to  us  (cf.
Dan.  ix.  23 ;  x.  12).  3.  Thanksgiving,  (Phil.  iv.  6.)  Our  thanksgiving  will  include
that  Divine  system  of  mediation  and  intercession  by  which  we  sinners  have  access  to
God;  all  the  past  answers  to  prayer  we  have  received  through  Christ  (Ps.  Ixiii.  7;
cxvi.  1,  2),  and  all  the  promises  he  has  given.  In  this  spirit  we  shall  also  be  able  to
thank  him  for  what  he  has  deferred  (Illustrations :  Job  and  "  the  end  of  the  Lord,"
Jas.  V.  11)  and  what  he  denies.  For  if  we  pray  with  submission  for  temporal  blessings,
we  lay  upon  God  the  responsibility  of  choosing  for  us.  Plato  ('  Alcibiades,'  bk.  ii.)
praises  one  of  the  ancient  poets  for  prescribing  this  form  of  prayer :  "  Grant  to  us  thy
blessings  whether  we  pray  for  them  or  withhold  our  prayers,  and  repel  from  ue  all  evils
even  though  we  pray  for  them."  With  fuller  knowledge  we  may  offer  the  same  prayer
for  temporal  blessings  "with  thanksgiving"  (Ps.  Ixxxiv.  11;  Matt.  vi.  32),  while  in
regard  to  spiritual  blessings  there  need  be  no  such  conditional  uncertainty  (Matt,  vi'
9—11 ;  John  xiv.  13, 14).

II.  Special  subjects  fob  prayer.  (Vers.  3,  4.)  The  requests  are  veiy  personal,  for
Paul,  Timothy,  Epa|ihras,.  etc.  The  apostle's  condition  ini|osed  limitations  which  he
desired  might  be  removed  "for  the  gospel's  sake."  These  prayers  were  answered
(Philem.  22).  By  prayer  doors  were  opened  in  the  first  century  (Rom.  xv.  19,  etc.),
and  still  are  (China,  Africa,  Madagascar,  etc.).  This  spread  of  the  gospel  may  still  b«
used  as  an  argument  for  the  divipity  of  the  gospel,  as  it  was  by  Clement  of  Alexandria


238  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oh.  nr.  I— 1&

"  The  Grecian  philosophy,  if  any  magistrate  forbade  it,  immediately  died  away ;  but  oul
doctrine,  even  from  the  first  preaching  of  it,  kings,  generals,  and  magistrates  prohibited
it;  nevertheless,  it  does  not  droop  like  human  dnctrine,  but  flourishes  the  more."
Similar  prayers  for  pastors  and  missionaries  are  still  needed,  and  maybe-enforced  by
various  motives ;  e.g. :  1.  Our  necessity ;  for  the  work  is  too  great  for  us  apart  from  the
help  given  through  prayer.  2.  Our  trials.  Illustrate  from  Paul's  ordinary  sources  of
anxiety  (2  Cor.  xi.  1 — 3,  28,  29  ;  Gal.  iv.  19,  etc.).  3.  Uur  dangers.  For  we  are  th«
mark  of  many  of  the  fieiy  darts  of  the  wicked  one,  and  if  we  fall  it  is  "  as  when  a
standard-bearer  faiuteth."  4.  Our  responsibilities.  (Heb.  xiii.  17.)  We  have  to  speak
"  the  mystery  of  Christ,"  and  desire  "  to  make  it  manifest  as  we  ought  to  speak."  How
much  this  implies  (Bph.  vi.  19,  20)  1  We  aim  at  the  sublimest  results  (ch.  i.  28,  29).
5.  Our  equvtahle  claims.  A  plea  especially  approijriate  to  pastors,  called  by  a  Church
to  their  post  of  duty  and  of  trust.  To  restrain  prayer  is  the  most  lamentable  meanness,
for  it  impoverishes  the  pastor's  or  missionary's  sold  (2  Thess.  iii.  1,  2,  etc.). — E.  S.  P.

Vers.  5,  6. — The  Christian'i  conduct  and  conversation  in  the  world.  In  these  closiDg
exhortations  we  are  taught —

I.  The  peinctples  which  should  guide  us  in  cub  intebcoubsb  with  the  would.
(Ver.  5.)  In  no  Pharisaic  spirit  we  have  to  speak  of  "  them  that  are  without "  (need-
lessly, guiltily  outside  the  family  of  God),  but  are  in  close  contact  with  us  "  within ; "
who  are  not  calkd  to  jmige  them  or  to  "  have  no  company  "  with  them,  but  to  live  in
such  a  way  as  to  bless  and  save  them  (1  Cor.  v.  9 — 13 ;  ix.  19 — 22).  The  wisdom
demanded  includes:  1.  Consistency,  as  its  most  essential  element.  Life  for  others  is  a
law  running  through  God's  universe,  and  finding  its  highest  illustration  in  the  life  and
cross  of  Christ  and  of  Christians  "  in  him  "  (John  xii.  24,  25 ;  Eom.  xiv.  7).  To  benefit
others  spiritually,  the  chief  qualification  is  not  gifts,  but  character.  The  lives  of
Christians  are.  the  world's  Bible  (2  Cor.  iii.  2,  3).  See  that  the  text  is  not  corrupted  or
illegible.  Live  so  that  the  more  you  are  known  the  more  you  will  be  esteemed  (let  not
"  distance  lend  enchantment  to  the  view  "),  so  that  the  anxious  or  the  dying  would
naturally  send  to  you  for  guidance,  and  your  judgment  or  reproof  would  carry  with  it
the  weight  of  a  holy  cha)  acter.  Beware  of  the  "  dead  flies  "  which  mar  this  wisdom
(Bccles.  X.  1 ;  Eph.  v.  15—17  ;  Phil.  ii.  14, 16  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  11, 12).  But  while  the  whole
of  our  "  walk  "  must  be  consistent,  the  wisdom  which  is  to  mark  it  includes  more  than
this  (Matt.  X.  16 ;  Horn.  xvi.  19).  Some  may  remember  what  were  their  chief  hin-
drances caused  by  the  characters  of  Christians  while  they  were  still  "without;"  let
them  guard  against  these.  2.  Christian  cheerfulness.  So  as  to  refute  the  libels  of
Satan  and  his  satellites  (Job  xxi.  14,  15 ;  Mai.  iii.  14,  15),  and  prove  the  sincerity  of
our  avowed  belief  (Ps.  xxxiv.  8 ;  Ixxxiv.  11,  12).  3.  Christian  charitableness.  Be
very  strict  in  judging  yourselves,  but  do  not  set  up  your  own  consciences  as  an  infallible
test  fbr  others  (cf.  1  Cor.  xi.  31  with  Matt.  vii.  2).  Seek  to  purify  and  enlighten  the
heart,  rather  than  to  denounce  acts  that  may  not  seem  wrong  to  the  half-enlightenel
doer  (Matt.  xii.  33).  Illustrate  from  Elisha's  treatment  of  Naaman  (2  Kings  v.  15 —
19).  4.  Well-regulated  zeal.  Zeal  is  implied  in  "  redeeming  the  time,"  letting  no
opportunity  slip  you  of  seeking  to  do  good  in  these  evil  days  (Epli.  v.  16),  even  though
at  times  it  might  appear  to  some  to  be  "out  of  season  "  (2  Tim.  iv.  2 ;  Gal.  vi.  10).
But  wisdom  is  needed  here,  or  our  efforts  may  be  like  random  shots  in  a  battle,  injuring
friends  more  than  foes  (e.g.  Mark  ix.  38  ;  Luke  ix.  54).  Silence  may  at  times  be  more
"  golden  "  than  speech.    Matt.  vii.  6  must  be  combined  with  Mark  xvi.  15.

II.  The  special  wisdom  needed  fob  peofitablb  conversation.  (Ver.  6 ;  Prov.  xvL'i.
21.)  By  "always  with  grace  "is  not  meant  always  religious,  but  always  consistent
with  "  this  grace  wherein  we  stand,"  and  calculated  to  win  the  favour  and  promote  the
highest  good  of  those  who  hear  us  (Eph.  iv.  29).  Therefore  we  must  seek  that  it  be
"  seasoned  with  salt,"  which  preserves  from  corruption  and  gives  relish  to  our  food.
Both  senses  are  probably  included.  Vital  religion  being  distasteful  to  the  natural  heart,
care  is  needed  that  in  our  conversation  we  neither  degrade  the  religion  we  profess  nor
increase  aversion  to  it  by  the  insipidity  of  our  talk  (cf.  Job  vi.  6;  xxvi.  3).  Let  our
rule  be  Elihu's  (Job  xxxiii.  3 ;  cf.  Ps.  xxxvii.  30,  31 ;  Prov.  xv.  4).  One  object  of  this
care  Sm  "  that  ye  may  know,"  etc.  We  must  be  prepared  to  be  questioned  and  cross-
questioned  on  our  holy  faith.    Prov.  xx.  4,  6  may  both  need  to  be  observed  (as  by


OH.  IV.  1—18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  239

our  Lord,  Matt.  xxi.  27  ;  xxii.  21,  29).  When  questioned  as  to  "  the  hope  that  is  in
us  "  (1  Pet.  ill.  15)  a  weak  answer  may  confirm  doubts.  Take  as  models  the  various
answers  and  vindications  of  'his  faith  given  by  St.  Paul  before  the  pagans  of  Athens,
the  Jews  of  Jerusalem  and  of  Rome,  Polix  and  Agrippa.  But  if  our  tongues  are  to
speak  aright,  our  hearts  must  be  kept  full  of  the  fire  of  the  love  of  God  tempered  by
"  the  wisdom  that  is  from  above  "  (Matt.  xil.  34 ;  Jas.  iii.  17).— E.  S.  P.

Vers.  7—18. — Personal'  salutations  and  pastoral  cares.  The  personal  references  in
Paul's  Epistles  are  valuable  in  several  ways.  "  Proper  names,  although  they  be  recited
alone  in  the  Scriptures,  are  not  to  be  despised  "  (2  Tim.  iii.  16).  "  For  like  as  if  any  one
should  find  dry  herbs,  having  neither  fragrapce  nor  colour  that  was  pleasing,  arrani;ed
in  the  surgery  of  a  doctor,  however  mean  may  be  their  appearano?,  will  yet  guess  that
some  virtue  or  remedy  is  concealed  in  them  ;  so  in  tlie  pharmacopceia  of  the  Scriptures,
if  anything  occurs  that  at  first  sight  may  seem  to  be  despised  by  us,  yet  may  we  deter-
mine of  a  certainty  that  there  is  some  spiritual  utility  to  be  found  in  it ;  because
Christ,  the  Physician  of  souls,  we  may  suppose,  would  place  nothing  insignificant  or
useless  in  his  pharmacopoeia"  (Origen).  These  personal  references  are  useful:  1.  As
supplying  "  undesigned  coincidences  "  (Paley's  '  Horaj  Paulinse,'  ch.  vi.,  viii.,  and  xiv. ;
and  Birks"Hor»  Apostolicje,'  ch.  vi.).  2.  As  correcting  errors;  e.g.  the  alli^ged  episcopacy
of  St.  Peter  at  Eome  from  a.d.  42 — 68  is  rendered  incredible  by  the  silence  of  St.  Paul
in  all  his  Epistles  from  Eome  (vers.  10,  11).  3.  As  helping  us  to  form  a  vivid  idea  of
the  apostle's  circumstances  at  different  periods,  and  their  bearing  on  his  life's  work  and
teaching.  From  these  twelve  verses  we  gather  such  facts  as  these,  each  of  which  may
suggest  some  useful  lessons.  He  was  a  prisoner,  adding  his  autograph  message  "  in
a  chain"  (Eph.  vi.  20);  enjoying  for  the  present  considerable  indulgence  (Acts  xxviii.
30,  31),  and  hoping  for  a  speedy  release  (Philem.  22).  He  enjoyed  the  company  of
friends  both  old  and  new.  Here  is  Tychicus,  probably  from  Bphesus,  a  tried  com-
panion in  toil  and  peril  (Acts  xx.  4;  Eph.  vi.  21);  and  Onesimus  (a  trophy  of  Divine
grace,  a  jewel  rescued  as  from  the  common  sewer  of  the  corrupt  metropolis ;  teaching
us  to  despair  of  no  one).  These  two  are  being  sent  to  tighten  the  bonds  between  the
Churches  in  Asia  and  the  apostle  at  Rome  (vers.  7 — 10;  Eph.  vi.  22).  Others  remain
to  aid  and  cheer  him.  Aristarchus  of  Thessalonica,  one  of  the  firstfruits  of  Europe,
now  a  voluntary  prisoner  (Acts  xix.  29 ;  xx.  4;  xxvii.  2).  Mark,  now  enjoying  the
fullest  confidence  of  St.  Paul  (2  Tim.  iv.  11):  an  encouraging  illustration  of  how
"patient  continuance  in  well-doing"  may  cast  early  errors  into  oblivion  and  win
back  confidence  once  withdrawn;  and  a  caution  even  to  an  apostle  against  too  stern
a  judgment  on  a  young  brother.  Jesus  Justus,  the  only  other  Hebrew  Christian  men-
tioned, otherwise  unknown,  yet  worthy  of  honour  in  all  ages,  because  '*  a  comfort "  to
the  apostle :  an  encouragement  to  workers  little  known  in  the  annals  of  the  Church
(Matt.  X.  40 — 42).  Epaphras,  probably  the  founder  of  the  Ci'lossian  Church,  who  had
often  preached  to  them  and  now  prayed  much  for  them.  Luhe,  the  first  medical
missionary,  a  minister  to  the  soul  as  well  as  to  the  body  of  the  sorely  tried  apostle.  Last
comes  Demas,  mentioned  without  any  commendation;  still  a  fellow-labourer  (Philem.
24),  but  in  whom  St.  Paul  may  have  already  detected  signs  of  that  worldly-mindedness
which  led  him  afterwards  to  withdraw  from  duty  and  danger,  if  not  altogether  to  make
shipwreck  of  faith  (2  Tim.  iv.  10) — a  caution  agcinst  backsliding  in  heart  (Prov,  xiv.
14  ;  1  John  ii.  15).  The  salutations  to  brethren  at  Colossas  further  remind  us  of  the
soeiallile  and  limited  conditions  of  the  primitive  Christians  ("  Nymphas,  and  the  Church
that  is  in  their  house"),  of  the  value  of  an  earnest  ministry  to  the  Church  (ver.  17),
and  of  the  duty  of  cherishing  fraternal  sympathy  with  other  Churches  (vera.  15,  16).
This  reference  to  the  Epistle  to  Laodicea  suggests  to  us  that,  though  a  letter  may  be  lost
and  a  Church  may  languish  or  die  (Rev.  iii.  14 — 22),  the  Word  of  the  Lord  in  the  letter
dnd  to  the  Church  endureth  for  ever.  Many  of  these  references  group  themselves
around  the  names  of  those  who  were  pastors  or  evangelists,  and  suggest  final  thougiits
respecting  a  minister's  responsibilities,  anxieties,  and  encouragements.  1.  Bespunsibilities.
(Ver.  17.)  The  ministry  was  "  in  the  Lord,"  In  union  with  and  in  subordination  to
him  he  was  to  exercise  it ;  and  only  by  the  utmost  vigilance  and  energy  could  he  fulfil
it.  To  every  minister  such  a  charge  is  given  as  2  Tim.  iv.  1,  2,  5,  and  such  promises  a?
1  Tin.  iv.  16.     Responsibility  inspires  zeal  (2  Cit.  iv.  Ij  2;  v.  9;  vi.  3 — 10)    and


240  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  [oh.  iv.  1—18


fosters  that  spirit  of  dependence  which  ensures  the  blessing  (1  Cor,  Hi.  7).  2.  Anxietien.
(Vers.  12,  13.)  A  faithful  mini-ster  can  aim  at  nothing  less.  He  cannot  adapt  the
standard  of  the  gospel  to  the  maxims  of  the  day.  He  has  to  educate  the  luiud  and  the
conscience,  that  his  flock  may  be  "  perfect  and  fully  assured  iu  all  the  will  of  God."
He  must  teach  and  warn,  ajipl^  ing  general  principles  to  practical  details,  being  himself
an  example  to  the  flock  (1  Tim.  iv.  12)  in  labours  and  in  prayeia,  so  that  those  who
know  him  best  may  bear  such  witness  to  him  as  Paul  does  to  Epaphras.  3.  Encourage-
ments from  three  sources :  sympathy,  such  as  Paul  enjoyed  from  friends  at  Rome  and  at
Colossas ;  co-oj  eration  from  "  fellow-workers  unto  the  kingdom  of  God ; "  affection,  auoh
as  love  to  the  one  Lord  and  labours  for  him  promote  iu  men  of  different  temperaments,
so  that  we  find  Paul  speaking  of  many  of  his  colleagues,  not  only  as  lionoured  fellow-
soldiers,  but  beloved  frieiids  (vers.  7,9, 14;  Bom.  xvi.  12).  Fur  all  such  the  apostle
breathes  the  concluding  prayer  in  one  comprehensive  term,  "  Grao»  be  with  you." —
E.  S.  P.

Ver.  2. — Ste'id/astness  in  prayer.  I.  It  is  gbeatlt  needed.  The  seven  deacons
were  chosen  jartly  in  order  that  the  apostles  might  not  be  hindered  by  temporal  affairs
from  continning  steadfastly  in  prayer  (Acts  vi.  4).  St.  Paul  exhorts  the  Boman
Christians  to  this  same  steadfastness  (Bom.  xii.  12).  It  is  requisite  on  many  accounts.
1.  There  are  never  wanting  subjects  that  claim  our  prayers.  2.  When  we  are  least
inclined  to  pray  we  are  in  most  need  of  prayer.  3.  Only  constant  prayer  can  be  pro-
foundly spiritual.  It  is  the  ever-flowing  stream  that  wears  the  deep  water-course.
The  bird  that  soars  high  must  he  much  on  the  wing.  4.  Steadfastness  in  prayer  is
rewarded  by  Divine  responses;  e.g.  Abraham's  intercession  for  Sodom,  the  parable  of  the
importunate  widow,  etc.

If.  It  IS  A  SIGN  OF  sri RITUAL  HEALTH.  After  the  ascension  of  their  Lord  the  early
Chribtians  continued  steadl'astly  in  prayer  (Acts  i.  14) ;  so  did  the  converts  of  the  day
of  Penticost  (Acts  ii.  42).  1.  It  shows  a  spiritual  tone  of  mind.  We  may  pray  in
special  need  without  this,  and  we  may  pray  at  set  seasons  of  devotion  without  it.  But
to  live  in  an  atmosphere  of  prayer,  to  pray  because  it  is  natural  to  us  to  talk  with  God,
because  we  love  communion  with  him,  because  prayer  is  our  vital  breath,  and  so  ta
pray  without  ceasing  from  inward  devotiim  rattier  than  from  external  prompting, — «U
this  is  a  sign  of  true  spirituality.  2.  It  shows  spiritwd  vigour.  Such  prayer  is  no
mere  lisstless  droning  of  empty  phrases,  no  sudden  burst  of  temporary  ejaculations.  It
implies  a  strong,  deep  energy  ot  devotion.

HI.  It  is  difficult  to  maintain.  It  is  easy  to  cry  out  to  God  in  great  extremities,
Prayevless  men  pray  under  such  circumstances.  It  is  easy,  too,  to  pray  when  we  are  in
a  mood  of  devotion.  The  dilfioulty  is  to  continue  steadfastly  in  prayer.  The  hindrances
are  numerous.  1.  Luch  of  interesting  subjects  of  prai/tr.  There  may  be  nothing  that
touches  us  as  a  great  want  or  strongly  appe-als  to  our  sympathies  at  some  seasons  like
the  dire  needs  and  touching  claims  that  inspire  our  petitions  at  other  times.  2.
External  distractions.  The  pressure  of  business,  the  din  of  the  world's  affairs,  uncon-
genial society,  even  too  absorbing  Church  work,  especially  in  this  age  of  rich  activity
and  meagre  contemplation,  check  prayer.  3.  Internal  hindrances.  We  are  not  always
in  tbfl  mood  lor  prayer.    Sometimes—

*  Hosannas  languish  on  onr  lipi^
And  our  devotion  dies."

This  may  result  from  physical  weariness.  The  spirit  may  be  willing  tliough  the  flesh
is  weak.  We  shuuld  ilien  turn  aside  and  rest  awhile  from  the  tiring  work  of  the
world.    But  it  may  result  from  sin.    Sin  is  the  greatest  hindrance  to  prayer.

IV.  It  hat  be  maintained  bt  the  obace  of  God.  1.  It  is  not  to  ht  revived  in
viedkness  hy  greater  assiduity  in  formal  devotion.  It  is  a  fatal  mistake  to  confound
long  prayers  with  steadfast  prayers,  and  to  suppose  that  spending  more  time  in  saying
prayers  will  strengthen  our  enfeebled  spirit  of  prayer.  It  will  have  the  opposite  effect.
Nothing  hinders  true  prayer  so  much  as  continuing  the  form  of  devotion  without  the
power.  2.  The  secret  is  to  seek  the  reviving  Spirit  of  Ood.  If  prayer  is  growing  faint,
there  may  still  be  energy  for  uttering  the  petition,  "My  soul  cleaveth  unto  the  dust:
quicken  thou  me  according  to  thy  Word  "  (I's.  czix.  26).    All  true  prayer  u  «u  inspira


OH.  IV.  1—18.]  THE  EPISTLE  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.  241

tion.  The  deepest  prayer  comes  from  the  striving  of  God's  Spirit  within  us.  "  The
Spirit  also  helpeth  our  infirmities  .  .  .  the  Spirit  himself  malceth  intercession  for  m
with  groanings  which  cannot  be  uttered"  (Eom.  viii.  26). — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  6  (first  clause). — The  wisdom  of  the  Ohureh  in  its  relations  to  the  world.  I.
The  characteristics  of  this  wisdom.  The  Church  needs  wisdom.  Christians  must
be  wise  us  serpents  as  well  as  harmless  as  doves.  We  are  to  blame  for  lack  of  wisdom
as  well  as  lor  lack  of  other  graces,  for  this  is  a  gift  of  God  (Jas.  1.  5).  1.  This  wisdom
is  practical.  It  concerns  itself  with  behaviour  rather  than  with  speculation.  2.  It
must  be  pwe.  There  must  not  be  the  slightest  unfaithfulness  to  Christ,  tampering
with  truth,  or  casuistic  deviation  from  the  highest  principles.

II.  The  occasions  for  this  wisdom.  It  was  most  necessary  in  the  apostolic  age,
when  the  Christians  existed  only  as  small  communities  scattered  about  among  adverse
populations.  But  it  is  always  more  or  less  called  for.  1.  For  lawful  sdf-proteetion.
If  persecuted  in  one  city  the  servant  of  Christ  was  to  flee  to  another.  He  was  not  to
court  opposition.  Martyrdom  is  only  a  glory  when  it  comes  in  the  path  of  duty,  and
never  when  men  go  out  of  that  path  to  seek  it.  Then  it  degenerates  into  little  better
than  suicide.  2.  To  conquer  opponents.  The  Church  has  a  mission  to  the  world,  and
she  will  fail  in  this  mission  if  she  cannot  win  her  enemies  over  to  her  own  side.  For
Christ's  sake,  and  for  the  good  of  men  who  need  his  gospel,  this  wisdom  must  be
observed  in  conciliating  foes  that  they  may  themselves  be  brought  into  the  Church.

III.  The  manner  of  exebcisino  this  wisdom.  1.  In  understanding  those  who  are
without.  We  often  provoke  opposition  because  we  do  not  study  the  weaknesses  and
prejudices  of  others.  On  the  other  hand,  Christians  have  shown  a  needless  scorn  for  the
good  in  others.  True  charity  will  take  note  of  all  that  is  admirable,  and  think  of  what-
soever things  are  worthy  in  the  world  outside  the  Church.  2.  In  an  attractive  exhibi-
tion of  the  blessings  of  Christianity.  Souls  are  not  saved  by  rating  and  scolding  men.
The  world  must  be  drawn,  not  driven,  to  Christ.  A  morose  Church  will  only  repel
an  unsympathetic  world.  Wisdom  towards  them  that  are  without  will  forbid  the
scandal  of  quarrelling  among  Christians.— W.  F.  A.

Ver.  6. — Salt.  Our  speech  is  to  be  "seasoned  with  salt."  The  context  shows  that
this  advice  is  given  especially  in  regard  to  the  conversation  of  Christian  people  with
men  of  the  world.  It  is  part  of  the  "  wisdom  towards  them  that  are  without."  Instead
of  offensive  fault-finding,  haughty  self-assertion,  or  morose  indifference,  our  speech  is  to
be  courteous — "  with  grace ; "  and  pleasant—"  seasoned."  Salt  stands  for  wit  in  Greek
references  to  it  as  seasoning  speech.  But  with  St.  Paul  it  seems  rather  to  mean  a
pleasant,  kindly,  interesting  characteristic  of  speech.

I.  Spkech  should  be  coubteous.  "  Be  courteous "  is  advice  that  comes  to  us  from
the  sturdy  fisherman  (1  Pet.  iii.  8).  If  we  cannot  agree  with  another  there  is  no
reason  wliy  we  should  treat  him  unkindly.  If  we  must  even  oppose  him,  still  we  can
do  it  with  consideration  and  gentleness  of  manner.  In  general  intercourse  it  is  well
that  an  afiability  of  behaviour  should  characterize  the  Christian.  How  courteous
Christ  was  with  all  classes  I  St.  Paul  is  a  model  of  the  true  Christian  gentleman.  The
essence  of  courtesy  is  sympatliy  for  others  in  small  things.  It  is  hollow  if  we  manifest
hostility  or  selfishness  in  large  things.  The  courtesy  of  a  Chesterfield  has  a  flavour  of
hypocrisy  about  it  because  it  is  based  on  selfishness.  Still,  if  we  are  sympathetic  in
serious  matters  we  may  be  much  misunderstood,  and  we  may  really  give  much  pain  by
a  needless  brusqueness  of  manner.

IL  Speech  should  be  intebbstinq.  Salt  is  seasoning.  It  gives  pungency.  Some-
thing similar  should  be  fuuud  in  our  conversation.  Dulness  is  an  offence.  It  is  an
infliction  of  intolerable  weariness  on  the  lisener.  On  the  part  of  the  speaker  it  shows
eitlier  want  of  interest  in  his  subject  (in  which  case  he  should  let  it  alone),  or  want  of
interest  in  his  lieaier  (which  is  a  direct  result  of  lack  of  sympathy).  Moreover,  the
Christian  is  called  to  be  Irequently  bearing  testimony  for  his  Master.  He  weakens  that
testimony  by  giving  it  in  an  uninteresting  manner.  He  should  study  his  words.  But,
better  than  that,  he  should  have  his  theme  so  much  at  heart  as  to  speak  with  the
eloquence  of  enthusiasm.

III.  Speech  should  be  pubk.    Salt  is  antiseptic.    The  Christian  should  not  only

COLOSSUNS.  B


243  THE  BPISTLB  TO  THB  OOLOSSIANd.  [oh.  it.  1—18.

ayoid  unwholesome  topics  and  styles  of  speech ;  he  shonld  bring  into  conversation  a
positive,  purifying  influence.  This  does  not  mean  that  he  should  be  always  quoting
texts  and  set  religious  phrases,  or  always  dragging  in  religious  subjects  out  of  place,  and
season.  He  degrsides  them,  provokes  his  hearers,  and  stultifies  himself  by  so  doing.
But  he  should  seel?  to  elevate  the  tone  of  conversation,  to  guide  it  from  unworthy
subjects  and  to  infuse  into  it  a  pure  tone.  There  are  Christ-like  men  whose  very
prssence  in  a  room  seems  to  rebuke  evil  talk  and  to  breathe  a  higher  atmosphere  into
the  conversation.    How  purifying  was  the  conversation  of  Christ  1 — W.  F.  A.

Ver.  16. — A  friendlt/ exchange.  I.  Scriptdbb  is  intended  fob  genebal  beadinq.
The  two  Epistles  are  to  be  read  in  the  Churches.  They  are  not  to  be  reserved  for  the
bishops,  the  more  initiated  or  the  more  advanced  Christians.  All  members  of  the  two
Churches,  young  and  old,  slaves  and  freemen,  illiterate  and  cultured,  imperfect  and
spiritual-minded,  are  to  hear  the  two  Epistles.  Now,  these  Epistles  contain  about  the
most  advanced  doctrine  of  all  writings  of  the  Bible.  They  approach  nearest  to  what
is  analogous  to  the  inner  Gnostic  doctrines  of  all  Scripture  teaching.  If,  therefore,  any
portions  of  revelation  should  be  reserved  for  the  few,  it  would  be  these.  If  these  are  for
public  perusal,  surely  the  simpler  Gospels  and  psalms  must  be  also  public  property.
The  Bible  is  a  book  for  the  people.  It  is  free  to  all.  No  man  has  a  right  to  bar  access
to  the  tree  of  life  on  the  plea  that  the  ignorant  do  not  know  how  to  help  themselves
from  it  and  must  have  its  fruits  doled  out  by  ofScial  guardians.  The  greatest
philosopher  may  find  unfathomable  depths  in  Scripture ;  but  a  little  child  may  also
read  clear  truths  therein.  If  it  be  said  that  the  ignorant  will  misunderstand,  the  reply
is — They  will  gain  more  truth  on  the  whole,  in  spite  of  misunderstanding,  by  free  access
to  the  Bible  than  when  only  led  to  it  by  others.  God  can  take  care  of  bis'own  truth ;
the  Bible  was  written  for  the  people,  and  the  people  have  a  right  to  their  own.  No
guardians  of  Scripture  who  are  to  measure  it  out  to  others  at  their  discretion  were  ever
appointed  by  Christ  or  by  his  apostles.

IL  The  Scbipturb  that  is  useful  to  one  Church  will  be  useful  to  anotheb.
The  two  letters  were  written  with  special  regard  to  the  peculiar  circumstances  of  the
two  Churches.  Yet  they  were  to  be  exchanged.  Much  more,  then,  should  Christians
who  have  not  had  any  private  Epistle  of  their  own  benefit  by  the  public  Scriptures.
Special  wants  are  not  primary  wants.  The  great  need  of  revelation  is  common  to  all.
The  fundamental  truths  of  the  gospel  are  needed  by  and  offered  to  alL  The  highest
^k>ries  of  revelation  are  for  alL

III.  Our  reading  of  Sobipture  should  not  be  confined  to  isolated  fragments.
A  Church  which  liad  been  honoured  by  receiving  an  apostolic  Epistle  written  expressly
for  itself  would  be  tempted  to  depreciate  other  apostolic  writings,  or  at  least  to  consider
that  for  its  own  use  its  own  Epistle  was  of  paramount  if  not  of  exclusive  importance.
It  would  be  in  danger  of  making  its  one  Epistle  its  own  New  Testament,  to  the  dis-
regard of  all  the  rest.  But  the  advice  of  St.  Paul  shows  that  such  an  action  would  be
a  mistake.  1.  Our  reading  of  Scripture  should  he  wide  and  varied.  We  must  beware
of  confining  our  attention  to  favourite  portions.  By  doing  so  we  get  one-sided  views
©f  truth,  and  probably,  even  if  unconsciously,  select  what  seems  to  support  our  own
notions  to  the  neglect  of  what  would  modify  them.  We  may  most  need  to  read  those
Scriptures  in  which  we  feel  least  interest.  2,  Scripture  halances  and  interprets
Scripture.  The  doctrine  of  the  Christ  which  is  the  leading  theme  of  the  Epistle  to
the  Colossians  is  closely  related  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Church  which  is  the  central
subject  of  the  so-called  Epistle  to  the  Ephesians  (that,  probably,  referred  to  by  St.  Paul
as  the  Epistle  to  the  Laodiceans).

rv.  There  should  be  inteboommunion  between  Christian  oonqreoations.
There  is  too  much  corporate  selfishness  in  the  Church.  We  should  .be  the  better  for
mere  ecclesiastical  altruism,  or  rather  communism.  1.  This  is  most  to  be  looked  for
between  neighbom's.  ■  Laodicea  was  near  to  Colossae.  2.  And  it  should  be  cultivated
between  the  prominent  and  the  obscure.  Laodicea  was  an  important  city,  Colossae  a
small  town.  Yet  the  Churches  in  the  two  places  were  to  show  brotherly  sympathy  on
equal  terms  and  to  be  mutually  helpful  to  one  another.  While  the  strong  should  help
iUe  weak,  the  weak  sbculd  beware  of  stlflahmMs  and  do  their  best  to  serve  the  strong.
-W.  F.  A.


CH.nr.l— 18.]  THK   EPISTLB  TO  THE  OOLOBSIANi.  843

Ver.  18. — "  Remember  my  londa.''  St.  Paul's  occasional  references  to  his  bonds  are
never  thrust  forward  in  "the  spirit  of  the  histrionic  martyr  and  never  expressed  in  a
murmuring  tone,  but  they  evince  the  irksome  restraints  under  which  he  laboured,  and
they  give  a  certain  pathos  to  his  entreaties.  To  be  always  chained  to  a  soldier,  possibly
one  of  rude  and  coarse  manners,  must  have  been  peculiarly  distressing  to  a  man  of
sensitive,  refined  disposition  like  St.  Paul.  Feeling  the  burden  of  his  bonds,  the
apostle  prays  his  readers  to  remember  them.

I.  Rembmbbb  them  in  sympathy.  It  is  something  to  know  that  friends  are  feeling
with  us,  when  they  can  do  nothing  directly  to  remove  the  cause  of  trouble.  The
lowliest  may  help  the  greatest  by  his  sympathy.  An  apostle  seeks  the  sympathy  of
obscure  Christians.  Christ  looked  for  the  support  of  his  disciples'  sympathy  in  the
hour  of  his  greatest  agony,  and  had  the  last  drop  of  his  bitter  cup  in  the  failing  of  that
sympathy  (Matt.  xxvi.  40).

II.  Remembeb  them  in  pbateb.  When  we  cannot  work  for  our  brother's  release
from  trouble,  we  may  pray.  With  all  the  power  of  Rome  at  his  back,  Nero  cannot
prevent  the  feeble  Christians  from  having  recourse  to  the  mighty  weapon  of  prayer.
Let  us  beware  of  a  selfish  narrowness  of  sympathy  in  prayer.  There  are  always  many
calls  for  prayers  of  intercession.  Very  touching  is  the  ancient  prayer  that  has  come
down  to  us  from  the  dark  ages  of  persecution,  and  is  presented  in  the  so-called  '  Divine
Liturgy  of  St.  James : ' "  Remember,  0  Lord,  Christians  sailing,  travelling,  sojourning  in
strange  lands ;  our  fathers  and  brethren,  who  are  in  bonds,  prison,  captivity,  and  exile ;
who  are  in  mines,  and  under  torture,  and  in  bitter  slavery."

III.  Remembeb  them  in  aRATiTUDE.  St.  Paul  was  suffering  for  the  gospel.  The
real  cause  of  his  imprisonment  was  the  persecution  of  the  Jews,  who  were  more  bitter
to  his  liberal  version  of  Christianity  than  to  the  more  Judaistic  Christianity  of  the
other  apostles.  Thus  he  described  himself,  "  I  Paul,  the  prisoner  of  Christ  Jesus  in
behalf  of  you  Gentiles  "  (Eph.  iii.  1).  Therefore  his  bonds  merit  our  grateful  memory ;
and  the  sufferings  of  the  champions  of  Christian  liberty  merit  similar  reverent  and
grateful  recollections.  It  is  well  that  these  memories  should  be  handed  down  from
father  to  son,  that  the  stories  of  the  heroes  of  Christendom  through  whose  toils  and
sufferings  we  now  enjoy  so  many  privileges  should  be  taught  to  our  children.

IV.  Remember  them  in  reverence  foe  St.  Paul's  authority.  His  bonds  lend
weight  to  his  words.  They  prove  his  sincerity.  They  are  a  reason  for  listening  to  his
entreaties.  By  his  sufferings  he  entreats  us  to  walk  worthily  of  our  Christian  calling.
So  the  greater  sufferings  of  a  greater  Friend  give  force  to  his  persuasion  when  he  \ms
us  follow  him.— W.  f .  A.


HOMILETICAL  INDEX

TO

THE  EPISTLE   OF

ST.  PAUL  TO  THE  COLOSSIANS.


CHAPTER  L

fHxm  PAGE

Introduction        ...  ...  •>•  19|  59

The  Redeeming  Son  and  his  Kingdom      22
The  Apoatle  and  his  Mission  ...      24

The  Apostle's  Thanksgiving   for  the

Spiritual  Progress  of  the  OoloBsians      27
The  Apostle's  Prayer  for  the  Enlarge-
ment and  Completion  of  their  Spiri-
tual Life  ...  ...  ...      SO

Divine  Meetness  of  the  Saints  for  theii
Inheritance        ...  ...  ...      82

Translation  into  Christ's  Kingdom    ...      82
Redemption    through    the    Blood   of
Christ...  ...  ...  ...      33

Christ's  Headship  over  Nature  ...      S3

Christ's  Headship  of  the  Church       ...      34
The  Fulness  of  the  Godhead  in  Jesus
Christ...  ...  ...  ...      85

Tlie  Reconciliation  effected  by  Christ      36
Application  of  the  Reconciliation  to  the

Special  Case  of  the  Colossians        ...      37
The  Mission,  Sufferings,  Gospel,  and
PreacMngofthe  Apostle  ...  ...      88

The  Manner  in  which  the  Apostle  dis-
charged his  divinely  given  Trust  ...      40
The  Hope  laid  up  in  Heaven  ...      41

The  Kingdom  of  God's  Dear  Son      ...      41
The  Glories  of  King  Jesus  ...      43

The  Indwelling  Christ  the  Boliever'i
Hope  to  Glory  .„  ,„  ...      44


THEUB  PAGB

Address  and  Salutation       ..>            „,  45

Pauline  Sorites      ...            ...            ...  47

Prayer  leading  up  to  the   Person  uf

Christ...            ...            ...            ...  49

Paul's  Sufferings  ...            ...            ...  57

The  Apostolic  Salutation     ...  ...60,03

The  Apostolic  Thanksgiving  ...60,  05

The  Apostolic  Prayer          ...            „.  61

Christ  All  in  All  ...            ...            ...  62

The  Ministry  of  the  Mystery             ...  63

The  Intercession   ...            ...            ...  66

The  Love  of  the  Father      ...            ...  67

The  Glory  of  the  Son          ...            ...  69

The  Supremacy  of  Christ  in  the  MorrJ

Universe            ...            ...            ...  70

The  Apostle's  Comprehensive  View  of

Salvation           ...            ...            ...  72

The  Privilege  of  Suffering               ...  73

St.  Paul's  "View  of  hia  Ministry         ...  74

The  Pruitfulness  of  the  Gospel         ...  75

The  Knowledge  of  God's  Will          ...  75

The  Inheritance  of  the  Saints           ...  76

Redemption           ...            ...            ...  77

Christ  in  his  Relations  to  God  and  to

the  World          77

"  The  Firstborn  from  the  Dead  "       ...  78

The  Great  Reconciliation    ...            ...  79

Our  Reconciliation              ...            •••  79

Chiist,  tlie  Hope  of  Glory  ...            ...  80

The  Mission  of  Christian  Preaching ...  SI


INDEX.


CHAPTER  IL

Tnxn  PA6K
The  Apostle's  Concern  for  the  O0I03-

Bian  Church       ...            ...            ...  97

The  Christian's  Completeness  in  Christ  100

The  Claims  of  the  False  Teacher     ...  104
Kature  and  Objects  of  the  Apostle's

Struggle  on  Behalf  of  the  Saints   ...  108

A  Warning  against  Deceivers           ...  109
The  Principle  of  a  Consistent  Christian

Walk 110

A  Warning  against  Speculative  De-
ceivers              ...            ...            ...  Ill

Christ  the  Fulness  of  the  Godhead,  and

our  Belationship  to  him  ...            ...  112

The  True  Cixoumcision       ...            ...  112

The  Import  of  Christian  Baptism     ...  113
The  Atonement  and  its  Blessed  Results  114
Condemnation  of  Bitualistio  Observ-
ances and  Ascetic  Severities          ...  115
A  Warning  against  Angel-Worship  ...  116
A  Warning  against  Asceticism          ...  117
The  Trinity  as  the  Source  of  Christian
Love  and  Consolation      ...            ...  119

Christ  our  All       ...            ...            ...  120

Legalism  exposed                ...            ...  121

Introduction  to  the  Polemical  Part  of

the  Epistle        ...           ...           ...  122

Philosophy            ...            ...            ...  125

Three  Errors         ...            ...            ...  128

Three  Wonderful  Tkings    ...            ...  132

Blessed  Christian  Possibilities           ...  132

The  Complete  Man             ...            ...  133

Christian  Independence      ...           ...  134

The  Christian's  Exemption  from  Bond-
age to  Outwardness          ...            ...  134

St.  Paul's  Anxieties  for  the  Colossians,

and  how  they  were  allayed            ...  135
Congratulations  and  Counsels           ...  136
Christ's  Fulness  the  Christian's  Safe-
guard ...            ...            ...            ...  138

Purity,  Pardon,  and  Victory  through

Christ...            ...            ...            ...  139

Two  Dangers  to  be  avoided              ...  140
The  Worthlessnesg  of   Unauthorized

Ceremonialism  ...           ...           ...  142

Christ,  the  Treasury  of  Wisdom       ...  143

Orowth  in  Christ ...           ...           ...  144

The  Pull  Divinity  of  Christ             ...  144

The  Fulness  of  Humanity  ...           ...  145

The  Eights  of  Liberty        145

The  Failure  of  Asceticism  ...           ...  146


CHAPTER  IIL

THEUB  FAGl

The  True  Christian  Life 158

The  Christian  View  of  Family  Duties  166

The  Obligations  of  the  Risen  Life    ...  1 69
Heavenly  Things  the  True  Object  of

Christian  Contemplation ...            ...  169

The  Believer's  Final  Manifestation  with

Christ 170

The  Duty  of  Mortifying  the  Old  Man  170
A  Warning  against  Social  Sins         ...  172
The  Ground  of  these  Practical  Precepts  172
All  Distinctions  obliterated  in  Christ  173
The  Duty  of  putting  on  all  the  Charac-
teristic Qualities  of  the  New  Man  ...  174
Peace  and  Thanksgiving    ...            ...  174

The  Use  of  the  Word  for  Spiritual  Edid-

cation  ...            ...            ...            ...  175

The  Principle  of  a  Godly  Life           ...  176

The  Duties  of  Wives           ...            ...  176

The  Duties  of  Husbands     ...            ...  176

The  Duties  of  Children       ...            ...  177

The  Duties  of  Fathers        ...            ...  177

The  Duties  of  Servants       ...            ...  177

The  Heavenly  Life              ...            ...  178

Mortification  after  Death    ...            ...  179

The  New  Life  of  Love        ...           ...  180

Christianity  remodelling  the  Ancient

Household         ...            ...            ...  181

Our  Risen  Life     ...            ...            ...  182

Dying  before  Rising            ...            ...  184

What  particularly  we  are  to  put  on  ...  186

Relative  Duties     ...            ...            ...  188

The  Christian's  Higher  Life              ...  190

Death  to  Evil       ...           ...           ...  191

The  Marks,  Method,  and  Motive  of  the

Christian  Life  ...           ...            ...  192

The  Christian  View  of  Family  Life  ...  193
Religious  Regulations  for  Master  and

Servant              ...            ...            ...  194

Present  Privileges :  Future  Glory    ...  194
Sins  of  the  Flesh  and  the  Sin  of  Cove-

tousness            ...           ...           ...  196

The  New  Life  in  Christ  the  Death- War-

rant  to  Old  Sins              ...           ...  197

The  Christian's  Wardrobe  ...           ...  198

A  Threefold  Cord  of  Grace  ...            ...  199

The  Power  of  the  Word  and  the  Name

of  Christ           200

Husbands  and  Wives          ...           ...  200

Children  and  Parents          „,            ...  201

Servants  and  their  Masters  ...           ...  202

Christian  Aspiration           ...           ...  204


INDEX.


a


IHXMB

The  Hidden  Life  ...  ...

Chriet  All,  and  in  All  ...  ...

The  Bond  of  Peifeotness  ...

Peace  the  Umpire  ...  ...

Pgalmody             •••  >••  ••>

CHAPTER  IV.

Prayer  and  Social  Converse  ...

Personal  Messages  and  Greetings     ...

The  Duties  of  Masters        ...

Exhortation  to  Constant  Prayer

Prayer  for  the  Apostle  and  his  Com-
panions

The  Behaviour  of  Christians  in  the
World...

The  Importance  of  Seasonable  Speech

The  Bearers  of  the  Epistle  to  the
Colossians

Greetings  from  Three  Loyal  Friends
of  the  Apostle   ...

Greetings  from  Three  Gentile  Friends
of  tlie  Apostle   ...  ...  w.


FAOB

THEMS

PAaK

205

Salutations  and  Parting  Counsels

to

205

Friends              ...            ...

*..

227

2U6

Autograph  Salutation

...

227

207

The  Life  of  Prayer  and  Sympathy

...

228

207

The  Apostle's  Entourage    ...

...

229

Prayer  and  Prudence          ...

...

229

The  Personal        ...            ...

•..

231

216

An  Exhortation  to  Prayer  ...

*•«

235

219

The  Christian  and  the  World

M.

235

223

Christian  Greeting

...

236

223

Conditions  of  Success  in  Prayer

...

237

The  Christian's  Conduct  and  Conversa-

223

tion  In  the  World

...

238

Personal    Salutations    and    Pastoral

224

Cares  ...

...

239

224

Steadfastness  In  Prayer

...

240

The  Wisdom  of  the  Church  in  its  Rela-

225

tions  to  the  World

...

241

Salt

...

241

225

A  Friendly  Exchange         ...

M.

242

nnt>

''  Remember  my  Bonds  "     ».

•M

M3

1
