pis 
' i 
pabaaata 
1s 
b ay fasiite 
prebtesahe Hi 
et 
: 


a 


la 


2238. 


tf 
mn 
te 
i 
bt 


cia 


[meres 


Re etaay 


, 
eae 
ot) 


Ill 


579 


gy at Claremont 


I! 


iii 


“il of Theolo 


secretaries 
‘ Nene silt 


i Ube berg 


iy 











The Library 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 


_ WEST FOOTHILE AT COLLEGE AVENUE 


CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 











THE REVELATION 


RS 


On LV 


7 
: 


AN ANALYSIS AND EXPOSITION 
OF THE LAST BOOK OF THE BIBLE 


BY 


ARNO C. GAEBELEIN 


Editor of “Our Hope;” Author of the Annotated Bible; 
Exposition of Matthew; Joel; Daniel; Zechariah, etc. 


PUBLICATION OFFICE “OUR HOPE” 
456 FourtaH AVENUE 
New York City 
Picxerinc & INGLIS H. L. THatcHER 
11 Bothwell Circus Auckland 
Glasgow, Scotland New Zealand 


Copyright by A. C. Gaebelein, rors. 





LAr 
VIAg 





{} = i 7 me Fh 2 : 
OR fhe Oe 
; hence eens AORS Rs ; | 


¥ f 
Serer a > y \A = UF : ; 1 fom 
- i zs a 1 rt l Bees , hot 
ig ea ee Oa 
° i caer ~ , / : ; y 
ae ae ae os s J Vi Ce ag 
LAL /] Ae x te id A RS | eae 
f ( er foo 
To my Beloved Wife 
“Emma’ 


In appreciation of her prayers and sacrifices, 
which have been for many years a constant 
encouragement and cheer, as well as a help, 
in a busy life of service for God, this volume 
is affectionately dedicated. 





CONTENTS 


PAGE. 
The hevelatioie:mauess siresiccs ects a Seid ss 7 
Analysis (otethe Book, iy csi eins clec.onts ne okie 22 
Mxegetical Annotations. «a. ciclaeccie sss canes 28 
Appendix I. The Seventy Weeks of Daniel 178 
Appendix II. The Symbolical Names...... 199 


Appendix III. Helpful Books on Revela- 
Sion and) Prophecy: csiiince' sees anes xe 210 





THE REVELATION* 


“The Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave 
unto Him—.” ‘This is the first sentence with which 
this last book in God’s Word begins. The best title 
therefore is, “The Revelation of Jesus Christ.” Our 
Lord received, according to this opening statement, a 
revelation from God. ‘This must be understood in 
connection with Himself as the Son of Man. As the 
Only Begotten He had no need of a revelation; in 
His Deity He is acquainted with all the eternal pur- 
poses. One with God He knows the end from the 
beginning. But He, who is very God, took on in in- 
carnation the form of a servant, and thus being in 
fashion as a man, He humbled Himself (Phil. ii: 7-8). 
And as the Man who had passed through death, whom 
God raised from the dead, and exalted at His own 
right hand, God gave Him this revelation concerning 
the judgment of the earth and the glory of Himself. 
“God raised Him from the dead and gave Him glory” 
(1 Peter i:21). What this Glory is which He re- 
ceived from God is fully and blessedly revealed in this 
book. It is the revelation of His acquired Glory and 
how this Glory is to be manifested in connection with 
the earth. And this revelation He makes known to 
His servants, because His own are sharers with Him 
in all He received from God. 


*Read this introduction several times before taking up 
the study of the book. 


8 THE REVELATION 


Pre-eminently His Revelation 


The Revelation is pre-eminently His revelation; 
the revelation of His Person and His Glory. “In the 
volume of the book it is written of Me..... *” (Heb. 
x:7). Martin Luther asked, “What Book and what 
Person?” and answered, “There is only one Book— 
the Bible; and only one Person—Jesus Christ.” ‘The 
whole Book, the Word of God, bears witness of Him, 
Who is the living Word. He is the center, the sum 
total and the substance of the Holy Scriptures. The 
prayerful reader of the Bible will never read in vain 
if he approaches the blessed Book with the one desire 
to know Christ and His Glory. His blessed face is 
seen on every page and the infallible Guide, the Holy 
Spirt+, never fails to satisfy the longing of the be- 
liever’s heart to know more of Christ. Inasmuch as 
this last Bible book is the Revelation of Jesus Christ, 
an “Unveiling” of Himself, we find in it the complet- 
est revelation of His Person and His Glory. 

It is here where many expositions of Revelation 
have missed the mark. Occupied chiefly with the 
symbols of the Book, the mysteries, the judgments 
and the promised consummation. they have neglected 
to emphasize sufficiently Him, who throughout this 
Book is pre-eminently the center of everything. ‘The 
reader of Revelation does well to read first of all 
through the entire Book with this object in mind, to 
see what is said of our Lord, of His Person, His 
present and His future Glory. 

We shall find all the features of His Person and 
His Work mentioned. He is the Alpha ang Omega, 


THE REVELATION 9 


the first and the last (i:11); the Ancient of Days 
(1:14 compare with Daniel vii:9); the “I Am,” 
that is, Jehovah, “I am He that liveth” (i:18); the 
Son of God (ii: 18). These terms speak of His Deity. 
His earthly life in humiliation is touched upon in the 
statement, “the faithful Witness” (i:5). His death 
on the cross is likewise mentioned—“He hath washed 
us from our sins in His blood” (i: 5); “He was dead” 
(1:18); “the Lamb as it had been slain” (v:6); 
“worthy is the Lamb that was slain” (v:12). He is 
mentioned twenty-eight times as the Lamb in Revela- 
tion and each time it reminds us of the cross and the 
great work accomplished there. His resurrection is 
seen, for He is called, “the First begotten from the 
dead” (i:5), and He speaks of Himself as, “He that 
was dead, and, behold, I am alive forevermore” (i: 18) ; 
and again, “these things saith the first and the last, 
who was dead and is alive’’ (ii: 8). 


Then we behold Him “in the midst” in glory, seen 
face to face by all the redeemed and worshipped by 
them, as well as by the heavenly hosts and ultimately 
by every creature, the fulfillment of Phil. ii: 10-11, 
“that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, 
of things in heaven, and things on earth and things 
under the earth, and that every tongue should confess 
that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the 
Father” (Rev. v: 18-14). After the fifth chapter we 
have His revelation as the executor of the decreed 
judgments. He opens the seals; He sends forth the 
seven angels with the judgment trumpets and the seven 
angels with the judgment vials, in which the wrath of 


10 THE REVELATION 


God is completed. “The Father judgeth no man, but 
has committed all judgment unto the Son” (John 
v:22). Then He is seen in the glorious union with 
the Bride (xix:7-10) and as the victorious Christ 
who passeth out of heaven followed by the armies 
of heaven (xix: II-2I), conquering the opposing forces 
of evil, executing the wrath of Almighty God, appear- 
ing as King of kings and Lord of lords. The twentieth 
chapter reveals Him as the reigning Christ. He and 
His Saints with Him will reign over the earth for 
a thousand years. And all which follows reveals Him 
and His Glory as well as the blessed and eternal re- 
sults of His work. 


A Book of Prophecy 


Aside from the title of the Book, which indicates 
that it deals with things future, there is a direct state- 
ment which determines its prophetic character. In 
the first beatitude of the seven which are found in 
the Book, we read that it is a Book of Prophecy— 
“Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the 
words of this Prophecy” (i: 3). It is known to every 
intelligent student of the Bible that a good part of it 
is Prophecy. The great prophecies concerning the 
people Israel and the nations of the world are found 
in the Old Testament Scriptures. In the New Testa- 
ment there is but one,Book of Prophecy, the Revela- 
tion. As it is the capstone of the entire revelation 
of God, without which the Bible would be an unfin- 
ished book, we find in its pages the consummation of 
the great Prophecies which were given by the Prophets 
of God in Old Testament times. 


THE REVELATION 11 


For the study of this New Testament Prophetic 
Book the knowledge of the chief content of the Old 
Testament Prophetic Word is therefore an absolute 
necessity. For instance to a Christian who does not 
have a fair grasp of Daniel’s great Prophecies, or is 
ignorant of the place which the people Israel hold 
in the purposes of God, the Book of Revelation is a 
sealed book, without any possible meaning. This is 
one of the chief reasons why this Book has suffered 
so much both from the critics and from the hands of 
commentators. The Apostle Peter saith, “Knowing 
this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any 
private interpretation. For the prophecy came not 
in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God 
spake as they were moved by the Holy Spirit” (2 Peter 
i: 20-21). The better translation for “private inter- 
pretation” is, “its own interpretation.” It means that 
the interpretation of prophecy must be done by com- 
paring Scripture with Scripture. The holy men of 
God, the prophets, were the instruments of the Holy 
Spirit and made known God’s purposes in a progres- 
sive way. To understand any prophecy is only possible 
by taking the entire Prophetic Word into considera- 
tion. That there is a wonderful harmony in the great 
body of prophetic dispensational truths as found in 
the Bible we have demonstrated in another volume. * 
This principle finds its strongest application in the in- 
terpretation of the Revelation. 





*“Harmony of the Prophetic Word”—a volume which has 
been used under God’s blessing to open the minds of many 
to the meaning of Prophecy. 


12 THE REVELATION 


The Three Classes 


In I Corinthians x: 32 the Apostle Paul speaks of 
three classes into which the human race is divided: 
the Jews, the Gentiles, and the Church of God. In 
the Old Testament there was no Church of God, for 
the Church is a New Testament institution. As the 
Revelation is the book of consummation these three 
classes must be seen in the contents of this Book. 
Many expositors have seen nothing but the struggles 
of the Church in her history in this Book. This is 
true of the so-called Preterist school and also of the 
Historical school of interpretation. ‘The Preterist 
school teaches a fulfillment of all the apocalyptic vis- 
ions in the struggles of the Church in the past. The 
Historical school also teaches that the visions con- 
cern mostly the Church. ‘These schools of interpreta- 
tion leave out the Jews and what is written concerning 
them and their final history during the end of the 
age, preceding the glorious appearing of our Lord. 
Of late another school of interpreters has come into 
existence. They teach that the entire Book of Revela- 
tion concerns the Jewish people and that there is 
nothing about the Church in this last Book of the 
Bible. Any interpretation of Revelation which ignores 
the Jews, the people Israel and the fulfillment of Old 
Testament predictions concerning them is wrong. And 
any interpretation which teaches that there is nothing 
about the Church in Revelation is equally wrong. The 
Church and her destiny on earth, the destiny of the 
true Church and the destiny of the apostate Church, 
or Christendom, is found in the Book. The Jews and 


THE REVELATION 13 


what concerns them in the end of the age, the Gen- 
tiles, the nations of the earth, and the judgments in 
store for them, as well as the 1uture of the earth, a 
future of glory and blessing; all this is found in our 
New Testament Book of Prophecy. 


The True Interpretation 


There is a true interpretation of Revelation which 
is in harmony with all previous prophecies and which 
opens the Book to our understanding. But how are 
we to find this true interpretation? We answer, the 
Book itself furnishes it. This is an important fact, 
both convincing and conclusive. It is therefore of no 
profit to examine the different theories and schools 
of interpretation. We shall avoid the terms Preterist, 
Historical and Futurist, and not try, as it has been 
attempted, to reconcile these different modes of in- 
terpretation. ‘There must be one true interpretation, 
and we claim that this is given to us by the Lord Him- 
self in this Book. 


The Key Which Fits 


It has often been truthfully said, every Book in 
the Bible contains a key which unlocks the Book. 
The Revelation is no exception. John the beloved 
disciple was in banishment in the isle of Patmos, as 
Daniel the man greatly beloved, was a captive in 
Babylon. The Lord called these two great servants 
to behold the panorama of the future. Both wrote 
down their visions. While in the Book of Daniel we 
find no direct command to write, we find such a com- 
mand /@ the first chapter of Revelation. Tohn received 


14 THE REVELATION 

divine instruction how to write the Revelation. We 
find this in the nineteenth verse, “Write therefore 
what thou hast seen, and the things that are, and the 
things that are about to be after these.’”* John, 
guided by the Holy Spirit then wrote the Revelation 
according to the divine direction. In examining this 
command to write we find that three things are men- 
tioned. He is to write first the things he had seen. 
then the things which are, and finally the things that 
are about to be after these. When John received 
these instructions he had already seen something, and 
the vision he had he was instructed to write down. 
Then present things, the things which are, and future 
things, to be after present things have passed away, 
must be located in this book. So we have the past, 
the present and the future in this key verse. 


Three Divisions—Where are They? 


It is then clear that the Book of Revelation must be 
divided into three main divisions. How are we to 
locate these divisions? They are marked, so that we 
are not left in doubt about it. In the beginning of 
the fourth chapter we find a significant statement 
which shows where the third division begins. After 
these things, that is after the contents of the opening 
three chapters were past, John heard the same voice 
speaking to him once more. He sees a door opened 
in heaven and is told, “Come up hither, and I will 
shew thee the things which must take place after these 
things” (iv:1). There can then be no doubt at all 





* This is the correct translation of this important verse. 


THE REVELATION 15 


that with the fourth chapter the seer beheld the things 
which take place after the preceding things, the things 
which are, have passed away. The third division of 
Revelation begins with the fourth chapter. John 
beholds future things from heaven’ into which he had 
been taken “in the Spirit.” The things he had seen 
and the things which are, are therefore contained in 
the first three chapters of the Book. 

The first chapter contains the things he had seen. 
“What thou seest write in a book” was the first in- 
struction John received (verse 11). In the nineteenth 
verse he is told, “Write therefore what thou hast 
seen.’ Between verse 11 and verse 19 he saw a 
vision, which he was to write, and this vision consti- 
tutes the first section or division of the Book. The 
second and third chapters form the second division, 
the things which are. The beginning of the fourth 
chapter to the end of the Book is the final, the third 
division. ‘There is no better and more logical key. 
And this key given in the Book determines the true 
interpretation. 

The Patmos Vision 

“The things thou hast seen’”—the first section of 
Revelation is the great Patmos vision, chapter i: 12-18. 
It is the vision of the glorified Son of Man in the midst 
of the seven golden candlesticks (or lampstands). 


' The Things Which Are 
The things which are, the present things, begin the 
prophetic section of the Revelation. The second and 


third chapters of Revelation, the things which are, 
contain the messages of our Lord addressed to the 


16 THE REVELATION 


ry 


seven churches of Asia Minor. ‘These messages con- 
tain the first great Prophecy of Revelation. The 
propHecy concerns the Church on earth. We shall 
show in our comment on these two chapters that we 
have in them a divine history of the Church on earth. 
It is one of the most remarkable sections of the Pro- 
phetic Word. What this present age is to be religiously 
and how it will end is made known in other parts of 
the New Testament. Our Lord in some of His King- 
dom parables (Matthew xiii) reveals the character- 
istics of this age. The parables of the sower, the evil 
seed sown into the field, the mustard seed parable and 
the parable of the leaven are prophetic and teach, 
in part at least, what the church messages reveal. ‘The 
Holy Spirit in the Epistolar testimony also reveals 
the religious and moral characteristics of the age, 
and depicts its departure from the truth, and its end. 
The destiny of the true Church is heavenly. She has 
a “blessed hope,” which is to be with the Lord in 
Glory. She is the Body of Christ, and He is the 
“Head of the Body.” The Church is also the Bride 
of Christ and He is the Bridegroom. The Body is 
united to the Head in Glory; the Bride will be joined 
to the Bridegroom. 1 Thessalonians iv: 13-18 is the 
Scripture which reveals this end for the true Church 
onearth. The professing Church, Christendom, which 
rejects the doctrine of Christ and goes into apostasy 
has a far different destiny. The Lord will disown 
that which hath denied His Name, and judgment and 
wrath is to be poured out upon apostate Christendom 
(2 Thess. i:7-9). These predictions concerning the 
Church on earth are contained in the seven, Church 


THE REVELATION 17 


messages. When we come to the close of the third 
chapter we find a significant promise, and equally 
significant threat. “I also will keep thee from the 
hour of temptation (trial) which shall come upon 
.all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth” 
(iii: 10). This is the promise. It tells of the removal 
of the true Church, composed of all true believers, 
from this earthly scene. “I will spue thee out of my 
mouth” (iii:6). This is the threat to the apostate 
Church. Both the promise and the threat will be 
fulfilled. After the third chapter the word church 
does not occur again in Revelation. The reason for 
this is obvious. ‘The history of the Church on earth 
terminates with the close of the third chapter. Be- 
cause the true Church is no longer here but has been 
taken up into Glory, and that which professes to be 
the Church is disowned by the Lord, therefore no 
more mention of the Church is made in Revelation. 


The Things Which Are After These 

The future things, things after the removal of the 
true Church from the earth, occupy the greater part 
of this Book. It is of the greatest importance to see 
that nothing whatever after the third chapter of 
Revelation has yet taken place. Some speak of a 
past and partial fulfillment of some of the visions 
found in this section. In view of the scope of the 
Book this is impossible. The open door in heaven, the 
voice which calls the seer to pass through that open 
door into heaven, is symbolical of the great coming 
event, the realization of the blessed Hope of the com- 
ing of the Lord for His Saints. That this open door 

2 


18 3 THE REVELATION 


is mentioned immediately after the third chapter and 
John is suddenly in the spirit in the presence of the 
throne in heaven is very significant. It proves that 
the entire situation is now changed. And the first 
great vision is a vision of the Saints in Glory, occupy- 
ing thrones and worshipping God and the Lamb. With 
the sixth chapter the great judgment visions of this 
Book begin. These great punitive dealings with the 
earth are executed from above. All transpires after 
the Lord has taken His Saints into Glory. No seal 
can be broken as long as this event has not been. 
But after the Rapture, the Seals of the Book, which 
the Lamb received, are broken by Him, the trumpet 
and the vial judgments fall upon the earth. All this 
takes place after the home-going of the true Church 
and before the glorious appearing of our Lord Jesus 
Christ (xix: 11, etc.). 

Now this portion of Revelation from chapter vi 
to xix contains the events which transpire during the 
end of the age. It is the unfulfilled seventieth week 
of the great prophecy in the Book of Daniel (Dan. 
ix:24-27). This “end of the age” will last twice 
1260 days, that is seven years. It is absolutely neces- 
sary to understand the scope of the seventy-week 
prophecy in Daniel in order to understand the greater 
part of these chapters in the Revelation.* We are led 
back upon Jewish ground. Events in connection with 
the Jewish people and Jerusalem are before us. The 
times of the Gentiles have taken on their final form 





* “The Prophet Daniel” by A. C. G. contains ai See simple 
exegesis of Daniel’s prophecies. 


THE REVELATION _ 19 


of ten kingdoms which Daniel saw on the fourth beast 
as ten horns, and Nebuchadnezzar on the image as 
ten toes. The empire in which these ten Kingdoms 
come into existence is the Roman empire. It will 
have a revival and come into existence again. Then 
a wicked leader will take the headship of that resur- 
rected Roman empire, and another Beast, the false 
prophet, the Anti-christ will domineer over the Jewish 
people and persecute their saints, the remnant of 
Israel, while the earth and the dwellers upon the earth 
experience the great judgments. The last half of 
these seven years is called the great tribulation. We 
must also remember that our Lord left behind a great 
Prophecy concerning the end of the age. This 
Prophecy is contained in the Olivet Discourse, the 
first part of which (Matt. xxiv: 4-44) harmonizes in 
a striking manner with the events in Revelation vi-xix. 
Our Lord calls special attention to Daniel and likewise 
speaks of the great tribulation. In our brief exposi- 
tion we shall point out some of the interesting and 
convincing details. 

The glorious climax is the visible manifestation of 
the Lord out of heaven, crowned with many crowns,* 
the defeat and overthrow of the Beast and the kings 
of the earth and their armies, the binding of Satan, 
and the reign of Christ with His Saints for a thou- 
sand years. After that follows the great white throne 
judgment, which is the judgment of the wicked dead, 
the glories of the new Jerusalem, the eternal destiny 
of the redeemed and the eternal destiny of the lost. 





* Compare Revelation xix: 11-21 with Daniel vii: 11-14 and 
Matthew xxiv: 27-31. 


20 THE REVELATION 

If this last great Book of the Bible is studied in 
this divinely given order it will no longer be, as is so 
often said, a sealed book. All fanciful interpretations 
and applications of these great visions to past or 
present history can no longer be maintained as soon 
as we reckon with the fact that these visions are not 
yet fulfilled, and are going to be fulfilled after the 
true Church is no longer on the earth. 


The Promised Blessing 


“Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear 
the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things 
which are written therein, for the time is at hand” 
(verse 3). A blessing is promised to him who readeth, 
and who hears and keeps. It does not say that a 
blessing is for him who understands and knows every- 
thing which is in this Book. If such were the con- 
- dition the writer and the reader would have no claim 
on this promised blessing. The Bible-teacher, or any 
other man, who says he knows and understands every- 
thing found in this great finale of God’s Word is very 
much mistaken. We cannot be sure about everything 
in some of these visions and the full meaning of some 
may not be understood till the world sees the fulfill- 
ment. The blessing is promised to all His people who 
give attention to the Revelation of Jesus Christ. 
What is the blessing we may expect through the read- 
ing and prayerful study of the words of this 
Prophecy? 


First of all we receive through this Book.a wonder- 
ful vision of our Saviour and Lord. This is what we 


THE REVELATION ; 21 


need as His people above everything else, and it is 
this which brings blessing into our lives. As stated 
before, this Book is pre-eminently His revelation, a 
blessed unveiling of His person and Glory. But we 
also get another blessing. In reading through this 
Book we see what is in store for this age, what judg- 
ments will overtake the world, and how Satan’s power 
will be manifested to the full upon those who rejected 
His grace. Judgment, tribulation and wrath are 
swiftly coming upon this age. Out of all this our 
gracious Lord has delivered us. There is no judg- 
ment, no wrath for us who know Him as our sin-bearer 
and our hiding-place. Praise must fill our hearts when 
we read the words of this Prophecy and remember 
the grace which has saved us from all which is com- 
ing upon this age. Another blessing is the assurance 
of ultimate victory and glory. Dark is the age, and 
becoming darker, but in Revelation we behold the 
glory which is coming for His Saints first of all and 
after the judgment clouds are gone, for Jerusalem, the 
nations and the earth. Reading Revelation fills the 
heart with the assurance and certainty of the out- 
come of all. It is a solemn atmosphere which fills the 
whole Book of Revelation. As we continue to read 
and continue to breathe this heavenly and solemn at- 
mosphere it will result in a closer walk with God, a 
more spiritual worship and a greater and more un- 
selfish service for Him “Who loveth us and hath 
washed us from our sins in His own blood, and hath 
made us priests and kings unto God His Father.” 


22 THE REVELATION 


THE ANALYSIS OF THE 
REVELATION. 


Title: The Revelation of Jesus Christ. 


I. THE PATMOS VISION OF THE GLORIFIED SON 
OF MAN. CHAPTER I. 


1. The Book, its title and introduction. Verses 1-3. 

2. Greeting and Benediction. Verses 4-5. 

3. The Outburst of Praise. Verses 6-7. 

4. The Testimony of the Almighty. Verse 8. 

5. John in Patmos. Verses 9-II. 

6. The Great Vision of the Son of Man in Glory. 
Verses 12-16. 

7. The Effect and the Commission. Verses 17-21. 


II. THE THINGS WHICH ARE. THE SEVEN 
CHURCH MESSAGES REVEALING THE HIS- 
TORY OF THE CHURCH ON EARTH. CHAP- 
TERS II-III. 


CHAPTER II. 


1. Ephesus, the Post-Apostolic Period. "Verses 1-7. 
2. Smyrna, the Period of Persecution. Verses 8-11. 
3. Pergamos, the Period of Corruption. Verses 12-17. 
4. Thyatira, the-*Romish Corruption. Verses 18-29. 


CHAPTER III. 


5. Sardis, the Reformation Period. Verses 1-6. 

6. Philadelphia, the Faithful Remnant. Verses 7-13. 

7. Laodicea, the Indifferent and Apostate Church. 
Verses 14-22. 


THE REVELATION 23 


III. THE THINGS WHICH ARE AFTER THESE, 
THE END OF THE AGE, THE CONSUM- 
MATION AND THE FINAL MESSAGES. 
CHAPTERS IV-XXII. 


First Division: The Heavenly Scene. Before the Throne. 
Chapters IV-V. 
CHAPTER IV. 3 
1. The Open Door and the Vision of the Throne. 
Verses I-3. 
2. The Twenty-four Elders. Verse 4. 
3. The Description of the Throne. Verse 5. 
4. The Four Living Creatures and the great Praise and 
Worship. Verses 6-11. 


CHAPTER V. 

1. Who is Worthy to open the Book? Verses 1-3. 

2. The Answer. Verse 4-5. 

3. The Vision of the Lamb. Verses 6-7. 

4. The Worship of the Living Creatures and the Elders. 
Verses 8-10. 

5. The Worthiness of the Lamb Acclaimed by all Beings. 
Verses II-14. 


Second Division: The Opening of the Seven Seals. Chap- 
ters VI-VIII: 5. 
CHAPTER VI. 
1. The First Seal. The White Horse; the Conquering 
Rider. Verses 1-2. 
2. The Second Seal. The Red Horse; the Rider with 
the great Sword. Verses 3-4. 
3. The Third Seal. The Black Horse; the Rider with 
the Balance. Verses 5-6. 
4. The Fourth Seal. The Pale Horse; the Rider 
Followed by Hades. Verses 7-8. 
5. The Fifth Seal. The Cry of the Souls Under the 
Altar. Verses 9-11. 
6. The Sixth Seal. The Shaking of all Things. The 
Anticipation of the End. Verses 12-17. 


24 THE REVELATION 
Between the Sixth and Seventh Seal. A Parenthetical 
Vision. (Chapter VII.) 


CHAPTER VII. 
1. The Remnant of Israel Called and Sealed. Verses 
1-8. 
2. The Saved Multitude of Gentiles Coming out of the 
Great Tribulation. Verses 9-17. 
End of the Parenthesis. 
3. The Seventh Seal. Verses 1-5. 


CHAPTER VIII: 1-5. 


Third Division: The Sounding of the Seven Trumpets. 
Chapters VIII: 6-XI: 18. 
CHAPTER VIII: 6-13. 
1. The First Trumpet. Verses 6-7. 
2. The Second Trumpet. Verses 8-9. 
3. The Third Trumpet. Verses 10-11. 
4. The Fourth Trumpet. Verses 12-13. 
CHAPTER IX. 


s. The Fifth Trumpet. The First Woe. Verses I-12. 
6. The Sixth Trumpet. The Second Woe. Verses 
13-21. 


Between the Sixth and Seventh Trumpets. Parenthetical 
Visions. (Chapters X-XI: 14.) 
CHAPTER X. 


1. The Descending Angel. Verses 1-7. 
2. The Little Book. Verses 8-11. 


CHAPTER XI. : 
3. The Temple, Altar and Jewish Worshippers. Verses 
1-2, 


4. The Two Witnesses. Verses 3-6. 

5. The Beast and the Witnesses. Verse 7. 

6. The Treatment of the Slain Witnesses. Verses 8-10. 
7. Their Public Vindication. Verses 11-12. 


THE REVELATION 25 


8. The Great Earthquake. Verses 13-14. 
End of the Parenthesis. 
g. The Seventh Trumpet. Verses 15-18. 


Fourth Division: Satan’s Power and Satan’s Masterpieces. 
Chapter XI: 19-XIII. 


CHAPTER XI: 19. 
1. The Vision of the Opened Temple. Verse 19. 


CHAPTER XII. 
2. The Great Sign. Verses 1-5. 
3. The Escape of the Woman. Verse 6. 
4. War in Heaven, and Satan cast out of Heaven. 
Verses 7-12. 
5. The Dragon Persecuting the Woman. Verses 13-17. 


CHAPTER XIII. 


6. The Beast out of the Sea. Verses 1-10. 
7. The Beast out of the Earth. Verses 11-18. 


Fifth Division: The Power of God in Intervention. Grace 
and Judgment Manifested. Chapter XIV. 


CHAPTER XIV. 

1. The Lamb upon Zion and the 144,000. Verses I-5. 

2. The Proclamation of the Everlasting Gospel. Verses 
6-7. 

3. Babylon has Fallen! Verse 8. 

4. The Eternal Wrath for the Worshippers of the Beast. 
Verses 9Q-II. 

5. The Blessed Dead who Die in the Lord. Verses 
12-13. 

6. The Harvest and the Vintage. Verses 14-20. 


Sixth Division: The Seven Angels Having Seven Plagues; 
the Vials of Wrath. Chapters XV-XVI. 


CHAPTER XV. 
1. The Seven Angels with the Seven Plagues. Verse I. 


26 THE REVELATION 


"2, Another Scene of Worship. Verses 2-4. 
3. The Seven Angels Proceeding out of the Temple. 
Verses 5-8. . 
CHAPTER XVI. 

4. The First Vial. Verses 1-2. 

5. The Second Vial. Verse 3. 

6. The Third Vial. Verses 4-7. 

7. The Fourth Vial. Verses 8-9. 

8. The Fifth Vial. Verses 10-11. 

9. The Sixth Vial. Verse 12. 


Between the Sixth and Seventh Vial, Parenthetical Vision. 
Verses 13-16. 


10. The Seventh Vial. Verses 17-21. 


Seventh Division: The Great Harlot, Babylon, and her 
Judgment. Chapters XVII-XVIII. 


CHAPTER XVII. 


1, The Description of the Woman. 
2. The Interpretation by the Angel. Verses 7-15. 
3. The Destruction of the Harlot. Verses 16-18. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


. The Angelic Announcement. Verses 1-3. 

. The Call to Separate. Verses 4-5. 

. Her pride and Righteous Destruction. Verses 6-8. 

. The Universal Lamentation over Her. Verses 9-10. 

. The Rejoicing Heavens. Verse 20. 

. Her Utter and Everlasting Destruction. Verses 
21-23. 

10. The Blood of the Saints found in Her. Verse 24. 


© ON Au 


Eighth Division: The Manifestation of the King and the 
Millennium. Chapters XIX-XX: 6. 


CHAPTER XIX. 


1. The Four Hallelujahs in Heaven. The Marriage 
of the Lamb. Verses 1-10, . 


THE REVELATION 27 


2, Heaven Opened. The Coming of the King. Verses 
11-16. 

3. The Battle of Armageddon and the Execution of 
Wrath. Verses 17-21. 


CHAPTER XxX: 1-6. 
4. The Binding of Satan. Verses 1-4. 
5. The Reign of Christ and His Saints for a Thousand 
Years. Verses 5-6. 


Ninth Division: After the Thousand Years. The Vision 
of the New Jerusalem. Chapters XX: 7-XXII: 5. 


CHAPTER XX: 09-15. 
1. Satan Loosed. The Last Revolt. Verses 7-9. 
2. Satan’s Eternal Doom. Verse Io. 
3. The Great White Throne Judgment. Verses II-I5. 


CHAPTER XXI. 
4. The Eternal State. Verses 1-8. 
5. The Vision of the Holy City of Jerusalem. Verses 
9-27. 
CHAPTER XXII: 1-5. 
6. The River and the Tree of Life. Verses 1-2. 
7. The Seven Glories of the Redeemed. Verses 3-5. 


Tenth Division: The Final Messages. Chapter XXII: 6-21. 
CHAPTER XXII: 6-21. 

1. The Angel’s Message. Verses 6-11. 

2. The Message of the Lord. Verses 12-13. 

3. The Two Classes. Verses 14-15. 

4. The Final Testimony of Christ Concerning Himself. 

Verse 16. 
The Answer of the Spirit and the Bride. Verse 17. 
. The Final Warning. Verses 18-19. 
. The Final Message; the Final Prayer; the Final 
Benediction, Verses 20-21. 


Ou 


28 THE REVELATION 
EXEGETICAL ANNOTATIONS 
I. The Patmos Vision of the Glorified Son of Man, 
Chapter I 


I. The Book: Its Title and Introduction. Verses 
1-3. As we have already spoken of the title and the 
prophetic character of the book,.we do not repeat 
it here. The book does not contain, as it is often said 
“revelations,” but one great revelation and that the 
Revelation of Jesus Christ. And this revelation is 
“to show unto His servants things which must shortly 
come to pass,” so that they may know the future 
and serve Him with the Glory-light thrown upon 
their path. The vision of the future is much needed 
as an incentive for true and devoted service. 

2. Greeting and Benediction. Verses 4-5. 'The 
churches which John addressed were in the Province 
of Asia, not the continent Asia, but one of the prov- 
inces of Asia Minor. (See Acts xvi:6; xix: 10, etc.). 
These seven churches are representatives of the en- 
tire church, and prophetically unfold the history of 
the church on earth. “Grace unto you and Peace” 
is the greeting. Grace and peace are the blessed pos- 
sessions of the true children of God. Though the pro- 
fessing church may fail in her testimony, and the 
dark days of apostasy increase, grace and peace for 
God’s servants and children will never fail. The 
greeting differs from those found in the Epistles. In 
the Epistles the greetings come from the Father and 


of takin tai 


THE REVELATION 29 


the Son; the Holy Spirit being omitted. Here Jehovah 
is mentioned first, “who is, who was and who is to 
come’—“the I Am that I am’”—the Self-existing One 
(Ex. iii: 14). Then comes the Holy Spirit, spoken 
of here as “the seven Spirits.” Not as the “one Spirit” 
(Eph. iv:4; 1 Cor. xii:13) is He mentioned, but in 
His own complete fullness and His diverse activities 
(Isaiah xi:2). And finally the name of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. “He is the faithful witness ;” this de- 
scribes His holy and perfect life on earth. “The first 
begotten from the dead.” He died that shameful death 
on the cross and finished the Work the Father gave 
Him to do. Risen from the dead He is the first be- 
gotten as well as the first fruits. “The Prince of the 
kings of the earth.” This is His future title ‘and 
reveals His coming Glory. What comfort there is 
here for God’s people! Oh, the grace and peace 
which flow from a believing contemplation of Him- 
self and the knowledge that we are one with Him! 

3. The Outburst of Praise. Verses 6-7. 'The last 
sentence of verse 5 belongs to verse 6. This inspired 
outburst of Praise is the true Glory song of the true 
Church. It contains the blessed fundamentals of the 
Gospel of Grace, what He has done for us and what 
He has made us and what we shall be with Him. It 
is the first doxology in this book. Others follow and 
increase in adoration. ‘Twofold here; threefold in 
iv: 11; fourfold in v:13; sevenfold in vii:12. The 
tribute is followed by a testimony of His Coming. It 
is not His coming for His Saints but His coming to 
the earth. Compare with Acts i:11; Matthew xxiv: 
30; Daniel vii: 13; Zech. xii: 9-14. 


30 THE REVELATION 

4. The Testimony of the Almighty. Verse 8. God, 
so to speak, puts His seal to it all. The words of the 
preceding verse “Even so Amen” must be read with 
this verse. The speaker is Jehovah. 

5. John in Patmos. Verses 9-11. John was in 
banishment in the isle of Patmos and “became in the 
Spirit on the Lord’s day.” Does this mean “the Day 
of the Lord” 7. e. the day on which He comes in power 
and glory to begin His reign, or does it mean the 
blessed memorial day, the first day of the week? It 
means without doubt the latter. 

6. The Great Vision of the Glorified Son of Man. 
Verses 12-16. John turned to see the voice. He 
beheld the greatest vision human eyes have seen. The 
seven golden candlesticks (lamp-stands) represent the 
seven churches (verse 20) and are symbolical of the 
entire church. He himself is “in the midst” and 
seen by John “like unto a Son of Man.” But the 
vision makes it clear that He is more than a Son of 
Man, for He is the Ancient of Days as well. The 
title Son of Man belongs to Him both in His humilia- 
tion and exaltation. He was the Son of Man on 
earth; he is the Son of Man in Glory; and when He 
comes back to earth and receives the kingdom, it will 
be as Son of Man. Judgment will be executed by 
Him. In this vision His judicial character is the lead- 
ing feature. He is clothed with a robe down to His 
feet. While this denotes priestly dignity we see Him 
not engaged in priestly activity. The long-robed 
figure expresses the great dignity of Himself as the 
Priest-King who is about to enter upon His work as 
Judge. The golden girdle is symbolical of divine 


——— 


THE REVELATION 31 


righteousness; His white head and hair identify Him 
with the Ancient of Days who sits in judgment 
(Daniel vii:9-12). The flaming eyes, all searching ; 
the fiery burning feet; the voice like the sound of 
many waters (Psalm xxix); the two-edged sword; 
the face which was once marred and dishonored, now 
shining like the sun—all is symbolical and speaks of 
the great dignity and glory and the judicial rights of 
the Son of Man. His judgment in this book begins 
at the house of God, that which professes His Name; 
judgment is executed by Him on the earth and all 
culminates in His visible and glorious appearing, when 
all things will be put in subjection under His feet. 


There is one feature of the vision which needs an 
explanation. What do the seven stars mean, which 
are in the right hand of the Son of Man? Verse 20 
gives the answer. “They are the seven angels of the 
seven churches. Angels and stars are symbolical 
figures. The application of these terms to church- 
officers or bishops and pastors is incorrect. Stars are 
used in Scripture to typify true believers. Stars are 
heavenly bodies which shine during the night; so are 
true believers in a heavenly position with the respon- 


sibility to shine in the night. The lamp-stands repre- | 


sent the visible, professing church; the stars represent 


the true believing element in the Church. They are | 
in the right hand of Himself, held securely there. — 


Furthermore, only true believers have an ear to hear 
what the Spirit saith. The stars are called angels, be- 
cause an angel is a messenger and true believers are 
likewise that. 


t 
‘ 
/ 


32 THE REVELATION 

7. The Effect of the Vision and the Commission. 
Verses 17-20. John fell at His feet as dead; the 
vision was overpowering. Compare with Daniel 
x:4-11. But He put His hand upon Him. Blessed is 
His own testimony. He is the Living One, which 
means “Jehovah.” He was dead. And alive forever- 
more; He is risen from the dead and hath the keys 
of Death and of Hades. Then follows the command 
to write which we have fully explained in the intro- 
duction. , 


a ——s 


THE REVELATION 33 


Hi. The Things Which Are. The Seven 
Church Messages Revealing the 
History of the Church on Earth 
Chapters II and III 


These two chapters are extremely rich in prophetic 
and spiritual truths. “The things which are,” the 
second division of this book, is now before us. The 
churches mentioned in the two chapters, and never 
after, actually existed. They can easily be located 
geographically and traced historically. We do not 
attempt this as it has no spiritual value. These mes- 
sages of course had a deep and significant meaning 
for the different local assemblies. That there are 
many spiritual lessons written in these messages, is 
also true. However, all this must take a secondary 
place. The primary thing is the prophetic interpre- 
tation. ‘The seven churches represent the entire 
Church on earth, as already stated, and the con- 
ditions of these seven churches foreshadow the dif- 
ferent periods of the Church on earth from the 
Apostolic times to the ending days, when the Lord 
calls His Saints to meet Him in the air. There were 
many hundreds of churches in existence throughout 
the countries where the Gospel had been preached. 
But messages from the Glorified Son of Man were not 
sent to all of them. Only seven, and these closely con- 
nected in the province of Asia, were selected by the 
Lord. The Son of Man is the omniscient Lord and 
as such He knows the end from the beginning. He 
knew the entire history of the Church from the begin- 


3 


34 THE REVELATION 


ning. He knew the coming persecutions, declensions, 
revivals, the perversions of His truth, the denials of 
His Name, the depths of Satan and the final apostasy. 
In the days of His humiliation that future was not 
hidden from Him, for in the Kingdom parables He 
revealed the religious conditions of this Christian age 
(Matthew xiii). With divine knowledge of what 
this age would bring forth and how it would end, 
He looked with His all-searching eyes into the con- 
dition of the different churches. He saw in seven 
of them conditions which were in embryo, the con- 
ditions through which the whole church on earth 
would pass, so that we have in these seven messages, 
which uncover the state of the different churches, the 
spiritual and religious history of Christendom. Our 
hints on all this must necessarily be brief, but enough 
' will be given to prove the application. 

rt. Ephesus, the Apostolic and Post-Apostolic Period. 
Verses 1-7. Ephesus means “desired”; the Church is 
the object of His love, as is so beautifully stated in 
the Epistle to the Ephesians. He loved the Church 
and gave Himself for it; He cleanseth and sanctifieth 
it and He will present it to Himself a glorious Church 
(Ephes. v: 25-27). To that Church was communicated 
the highest revelation, especially the truth concerning 
the Church as the body and glory of Christ. Ephesus 
stands therefore for ‘the first period of the Church 
on earth. The Lord bears witness to its faithfulness. 
For His Name’s sake they labored and fainted not. 
What is especially a mark of the Apostolic and post- 
Apostolic times is the statement “thou hast tried or 
tested them which say they are apostles and are not, 


iy neoaiaee 


ee 


THE REVELATION 35 


and hast found them liars.” Compare this with 2 
Cor. xi: 13 “for such are false apostles, deceitful (ly- 
ing) workers.” Men arose who pretended to be 
apostles even while the apostles were still living and 
more so after their departure. But the early church 
did not tolerate these false apostles who appeared in 
large numbers during the second half of the first 
century. ‘The deeds of the Nicolaitanes they also 


? hated. What the Nicolaitanes were we shall find later. 


But the Lord touches the sore spot, the beginning of 


evil in the words “I have against thee because thou 


hast left thy first love.” What is the first love? The 
Apostle Paul in his heart devotion to the Person of 


Christ, with His burning desire to know Christ and 


to win Christ, with His wonderful confession “Christ 
is all in all’—‘“not I, but Christ,” illustrates the first 
love. The affection for Christ and devotion to Him, 

the One altogether lovely, was waning. Outwardly 
everything may have looked right, but the Lord, who 
desires the deepest affection of His people, knew that 
their hearts were departing from Him. ‘This is the 
starting point of all church and individual failure. 
Their hearts were growing cold towards Himself. 
Think it over! The beginning of evil, in doctrine or 
in life, is heart-departure from Christ, and not giving 
Christ the pre-eminence. Read also Paul’s prediction 
concerning Ephesus and what should come after his 
departure (Acts xx: 29-30). 

2. Smyrna, the Period of Persecution. Verses 8-11. 
Smyrna stands for the next period up to about 313 
A.D. Smyrna means “myrrh,” which was one of the 
ingredients of the perfume used for the embalming 


36 THE REVELATION 
of the dead. The Lord in addressing this church 
speaks of Himself as He “who was dead and is 
alive.” It is the Church in tribulation and persecu- 
tion. This is clearly marked in the message itself. 
“Behold the devil shall cast some of you into prison 
that ye may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation 
ten days; be thou faithful unto death and I will give 
thee a crown of life.” Such a martyr-period is re- 
corded in the history of the Church. The number 
ten is of special interest, for history informs us that 
there were just ten great persecutions of Christians 
by the Roman emperors. It was the work of the 
devil. Persecution of the Saints of God by pagan 
Rome, papal Rome or by any other power, is always 
the devil’s work. But who are those mentioned here 
and in the message to Philadelphia, who say they are 
Jews and are not, but are of the synagogue of Satan? 
It is a Judaized Christianity and with it a perverted 
and obscured Gospel. That evil was present in the 
apostolic age; it is fully manifested in our own days. 
They deny the Gospel of Grace and put in its place 
the Gospel of works and salvation by character in 
keeping the law. They make much of Sabbath- 
keeping, ordinances and religious observances and yet 
with it all they obscure the Cross and deny the Blood. 
They are the synagogue of Satan, brought together by 
that cunning being as a religious company. It is the 
false, the spurious Church as we see it almost uni- 
versally about us. 

3. Pergamos, the Period of Worldly Corruption. 
Verses 12-17. Pergamos means “a thorough mar- 
riage.” Pergamos is described as dwelling where 


THE REVELATION 37 


Satan’s throne (not seat) is. And Satan’s throne is 
not in Hell, but his throne is in the world, this present 
evil age, whose god he is (2 Cor. iv:4). This shows 
prophetically that period when the church gave up 
her pilgrim character and was thoroughly married to 
the world. A great change took place. When the 
devil found that “the blood of the martyrs is the 
seed of the Church” he stopped his work as the roar- 
ing lion and took on the form of an angel of light. 
What had led to Israel’s ruin was brought by the 
enemy into the professing Church, that is an unholy 
alliance with the world. The instrument used to 
accomplish this was the Emperor Constantine. The 
suffering, persecuted Church became joined to the 
world, wedded to the state; Constantine made the 
Church a world-institution. ‘This third church-period 
corresponds to the third parable in Matthew xiii. The 
little mustard seed became a big tree, rooted in the 
field (the world) and the branches filled with birds 
(representing unconverted people). Church historians 
have spoken of Constantine’s work as the work of 
God and a victory of Christianity. -It was rather the 
opposite, the work of the enemy and the defeat of true 
Christianity. The name of Balaam appears also. 
When he could not curse Israel, he put the daughters 
of Midian and Moab amongst the people of God and 
in the unlawful mixture which followed he succeeded 
in hurting Israel (Numbers xxxi:16; xxv: I-2; Jude 
ii). And here the Nicolaitanes are mentioned for the 
second and last time. ‘The best and perhaps only solu- 
tion of this mysterious word is to examine its mean- 
ing. It is a Greek compound. Nikao means to have 


38 THE REVELATION 


the upper hand, to domineer; Jaos means, the people 
(our English “laity”’). Nicolaitanes signifies “the 
domineerers of the people.” A priestly class had 
sprung up in the church, domineering over the rest 
of the people, the so-called laity. And this domineer- 
ing class claimed a superior place in the body of 
Christ and a priesthood which rightly belongs to the 
Lord Jesus Christ. This evil was rejected in Ephesus, 
but is fully sanctioned and tolerated in Pergamos. 
Priestly assumption became then, and ever since has 
been, the corruption of Christianity. This is what 
our Lord hates and what He hates we must hate with 
Him. 

4. Thyatira, the Period of the Romish Corruption. 
‘Verses 18-29, The corruption which set in like a 
great flood with the fourth century increased till the 
depths of Satan (verse 24) were reached. Thyatira 
brings us into the period of the Papacy and its wicked- 
ness, ecclesiastical and otherwise. Here our Lord re- 
veals Himself as “the Son of God.” Rome speaks 
more of Him as the son of the virgin, the son of 
Mary, than as the Son of God. The Roman Catholic 
apostasy has put a woman in the place of the Son of 
God. Her corruption is fully reveled in verse 20. 
Jezebel, who called herself a prophetess, was permitted 
to teach and seduce God’s servants to commit forni- 
cation and to eat things sacrificed unto idols. Jezebel 
the wicked woman represents the Papacy. Jezebel 
was a heathenish woman married to an Israelitish 
King. She was a queen and an idolatress and perse- 
cuted the true prophets of God (1 Kings xviii-xxi). 
Apply all this to the Romish church with her spiritual 


THE REVELATION 39 


fornication and idolatry. The church—more strictly 
speaking the Papacy—assumes the place of teacher 
and dictator; and Christ is rejected. Jezebel has a 
double meaning. It means “the chaste one” but also 
means “a dunghill.” Rome claims to be the Bride 
of Christ, but in reality is a dunghill of all vileness 
and corruption. In verse 21 is another significant 
statement “she repents not” (repented is incorrect). 
Rome does not change. She is the same to-day as 
she was 500 years ago. She exists to-day and will 
continue in her impenitent state till the predicted doom 
will overtake her (verse 22; chapter xvii-xviii). In 
the fourth kingdom parable (Matthew xiii) cor- 
responding to this fourth church-period, our Lord 
speaks of a woman, who took leaven (corruption) and 
put it into the fine, pure, three measures of meal 
(symbolical of the doctrine of Christ). The woman 
in the parable of the leaven is Rome, the Jezebel in 
the message to Thyatira. 


Chapter III 


5. Sardis, the Period of the Reformation and 
Protestantism. Verses 1-6. We have traced briefly 
the decline during the 1450-1500 years of Church 
history. The climax is reached in Thyatira, propheti- 
cally the Roman abomination and apostasy. In Sardis 
we see the progress of evil stayed. Roman Catholi- 
cism, as already mentioned, is a fixed and unchanging 
religious system. Rome will yet have for a brief 
season a startling revival and get back her place as 
the mistress of the nations. But in Sardis we see a 
reaction. Sardis means “those escaping.” It is the 


40 THE REVELATION 

reformation period, the movement which produced 
Protestantism. The reformation itself was of God 
and the great men who were used were the most 
mighty instruments of the Holy Spirit. It was the 
greatest work, up to that time, since the days of the 
apostles. But out of it came the human systems 
which go by the name of Protestantism. The refor- 
mation began well, but soon developed in the different 
Protestant systems into a dead, lifeless thing. They 
have a name to live but are dead. This is the verdict 
of our Lord upon the churches which sprung out of 
the reformation: “Thou hast a name that thou livest 
and art dead.” 

6. Philadelphia, the Faithful Remnant. Verses 7-13. 
Philadelphia means “brotherly love.” As Sardis came 
out of Thyatira, a protest against it, so Philadelphia 
comes out of Sardis and is a protest against the dead, 
lifeless, Spiritless condition prevailing in Protestant- 
ism. Out of the deadness of the state churches over 
and over again came forth companies of believers, 
energized by the Holy Spirit. Philadelphia has been 
variously applied to Methodism, the evangelical move- 
‘ments, missionary efforts and to the revivals of the 
nineteenth century. But it is more than that. It is a 
complete return to the first principles. ‘The message 
makes this clear. It is the one message (be- 
sides Smyrna) in which the Lord does not say “I 
have against thee,” it is that which pleases Him and 
which He commends. It is a revival and turning back 
to the first love. The Lord Jesus Christ is once more 
as the all absorbing object before the heart; Philadel- 
phia repudiates all that dishonors Him and owns alone 


THE REVELATION AY 


that worthy, ineffable Name. It is a faithful remnant 
gathering around His Name as there was a faithful 
remnant in the closing days of the Old Testament 
(Mal. iii: 16-17). All human pretensions are rejected. 
The truth of the unity of all believers is owned and 
manifested in brotherly love towards all the Saints. 
They walk in the path of separation, in self-judgment, 
in lowliness of mind; they have a little strength, which 
means weakness; they are a feeble few. Twice the 
Lord speaks of obedience to His Word. “Thou hast 
kept my Word”’—“Thou has kept the Word of my 
patience.” And the Philadelphian does not deny His 
Name. These are the two chief characteristics of this 
phase of Christianity during the closing days of the 
professing Church on earth: Obedience to His Word 
and faithfulness and devotion to His Name. The 
Word and the Name are denied in the last days. The 
apostasy of Christendom consists in the rejection of 
the written Word and the living Word. And turning 
their backs upon a dead profession, going on in con- 
fessed weakness are such paralyzed in their service? 
Far from it! The Lord promises to open the door 
for service which no man can shut. Every child of 
God may test this. True and continued service is the 
result of true and continued faithfulness to the Lord. 
Especially is this service to be blessed to those who 
hold to a perverted Judaism (verse 9). And there is 
the great promise for them, which they believe and 
hope for, the coming of Himself to keep them out of 
the great tribulation (verse 10). In Philadelphia there 
is a revival of prophetic truth, an earnest waiting 
for the coming of the Lord. Philadelphia is not a 


42 THE REVELATION 


defined church-period, but rather a description of a 
loyal remnant called out by the Spirit of God and 
bearing the final testimony to the whole counsel of 
God by word and deed. If the reader desires to please 
the Lord then study the details of the message to 
Philadelphia and walk accordingly. 

7. Laodicea, the Indifferent and Apostate Church. 
Verses 14-22. Laodicea means “The judging or rights 
of the People.” It is opposite of Nicolaitanism. The 
domineerers of the people still go on in Rome, but 
in Protestantism the people (the laity) arise and claim 
their rights and do the judging. ‘This condition was 
also foreseen by the Apostle Paul. “For the time will 
come when they (the laity) will not endure sound doc- 
trine; but after their own lusts shall they heap to 
themselves teachers, having itching ears” (2 Tim. 
iv:3). We see in Laodicea the final religious and 
apostate conditions of protestant Christendom and 
the complete rejection of the professing body. “I 
will spue thee out of my mouth.” He Himself is seen 
standing outside, which shows that He is rejected. 
But infinite Grace! He knocks and is still willing to 
come in and bestow the riches of His Grace. And the 
Philadelphian-Christian, who is separated from the 
Laodicean state, whose heart is filled with the Love 
of Christ can learn a lesson here. If our Lord stands 
outside and yet knocks and waits in patience, we too 
with Him outside of the camp where He is disowned, 
can try to gain admittance to Laodicean hearts. 
Epaphras did this (Col. iv: 12-13). Laodicea con- 
sists in a proudly boasting spirit with total indifference 
to the Lord Jesus Christ and to His Name. It is 


THE REVELATION 43 


religiousness without any truth nor the power of the 
Holy Spirit. Lukewarmness expresses it all. “Luke- 
warmmness, a perfect jumble of sacred and wordly 
matters. The word does not point chiefly to half- 
heartedness. But as lukewarmness is produced by 
pouring of hot and cold water together into the same 
vessel, so in the Laodicean state, intense wordliness 
will be varnished over by plausible and humanitarian 
and religious pretences.” Great reformation move- 
ments for the advancement of religion and the better- 
ment of the world, the rejection of the Gospel as the 
power of God unto salvation, are characteristic fea- 
tures of this final phase of Christendom. It will con- 
tinue and wax worse and worse till His patience is 
exhausted. ‘Then the true church will be caught up 
with the departed Saints to meet Him in the air, and 
Laodicea will be spued out of His mouth. It is im- 
portant to notice that Thyatira (Rome), Sardis 
(Protestantism) and the two phases of Protestantism 
represented by Philadelphia and Laodicea co-exist. 
They go on together. This is seen by the fact that 
in each our Lord speaks of His second coming (ii: 25; 
iii: 3; iv:10-11, 16). The Lord takes His own to 
Himself. Rome and an apostate Protestant Christen- 
dom continue on earth during the period of judgment, 
preceding the visible coming of the Lord. 


44 THE REVELATION 


III. The Things Which Are After These. The 
End of the Age. The Consummation 
and the Final Messages 


Chapters IV-XXII 
FIRST SUBDIVISION. THE HEAVENLY SCENE. 
BEFORE THE THRONE. 
Chapters IV-V 


Chapter IV. The Open Door and the Vision of the 
Throne. Verses 1-3. The scene changes suddenly. 
We are no longer on earth but are transported into 
heaven. The true church is gone and the apostate 
Church while still on earth to pass into the judgments 
of the great tribulation, is no longer owned by the 
Lord and therefore not mentioned. That is why the 
word “church” disappears entirely from this book 
after the third chapter. The open door and the voice 
which calls “come up hither” and John’s presence in 
glory in the spirit, clearly indicate symbolically the 
fulfilment of 1 Thess. iv:15-17. That for which the 
faithful remnant waited, the blessed hope of the 
Church, has suddenly come to pass. The departure 
of the true Church from the earth will be as sudden 
as its beginning (Acts ii: 1-2), Surely the gathering 
of all the Saints in glory must some day take place. 
He promised it (John xiv:1-3). He prayed for it 
(John xvii: 24). The Holy Spirit in the Epistles bears 
constant witness to it. The shout, perhaps the same 
words which John heard “Come up hither,” wilt open 
the graves of all the Saints, and those who are on 


THE REVELATION 45 


earth at that time will be caught up; yes dear reader, 
we are authorized to say “we who remain shall be 
caught up together with them in clouds to meet the 
Lord in the air.” 

John’s first vision in heaven is the established 
throne, the sign and symbol of the universal govern- 
ment of God. While thrones on earth begin to totter 
and to fall and man’s day closes in the predicted up- 
heavals, there is a throne which cannot be affected 
nor disturbed. Yea, He who sitteth there and looks 
down upon earth and sees man’s rebellion and madness 
laughs at them and holds them in derision (Psalm 
1i:4). The occupant of the throne was to look upon 
like a Jasper and a Sardine stone. They were the 
first and the last precious stones in the breastplate 
of the High priest, only the Sardine stone is there the 
first while here it is mentioned last. The names of 
Benjamin (“the son of the right hand”) and Reuben 
(behold a son!) were engraven upon these two stones 
(Exod. xviii: 17-20). The Sardine, probably identical 
with the ruby, is a blood-red stone. The Jasper is not 
the common Jasper of little value. See chapter xxi: II. 
Many think it is the diamond or perhaps the opal. 
Our Lord and the glory of His Person are thus sym- 
bolically represented in these stones. His glory in 
the brilliant stone, His redemption work in the blood- 
red Sardine. The rainbow in emerald-green tells us 
that in the judgments about to come upon the earth 
mercy will be also remembered. It is the covenant 
sign. Though judgments come, yet mercy is in store 
for Israel and the earth. 

“2, The Twenty-four Elders. Verse 4. Who is 


46 THE REVELATION 


represented by these twenty-four elders? They cannot 
be angels. Angels are never seen seated upon thrones, 
(not seats as in the authorized version) nor are they 
crowned, nor can they sing redemption’s song as the 
Elders do. There is only one possible meaning. They 
represent the redeemed, the Saints in glory. They 
are Priests (clothed in white) and they are Kings 
(crowned) ; they are the royal priesthood in the pres- 
ence of the throne. And why twenty-four? It points 
us back to the work David did for the temple. He 
appointed twenty-four courses of the priests (1 Chron. 
xxiv). Twice twelve would suggest the Saints of the 
Old and New Testament. 

3. The Description of the Throne. Verse 5. There 
were lightnings and voices and thunderings. ‘This is 
repeatedly stated. See viii:5; xi:18; xvi:18. It is 
the symbol of God’s throne in its judicial aspect. 
And He who occupies that throne is our Lord. 
Heaven’s throne, so to speak, is getting ready for the 
judgments. And the Elders are in perfect peace, 
undisturbed by these otherwise terrifying manifesta- 
tions, sitting before the throne. ‘There is no judgment 
for them, they are safe at home. 

4. The Four Living Creatures and the Great Praise 
and Worship. Verses 6-11. The sea of glass is a 
reminder of the great laver in Solomon’s temple in 
which the priests had to wash. Now it is solidified 
because no more water is needed for the cleansing of 
the Saints. The word “beast” should be changed to 
“living creatures” or “living ones.” They are not sym- 
bolical of the church, or a special class of saints, but 
they are the same supernatural beings seen in the 


THE REVELATION 47 


Old Testament and always in connection with the 
throne and the presence of Jehovah. They are the 
cherubim of Ezekiel’s great vision, chapters i and x. 
Their constant cry, “Holy, Holy,” reminds us of the 
seraphim also. (Isaiah vi). The worship here is the 
worship of Him who is the Creator. 

“The saints here fall down before the throne, bow 
themselves before His place in glory, and worship Him 
in His endless being, and lay down their given glory 
before His supreme and proper glory, ascribing all 
glory to Him, as alone worthy of it; but here, accord- 
ing to the nature of the celebration of it, the Creator 
for whom all things are. In all changes these remained 
true. It will be remarked here, that the living crea- 
tures only celebrate and declare; the Elders worship 
with understanding. All through the Revelation the 
Elders give their reason for worshipping. ‘There is 
spiritual intelligence in them.” * 

Chapter V. 1. Who is worthy to Open the Book? 
Verses 1-3. Much has been written about the mean- 
ing of the book written within and sealed with seven 
seals. What the book contains is no secret whatever. 
Beginning with the sixth chapter the seals are opened 
and after they are all broken the contents of the book 
are made known. ‘The book contains the judgments 
for this earth preceding His coming in power and 
glory and the beginning of His reign. It is there- 
fore the book of the righteous judgments of God, 
preceding the glorious manifestation of the King of 
kings. The same figure of a book is found in Ezekiel 





* Synopsis. 


48 THE REVELATION 
ii:9g-10. And who is worthy to open this book and 
make known, as well as execute, its contents? 

2. The Answer. Verses 4-5. John receives the an- 
swer to the question the strong angel had proclaimed. 
One of the Elders told him “Behold the lion of the 
tribe of Judah, the Root of David, has prevailed to 
open the book, and the seven seals thereof.” No 
further comment is needed; the Lord Jesus Christ is 
the Lion of Judah and the Root of David. “The 
King’s wrath is as a roaring lion” (Prov. xix:12). 
He is now to be revealed in mighty power and strength 
to execute Judgment. See Genesis xlix:9. And He is 
also the Root of David. Both terms tell us that 
Judah and the house of David will be remembered in 
mercy when the judgment sweeps over the earth. The 
time is at hand when the Davidic covenant-promise 
will be fully accomplished by Him who is the Lion 
of the tribe of Judah. 

3. The Vision of the Lamb. Verses 6-7. ‘And now 
He is seen who alone is worthy to open the book. He 
does not appear as a Lion in majesty, but He is seen 
by John as a Lamb standing, as having been slain. 
The Lamb slain is the Lion. His victory was gained 
by dying, and therefore He must have as the Lion the 
victory over all His enemies. "Thrice the number 
seven is repeated revealing His perfection. Notice 
especially three descriptions. He is “in the midst.” 
He is the center of God’s government and of heaven 
itself, as He is for His people the center of all their 
thoughts and affections. He is seen “as a Lamb stand- 
ing.” Now He is seated at the right hand.of God, 
but when the time comes when His enemies are about 


THE REVELATION 49 


to be made His footstool, He will arise to act. He 
will arise and have mercy upon Zion (Psalm cii: 12). 
And He is seen as “the Lamb slain.” The Greek word 
here suggests “slain in sacrifice.” In His body after 
His resurrection the disciples saw the nail-prints and 
the wound the spear had made (John xx: 20, 25, 27). 
Here when He is about to take to Himself His rights, 
purchased by His death on the cross, about to usher 
in His reign, the wound-prints are also seen. And 
when He comes in great power and glory the same 
tokens of His passion will be visible, for they shall 
look on Him whom they pierced. And what an inde- 
scribable scene when He took the book! 

4. The Worship of the Living Creatures and the 
Elders. Verses 8-to. A great worship scene follows 
at once. The four living Creatures join in with the 
Elders, but the latter alone have harps and golden 
bowls full of incense, which are the prayers of the 
Saints. The harps express their great joy and praise 
and the bowls full of incense denote the priestly 
ministry of the redeemed. Such is part of our glorious 
future, an endless praise of deepest joy, and perfect 
ministry. The prayers of the Saints are not the 
prayers of the past, but the prayers of Jewish saints, 
so beautifully re-written in the Psalms, when the 
time of Jacob’s trouble is on “he earth. And then 
the new song! ‘This is redemption’s song, the song 
of redeeming love; the old song was the praise of God 
as the Creator in His glory (Job xxxvili:7). Redemp- 
tion is now accomplished for the Saints in glory; 
they look forward to the glorious manifestation with 
Himself and the great new song bursts forth in all 


4 


50 THE REVELATION 


its wonderful meaning. Better rendering is “Worthy 
art Thou to take the book, and to open the seals 
thereof; for Thou wast slain, and didst purchase unto 
God by Thy blood, out of every tribe, and tongue, 
and people, and nation and madest them unto our 
God kings and priests, and they shall reign over the 
earth.” He and His worthiness are the great theme. 
He is worthy; He was slain; He hath purchased ; 
He purchased the glory for His own. No other wor- 
ship will be known in heaven. Happy are we if we 
sing redemption’s song down here in blessed antici- 
pation of the soon coming consummation, when we 
shall see Him as He is “in the midst” and enter upon 
our never ending and glorious inheritance. 

5. The Worthiness of the Lamb Acclaimed by all 
Beings. Verses 11-14. Praise of Him becomes uni- 
verse-wide. The innumerable company of angels join 
in it. “The number of them was myriads of myraids 
and thousands of thousands.” * And the Praise de- 
scribed here leads us on to the time when God 
will be all in all. It is the never ending praise, the 
Hallelujah-chorus of redeemed Creation! The four 
living creatures say “Amen”; the Elders worship. 
Omit “Him that liveth forever and ever,” as these 
words do not belong here. 





* This is according to the Greek, 


THE REVELATION 51 


SECOND DIVISION. THE OPENING OF THE 
SEVEN SEALS. 


Chapters VI-VIII: 5 


The Lamb, invested with all the authority to execute 
judgment, having received His commission from God, 
begins now to open the seals of the book which is 
in His hands, the hands which were once nailed to the 
cross. It is evident that the breaking of the seals does 
not begin till His Saints are gathered around the 
throne in glory. Until then it is still the day of grace. 
Read Isaiah Ixi: 1-2 and compare with Luke iy: 18-19. 
When He read from the book in the synagogue of 
Nazareth, He stopped with the sentence “to proclaim 
the acceptable year of the Lord.” He did not read 
“and the day of vengeance of our God.” When the 
Saints are gathered home, when the true Church is 
received into glory, the acceptable year of the Lord 
ends. The door will be shut as far as the nations 
of Christendom are concerned and the days of venge- 
ance will be executed.* 

In Matthew xxiv, in the great prophetic Olivet 
Discourse, our Lord speaks of the end of the age, It 
is the end of the interrupted Jewish age, the final 
seven years of the prophecy in Daniel (Chapter ix). 
The first thing which our Lord mentions is, what He 
calls, “the beginning of sorrows” (Matt. xxiv:8). 
This is fulfilled in the seal judgments. 

Chapter VI. 1. The First Seal. The White Horse: 
the Conquering Rider. Verses 1-2. When the first 
seal is opened one of the living creatures said in voice 





* But see Chap. VII. 


34 THE REVELATION 

of thunder: “Come.” The words “and see” must be 
‘ omitted here and in verses 3, 5 and 7. A rider upon 
a white horse appears; his is a bloodless conquest. 
He has a bow, but no arrow. He receives a crown and 
goes forth to conquer. Many expositors make this 
rider the Lord Jesus or some power which represents 
Him. It is positively incorrect. The Lord is indeed 
pictured as a rider upon a white horse, but when He 
comes it will be at the close of the judgment and 
tribulation period and His victorious conquest will be 
far different from the rider under the first seal. 
Read carefully Psalm xlv:1-5; Zech. ix:9-14; Rev. 
X1X: II, etc., also the Apocalypse of Zechariah, espe- 
cially chapters i-ii. The rider here is a great counter- 
feit leader, not the personal Anti-christ, but the little 
horn which Daniel saw coming out of the ten-horned 
beast (Daniel vii). We are now in the most solemn 
and ominous times the world has ever known. Many 
are the voices which are calling for a European con- 
federacy and for some great leader, another Napoleon. 
The blinded world looks for such a one and expects 
that he will bring peace and order into the prevailing 
chaos. And the Lord will permit such a one to come, 
deceiving the world so that they will say “peace and 
safety” (1 Thess. v:1-3). This coming leader of the 
revived Roman empire will go forth to conquer and 
become its political head. He is Satan’s man as we 
shall see later. No human being knows how long God, 
in His infinite patience, may still delay the beginning 
of all these things. But as far as mortal eye can 
see, enlightened by His Word and Spirit, these things 
are at hand and the outcome of the European war 


THE REVELATION 53 


may be this confederacy and the rider upon the white 
horse will begin his conquest. And if so, how near, 
how very near, the home-gathering of the Saints must 
be. And this is the first thing our Lord mentions in 
the Olivet Discourse, to take place as the age ends: 
false Christs, deceivers (Matt. xxiv: 4-5). 

2. The Second Seal. The Red Horse. The Rider 
With the Great Sword. Verses 3-4. ‘The second seal 
reveals a rider upon a red horse. He takes away the 
false peace, which the rider upon the white horse 
as a divine judgment act established. The universal 
peace of which the world dreams without the presence 
of the Prince of Peace, will be of a short duration. 
Another awful war follows. It will not be war alone 
between nation and nation, but it will be a world-wide 
reign of terror and bloodshed, a carnage unknown 
before in the history of the world. Not a few believe 
that the present war is the second seal. But this 
cannot be because the true Church is still here. Some- 
thing far worse is in store for the earth. Even keen 
observers in the world say that this will not be the 
last war the world will see. Blessed be His Name! 
that we His people will escape these coming judgments. 
See in Matthew xxiv how our Lord mentions the great 
conflict of nation against nation and kingdom against 
kingdom. 

3. The Third Seal. The Black Horse. The Rider 
With the Balance. Verses 5-6. ‘The black horse rider 
brings famine. Exactly what our Lord mentions next: 
“there shall be famines.” Famine follows war and 
inasmuch as the second seal brings the greatest war, 
the third seal will bring the greatest famine. The 


54 THE REVELATION 


judgments of God are then on the earth. It has been 
estimated that a denarius (wrongly translated penny) 
was about one dollar and a half in our money, and a 
measure of wheat, a “choenix” about one of our quarts. 
A quart of wheat for a dollar and a half. Starvation 
will come then for countless thousands. The rich 
seem to escape a part of this judgment for the oil and 
the wine, the luxuries of the well to do, are not to be 
hurt. They will receive their share of judgment later. 
Our Lord also speaks of famines in Matthew xxiv. 

4. The Fourth Seal. The Pale Horse. The Rider 
Followed by Hades. Verses 7-8. The next rider 
under the fourth seal is named death. And Hades, 
the region of the unseen, (not hell) is populated. 
Sword, hunger, death, that is pestilences and the 
beasts of the earth, claim an awful harvest (Ezek. 
xiv:21). And so our Lord spoke of “pestilences.” 
These four seal judgments are hardening judgments. 
The Christless masses of Christendom will not recog- 
nize the hand of God in these awful visitations. It is 
different in the present war of Europe because the 
testimony of the Gospel is still given, backed by the 
prayers of God’s people. But after the true Church 
is gone and the Lord has spued out Laodicea these 
judgments will only harden their hearts. 

5. The Fifth Seal. The Cry of the Souls Under the 
Altar. Verses 9-11. The four living Creatures have 
uttered their fourfold “Come.” They are thus seen 
in connection with the providential government of 
the world. Under the fifth seal the scene changes 
completely. John saw under the altar the souls of 
them that had been slain. And they cry, “How long, 


THE REVELATION oo 


O Lord!” Who are they? Not the martyrs of past 
ages. They are risen from the dead and are in glory 
with redeemed bodies. The words of the Lord in the 
Olivet Discourse give us the key. Speaking to His 
Jewish disciples He said: “Then shall they deliver 
you up, and shall kill you and ye shall be hated of all 
nations for my Name’s sake” (Matt. xxiv:9). The 
Lord speaks of another company of Jewish disciples 
who will bear a witness during the end of the age, 
after the rapture of the Church. He will not leave 
Himself without a witness. He calls a remnant of His 
people Israel and they bear a witness to the coming 
of the Messiah, their coming deliverer and King. 
Many of them suffer martyrdom. ‘Their cry, “How 
long?” is the well known prayer of Jewish saints; and 
their prayer to have their blood avenged is equally 
a Jewish prayer. Christians are not supplicating for 
vengeance on their foes. The prayer for vengeance 
refers us to the imprecatory psalms prewritten by 
the Holy Spirit in anticipation of the final persecution 
of Jewish believers. And the fellow servants and their 
brethren who are yet to be killed (verse 11) are the 
martyrs of that remnant during the final three and one- 
half years, which is the great tribulation. See them 
mentioned in chapter xx:4. Notice the classes there. 
But there is only one class under the fifth seal, those 
slain in the first half of the week, before the image 
of the beast was set up. The Saints whom Daniel men- 
tions (Dan. vii: 27) who receive the Kingdom are these 
Jewish Saints. The Saints of the Most High as 
mentioned by Daniel are not the church-saints. 

6. The Sixth Seal. The Shaking of all Things. The 


56 , THE REVELATION 


Anticipation of the End. Verses 12-17. Are the 
things mentioned under this seal to be taken in a 
literal sense or symbolically? Most of it is symbolical, 
yet at the same time great physical phenomena are also 
involved. ‘The earthquake possibly means a literal 
earthquake. “Earthquakes in diverse places” our 
Lord predicted. And they increase as the age draws 
to its close. But the language is symbolical. Every- 
thing is being shaken in this poor world. The civil 
and governmental powers on earth all go to pieces; 
every class from kings to slaves is affected by it and 
terrorized. The political and ecclesiastical world is 
going to pieces. See the list of symbolical names and 
their meaning at the close of this volume. And when 
these shaking times have come, when thrones fall and 
anarchy reigns, when the great collapse of civilization 
and human society has come with signs on earth and 
in heaven, the earth-dwellers will see in anticipation 
the approaching day of wrath. ‘Terror fills every 
breast and those who sneered at prayer, as the Christ- 
rejectors do now, will gather for a prayer-meeting to 
appeal to the rocks to cover them. Read the following 
Old Testament passages in connection with this seal. 
Isaiah xxiv; xxxiv:2-4; Joel ii: 30-31; Zephaniah i; 
Haggai ii: 6-7. 


BETWEEN THE SIXTH AND SEVENTH SEAL. 
A PARENTHETICAL VISION. 
Chapter VII 


Chapter VII. 2. The Remnant of Israel Called and 
Sealed. Verses 1-8. We reach now the first paren- 


THE REVELATION 57 


thetical vision. It must not be taken chronologically. 
The six seal judgments extend over the entire period 
of the age ending. The rider upon the white horse 
will be on the scene to the end; wars will continue to 
the end, and culminate in the battle of Armageddon, 
and so do the famines and pestilences. And the sixth 
seal brings the end in view. We shall see the corre- 
spondence with the seventh trumpet and seventh vial 
later. ‘The trumpet and vial judgments are more 
intense and more terrible than the seal judgments. 
In a certain sense they are parallel; the effect of each 
is continuously felt. The parenthetical vision of the 
seventh chapter also covers the entire period of the 
last seven years and brings before us even the vision 
of what will be after the great tribulation. 

How much confusion would have been avoided if 
expositors and Christians in searching for the meaning 
of this vision, had not lost sight of two great facts 
1. This chapter can have no application to the Church 
on earth, nor to the Church in glory, for the simple 
reason that the Church is already complete and trans- 
lated to glory. 2. The vision states clearly that the 
sealed company is “of all the tribes of the children of 
Israel.” There are to-day perhaps a score or more of 
little sects who all claim to be the 144,000. Holiness 
sects, Advent sects, healers, Pentecostal people and 
others, all claim to be the company. If the true inter- 
pretation of Revelation is seen, that this company is 
called after the rapture of the Church, these confusing 
theories will at once be rejected. 

The sealed company is of Israel. After the Church 
is removed to glory, when the fulness of the Gentiles 


58 THE REVELATION 


is come in (Rom. xi: 26) the Lord will turn in mercy 
to Israel and call, before the judgments fall, a remnant 
which will also be sealed (See Ezek. ix). This rem- 
nant is frequently seen on the pages of Old Testament 
prophecy. We read prophetically their longings and 
their prayers. We quote a few passages of the many: 
Ps, xliv : 10-26; lv-lvii; Ixiv; lxxix; Ixxx; Isaiah ]xiii: 
15-lxiv. This remnant, enlightened by the Holy Spirit, 
will pass through the entire seven years. Many of 
them will suffer martyrdom, but the greater part will 
pass through the entire tribulation, enduring to the 
end, and then saved by their King, our Lord, when 
He comes in glory. ‘The so-called orthodox Jews 
will probably constitute with members of the other 
tribes* this remnant. The number, 144,000, that is, 
12,000 out of each tribe, must be looked upon as sym- 
bolical. It speaks of the complete government, which 
as to the earth, is invested in a redeemed and restored 
Israel. Dan is not mentioned because that tribe seems 
to be identified with Satan’s work during the tribula- 
tion (See Gen. xlix: 17). Itis said the anti-Christ will 
be of the tribe of Dan. This sealed company also 
bears a great testimony. They are the preachers of 
the Gospel of the Kingdom, as a witness to all nations 
before the end comes (Matt. xxiv:14). ‘Therefore 
during the time when the judgments are executed from 
above there will be a world-wide preaching of the 
Gospel of the Kingdom, proclaiming the coming of the 
King, calling to repentance and faith in His Name, and 
offering mercy still. 





*No one knows where the ten tribes ate; but God knows 
and He will bring them to light at that time. . 


THE REVELATION : 59 


2. The Saved Multitude of Gentiles Coming Out of 
the Great Tribulation. Verses 9-17. ‘The application 
of this passage of Scripture to the redeemed Church 
in glory is wrong. This Scripture does not apply to 
the Church in glory, but to saved Gentiles on earth. 
It is a company which comes “out of the great tribu- 
lation.” The Church enters the glory before that great 
tribulation begins. The great multitude represents 
those Gentiles who will hear the final testimony and 
believe. They will have turned in repentance to Him 
and will be washed in His precious Blood. Our Lord 
speaks of them in the great judgment of the nations as 
sheep, who stand at His right hand and inherit the 
Kingdom (Matt. xxv: 31, etc.). The brethren of our 
Lord mentioned in Matthew are the remnant of Israel. 
For a complete exposition see “The Gospel of Mat- 
thew,” by the author of this volume. This great com- 
pany therefore does not stand before a heavenly throne, 
but before the millennial throne on earth. It is a mil- 
lennial scene after the tribulation is passed. Sometimes 
the question is asked: Will there be another chance 
for the Gospel hardened multitudes of Laodicean 
Christendom during the tribulation? Will the large 
number of nominal Christians accept the final mes- 
sage given through the remnant of Israel? In view of 
2 Thess. ii: 1-12 we are bound to answer this question 
negatively. This great company is gathered from all 
nations, many of whom never heard a message of 
mercy before. The temple mentioned is the millennial 
temple (Ezek. xl-xliv). And then there is a descrip- 
tion of the millennial blessings for these redeemed 
nations. 


Ohare THE REVELATION 


Chapter VIII. The Seventh Seal. Verses 1-5. 
The silence in heaven when the seventh seal is opened 
is indicative of the solemn things which are now to 
come. The scroll is now fully opened and there 
is an ominous hush as the seven angels prepare to 
sound their trumpets of judgment. John beholds these 
seven angels, but before they begin to sound 
“another angel” is seen standing at the altar. 
This angel is not a creature, but like the angel 
of Jehovah in the Old Testament, is our Lord 
Himself. He is seen as the Priest in behalf 
of the praying, suffering Saints on earth. No 
angel can offer the prayers of the Saints, but tHe: 
who is the one Intercessor alone can do that. And 
for what do they pray on earth? For mercy for those 
who persecute the remnant of Israel? No! They 
pray for divine intervention, for the fire of judgment 
as Elijah did. And therefore the Lord answers them 
accordingly. He fills the censer with fire off the altar 
of God’s holiness and casts it into the earth. And 
there were voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, 
and an earthquake. 


THIRD DIVISION. THE SOUNDING OF THE 
SEVEN TRUMPETS. 


Chapters VIII: 6-XI: 18. 

Chapter VIII. 1. The First Trumpet. Verses 6-7. 
The judgments which follow can hardly be fully inter- 
preted at this time. It would be folly to dogmatize 
about them. ‘The historical application we reject, be- 
cause the scope of the book makes it clear that these 
judgments have not yet taken place. What many of 


THE REVELATION 61 


these things mean may perhaps never be fully under- 
stood till they are actually in fulfillment. The first 
four trumpet judgments evidently stand by themselves. 
The cry for judgment from the suffering and perse- 
cuted remnant of God’s ancient people is answered 
in what happens on the earth. The fire the Lord cast 
down is doing its work. The first trumpet manifests 
the same evidences of divine wrath as came upon 
Egypt, when Israel suffered there, under the seventh 
plague (Exodus ix:23). Hail (heat withdrawn), fire 
and blood are all the symbols of divine wrath. The 
trees and the green grass were burned up. The green 
things are symbols of agricultural and commercial 
prosperity. All is then passing and man’s boasted _ 
prosperity ends in great calamity. The third part 
mentioned repeatedly in these trumpet judgments re- 
fers to the Roman empire. ‘Terrible devastation by 
different agencies, including burning heat,* will sweep 
over that empire. 

2. The Second Trumpet. Verses 8-9. That this is 
not a literal mountain is obvious. A mountain in 
Scripture language represents a Kingdom (Isaiah ii: 
2; Zech. iv:7; Psalm xlvi:2; and especially Jerem. 
li: 25). The sea is typical of nations. Some kingdom, 
internally on fire, signifying probably revolution, will 
be precipitated into the restless sea of nations, and the 
result will be a still greater destruction of life and 
commerce, which is represented by the ships. 

3. The Third Trumpet. Verses ro-11. In the pre- 
ceding trumpets things were cast upon the earth, but 





*Burning heat may be symbolical of intolerant despotism. 


62 THE REVELATION 


here is a star which falls. It is some person who 
claimed authority and who becomes an apostate, whose 
fall produces the awful results given here. It may 
be the final anti-Christ who first may have claimed to 
be for Israel a great teacher with divine authority and 
then takes the awful plunge. Worm-wood is his 
name and the waters became worm-wood and bitter. 
It stands for great corruption. 

4. The Fourth Trumpet. Verses 12-13. The sun, 
the moon and the stars are now affected. The sun 
is the symbol of the highest authority, the moon, who 
has not her own light, is symbolical of derived author- 
ity and the stars are symbolical of subordinate author- 
ity. The symbolical meaning of this trumpet judgment 
is that all authority within the revived Roman empire 
will be smitten by the hand from above and as a result 
there will be the most awful moral darkness. These 
four trumpet judgments tell of prosperity taken first 
from the earth; a great power burning with the fires 
of revolution affecting the nations; a great leader 
will fall and become worm-wood; and authority dis- 
owned and smitten will fill the territory of the Roman 
empire with the densest darkness. Before this great 
war we have often heard it said how impossible all 
this sounds. No one can say so any longer. Europe’s 
condition is appalling and what will it be when these 
judgments fall! 

Chapter IX. 5. The Fifth Trumpet. Verses 1-12. 
The remaining three trumpets have a “woe” attached 
to each. This is announced in the last verse of the 
preceding chapter where the word angel should be 
“eagle.” An eagle, the bird of prey, proclaims the 


THE REVELATION 63 


three-fold woe. He acts thus as a herald of great 
judgments (Matt. xxiv: 28, Rev. xix:17-18). The 
fifth trumpet is a special judgment upon apostate 
Israel; because those who suffer are they “which 
have not the seal of God on their foreheads” (verse 
4). The great tribulation in the-second half of the 
week, comes now into prominence. If we turn to chap- 
ter xii: 12 we read something similar to the eagle’s 
message of woe. “Woe unto the inhabiters of the 
earth and of the sea! for the devil is come down 
unto you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that 
he hath but a short time.” Preceding the sounding 
of the fifth trumpet the eagle proclaimed the woe 
upon the inhabiters of the earth. The star which is 
seen fallen from heaven with the key of the pit of 
the abyss is Satan himself cast out of heaven. The 
details of this event we learn in the twelfth chapter. 
He has the key to the pit of the abyss, the same word 
“deep,” used in Luke viii: 31. “And they (the demons) 
besought Him that He would not command them to go 
out into the deep (abyss).” He unlocks the prison 
house of the fallen angels and the most awful satanic 
agencies come forth to begin their awful work of 
torment. ‘The smoke first, symbolical of darkening ; 
the locusts next, symbolical of these demon powers. 
Awful darkness prevails and the most diabolical delu- 
sions, producing fearful torments among apostate 
Israel and the inhabiters of the earth. It is the time 
of the strong delusion (2 Thess. ii: 4-11) which has 
come. And over them is a King. His name is given 
in Greek and Hebrew, showing that it is both Jew and 
Gentile that come under His power. Both names mean 


64. THE REVELATION 


the same—“destruction.” Apostate Israel and also apos- 
tate Christendom will suffer greatly under this trumpet 
judgment and face the desolation of everything reli- 
gious. The light is now completely blotted out and 
in the darkness coming from the pit of the abyss the 
demon powers will do their fearful work. Demon- 
possession and the most awful torments for soul and 
body will be the general thing. Because this judg- 
ment also concerns apostate Christendom the Greek 
name of the destroyer is given besides the Hebrew. 
2. The Sixth Trumpet. The Second Woe. Verses 
13-21. The sixth angel is commanded by a voice 
from the horns of the golden altar to loose the four 
angels who are bound at Euphrates, and as a result 
an innumerable company of horsemen is released.* 
They are prepared for a specific time to do their work. 
Euphrates is once more mentioned under the pouring 
out of the sixth vial. We believe the sixth vial judg- 
ment gives the key to these horsemen here. Euphrates 
does not mean the Turkish empire as we shall more 
fully show when we come to the sixth vial. This 
river was both the boundary line of the old Roman 
empire and the land of Israel. Restraining influences 
held back the tide of nations on the other side of the 
river; this restraint is now removed and therefore a 
great invasion takes place. As the land of Israel is 
nearest it will suffer first, but the revived Roman em- 
pire will be the objective of these invading hordes. 
The “third part” stands for the Roman empire, the 


* Greek: twice ten thousand times ten thousand, that is 
200 million. The number would indicate the immense, un- 
countable hordes. 


THE REVELATION 65 


coming European confederacy. This invasion is 
under the King of the North. It is seen in its begin- 
ning here and is consummated under the sixth vial. 
There the “Kings of the Sunrise” are included. And 
under the sixth vial they are more specifically gathered 
for the great day of God Almighty. We refer the 
reader to chapter xvi: 12. The four angels have been 
variously interpreted. They must not be identified 
with the angels in chapter vii:1. We can only say 
again that these things will be fully known when they 
are taking place. Connected with this invasion there 
is another manifestation of demon power. Serpents 
are mentioned. The Serpent, Satan, and his serpents, 
demons, are then on the earth. Everything is under 
Satanic control. The great mass of Apostates who 
escaped these plagues did not repent. They have be- 
come so blinded that they worship idols again, and 
demons, and connected with it are the grossest immo- 
ralities. 


BETWEEN THE SIXTH AND SEVENTH TRUMPET 
PARENTHETICAL VISIONS. 


Chapters X-XI: 14. 


As there is a parenthesis between the breaking of 
the sixth and seventh seals so is there between the 
sixth and seventh trumpet and another between the 
sixth and seventh vial. 

Chapter X. 1. The Descending Angel. Verses 1-7. 
The proclamation of the mighty angel is the first 
recorded event in this parenthesis. Who is this angel? 


5 


66 THE REVELATION 


It is Christ Himself. We saw our Lord in angel’s 
form before the opening of the seventh seal and then 
He appeared in priestly dignity. Here before the 
sounding of the seventh trumpet he appears again 
in the same form, but He is called a mighty angel 
and we behold Him in royal dignity. The cloud, the 
rainbow, the face like the sun, His right foot upon 
the sea, the left on the earth, the voice like a lion 
and the seven thunders, all declare this to be correct. 
The hour is rapidly approaching when the kingdoms 
of this earth are to become His Kingdom. ‘This is 
seen under the seventh trumpet. And therefore He 
is seen now in this attitude of royal dignity. The 
words which He speaks (verses 6 and 7) bear out this 
interpretation. “There shall be time no longer” means 
“there shall be no longer delay.” Man’s day is about 
to close. The mystery of God is now to be finished 
“as He hath declared to His servants, the prophets,” 
or in better rendering “the mystery of God also shall 
be completed according to the good tidings which He 
declared by His own servants, the prophets.” How 
great has been that mystery! Evil had apparently 
triumphed; the heavens for so long have been silent. 
Satan had been permitted to be the god of this age 
deceiving the nations. And Israel, too, is included 
in this mystery. And now the time has come when 
the mystery of God will be completed, when the glori- 
ous messages, the good tidings of the prophets con- 
cerning Israel’s blessing and the kingdom will be 
fulfilled. 

2. The Little Book. Verses 8-11. But what is the 
little book which the angel holds in His right hand? 


THE REVELATION 67 


It is not a sealed book, but open. It stands for the 
prophecies in the Old Testament relating especially to 
Israel during the time of the great tribulation, what 
is yet to come upon the earth, culminating in the per- 
sonal and glorious appearing of the Lord to begin His 
millennial reign. But we do not need to say more. 
We saw the contents of the seven-sealed book in 
chapter five were made known when the Lamb opened 
the seals. And the contents of the little book we shall 
also know. What follows after the parenthesis takes 
us upon Jewish ground and shows the fulfillment of 
these prophecies. And John was commanded to eat 
the book (See Ezek. ii: 8-iii:3). It was sweet and 
bitter. Such is the prophetic Word concerning these 
things. Sweet because it tells of deliverance and a 
glorious consummation, but when it is digested, taken 
in, it reveals the bitterness, the sorrows and judg- 
ments which are connected with it. And John had 
more to prophesy in connection with the end, con- 
cerning peoples, nations, tongues and many kings. 
And this we find in the chapters which follow. 


Chapter XI. 3. The Temple, Altar and Jewish 
Worshippers. Verses 1-2. We see at once how 
Jewish things come now into view. To apply these 
verses to the Church and make the temple the Church 
is absolutely wrong. The temple and the altar are 
Jewish; the holy city is Jerusalem. After the Church 
has left the earth the Jewish people will be fully 
restored to their own land, and their land restored to 
them. ‘They will possess Jerusalem once more. It is 
even revealed that a power beyond the land of Israel, 


Se THE REVELATION 


friendly to the Jews, will be used in this restoration 
(Isaiah xviii). It is deeply significant to read during 
this present world-crisis of the soon coming disposi- 
tion of Palestine. In the daily press and in magazines 
the suggestion is made that Palestine should be handed 
over to the Jews. When one follows the history of 
Zionism aiming at the establishment of a Jewish State 
and now sees how European nations begin to recognize 
the claims of the Jews, and promise their help in 
their restoration, one cannot but feel that these things 
are very near. A partial restoration may be looked 
for even now while the true Church is still here. 
When the Jews are once more masters in their own 
promised land they will erect another temple and 
then restore the Levitical worship as far as it is pos- 
sible. Such a temple must be in Jerusalem (see Isaiah 
Ixvi: 1-4). In that temple the personal Anti-christ, 
the beast out of the land of whom we shall read in 
chapter xiii, will appear and claim divine worship. 
See 2 Thess. ii: 3-4. Apostate Israel in corrupt alli- 
ance with equally apostate Gentiles is seen in the 
opening verses of this eleventh chapter, as the court 
without the temple. But in the midst of this corrupt 
mass, which will follow the delusion of the Anti-christ 
and accept Satan’s man as their Messiah, there will be 
the God-fearing remnant. This remnant is here 
divinely recognized as’ worshippers. ‘Therefore that 
coming temple is called “the temple of God” because 
the Lord owns the true worshippers found in the midst 
of the unbelieving mass. These godly Jews form an 
inner circle. The inner place is symbolical ,of the 
faithful remnant of worshippers; the outer court is 


THE REVELATION 69 


the symbol of apostate Israel. The forty-two months 
are now mentioned for the first time in Revelation. 
They are identical with the 1,260 days, for forty-two 
months make this number of days, the times, time and 
half a time in the prophecy of Daniel, the last three 
and one-half years of the seventieth week of Daniel.* 
To make these forty-two months 1,260 years, as it 
has been done by many expositors, is a mere invention 
and lacks Scriptural support. These 1,260 days are 
the time of the great tribulation. Then Israel apostate 
will be in the worst condition, demon-possessed and 
idolatrous (Matt. xii: 43-45). Then the Gentiles will 
do their final devastation of Jerusalem and her worst 
history will come to pass. She will have to drink the 
cup of the Lord’s fury to the very dregs. We suggest 
at this point a careful reading of Psalm Ixxix and a 
comparison with this eleventh chapter. It is the 
prayer of the godly remnant. On the measuring see 
also Zech. ii. 

4. The Two Witnesses. Verses 3-6. Much has 
been written on these two witnesses who will then 
appear in Jerusalem. The historical school of inter- 
pretation has named numerous persons and companies 
of people, like the Waldenses and Albigenses, who 
suffered under the papal persecutions. ‘These claims 
are not in harmony with the divisions of the book, to 
which we believe it to be our duty to adhere. These 
two witnesses are still future. Their work will be 
done during the great tribulation. Others make them 


*We cannot enlarge upon this interesting prophecy so 
absolutely necessary for an understanding of this part of 
Revelation. We refer the reader to Appendix I. 


70 THE REVELATION 


Enoch and Elijah and others think they will be Moses 
and Elijah returned in person. Some have claimed to 
be a re-incarnation of Elijah. Such claims are 
fanatical. No second coming of Moses is anywhere 
promised in the Word. Something, however, is said 
about the work of Elijah in the future (Mal. iv: 5-6). 
But the words of our Lord in Matt. xi: 14, speaking 
of John the Baptist, and Matt. xvii: 12, seem to make 
it clear that no literal coming of the same Elijah, who 
went into glory, without dying, is meant. Yet the 
deeds of these two witnesses clearly link them with 
the work of Moses and Elijah. They each do both 
the things that Moses and Elijah did separately. We 
take it then that these two witnesses represent the 
great testimony to be given in Jerusalem during 
the 1,260 days of the great tribulation. Perhaps the 
leaders will be two great instruments, manifesting the 
spirit of Moses and Elijah, endowed with supernatural 
power, but a large number of witnesses is unquestion- 
ably in view here. They maintain in the midst of 
the Satanic scenes a powerful testimony for God. 
They are called “olive trees,” because the energy and 
power of the Holy Spirit rest upon them. See and 
compare with Zech. iv. Their testimony, besides wit- 
nessing against the awful corruption, is the Gospel 
of the Kingdom and the glorious coming of the 
King. The judgments through them are their cre- 
dentials. 


5. The Beast and the Witnesses. Verse 7. Inverse 
2 the period of the great tribulation was mentioned 
for the first time and here we have the first mention 


THE REVELATION 71 


of the Beast. This Beast coming out of the pit of 
the abyss, the deep, is the revived Roman empire under 
_the little horn, seen by Daniel on the four-horned 
beast (Dan. vii:8). While he dominates over the Gen- 
tiles, he will turn in fury against these Jewish Saints, 
and the two witnesses will be slain. He makes war 
with the godly remnant. (Dan. vii:21). A part of 
‘that remnant will be killed. Then the company of 
martyrs mentioned in vi: 11 will be gathered. This 
is more fully described in chapter xiii. Here we look 
at it and the outcome in a general way. 

6. The Treatment of the Slain Witnesses. Verses 
8-10. See again Psalm Ixxix:1-3. The vileness of 
these coming days of Satan’s rule on earth is seen 
in the treatment of the bodies of Jehovah’s servants. 
The wicked are so elated over the silencing of the 
testimony that they refuse to permit their burial so 
that they may feast their eyes upon the sickening 
spectacle. They rejoice and make it a festive occa- 
sion, because torment had come to their consciences 
through the testimony of the slain. Gentiles, who 
side with apostate Israel are mentioned, but especially 
a class which is called “they that dwell on the earth” 
rejoices over the end of the witnesses. The same class 
- is mentioned several times. Study the passages where 
they are mentioned: Chapter iii: 10, vi: 9, 10; vili: 13; 
MANO Oy ex 8 fxiv 6,75 xvine8. “They are the 
apostate, nominal Christians who are utterly blinded 
and hardened. Phil. iii: 18-19 gives their character 
and destiny. They claim possession of the earth as 
belonging to them, but God is not only the God of 
heaven, He is also “the God of the earth.” (Rev. xi: 4.) 


72 THE REVELATION 


7. Their Public Vindication. Verses 11-12. God’s 
power is manifested in their physical resurrection and 
their visible translation. Their enemies see a great 
miracle. ‘The apostates who ridicule even now a physi- 
cal resurrection, who sneer at the blessed Hope of a 
coming translation of the Saints, will witness these 
two great facts. No wonder that a great fear fell 
upon them. The raised witnesses belong to the first 
resurrection (xx: 4). 

8. The Great Earthquake. Verses 13-14. The 
terror becomes still greater when the whole city is 
shaken by a mighty earthquake. This is not a sym- 
bolical earthquake but a convulsion of nature by 
which the fourth part of the city falls and 7,000 men 
are killed. It marks the end of the second woe. Then 
those who escaped the visitation gave glory unto the 
God of heaven, It is only inspired by fear. They do 
not turn in repentance unto God. Here ends the paren- 
thetical vision. 

9. The Seventh Trumpet. The Third Woe. Verses 
15-18. ‘The seventh trumpet brings us to the very end 
of the tribulation and to the beginning of the millen- 
nial reign. It is Jerusalem’s deliverance. He who 
alone is worthy receives the Kingdom. How clear 
this ought to make the fact that our Lord has no 
earthly Kingdom now, but He receives the promised 
Kingdom on the earth at the end of these things. See 
Dan. vii: 14. Heaven worships too; they celebrate the 
fact that He has taken His great power. It is a re- 
view of all that takes place and what follows when 
He appears out of heaven. The nations were full of 
wrath (Ps. ii; xlvi:6); His wrath is come; resurrec- 


ss 


THE REVELATION 73 


tion will follow; this points to the time after the king- 
dom (chapter xx: 12). And His servants, the Prophets 
and the Saints, receive their reward, to reign with 
Him. 


FOURTH DIVISION: SATAN’S POWER AND 
SATAN’S MASTERPIECE. 


Chapter XI:19-XIII. 


What follows now brings the great tribulation, the 
1,260 days, into prominence. As we have seen the 
seventh trumpet takes us right to the end. But now 
we are led back. 


Chapter XI. 1. The Vision of the Opened Temple. 
Verse 19. ‘This verse belongs properly to the twelfth 
chapter. The Ark contains the covenant made with 
Israel. ‘This is now to be remembered and con- 
nected with it are the manifestations of coming wrath 
for those who oppress His people. God is now taking 
up the interests of His earthly people and as of old 
the Ark is the token of His presence with them and 
the coming victory. 


Chapter XII. 2. The Woman with Child. Verses 
1-2. Who is represented by the Sun-clothed woman? 
Romanists have made out of her the Virgin Mary. 
Many expositors claim it is the Church which is repre- 
sented by this woman. Some claim the woman is 
the professing Church and the man-child represents, 
according to their view, a class of overcomers who 
will escape the tribulation. This is a favored inter- 
pretation of some of the so-called “holiness people.” 


74 THE REVELATION 

In the light of the scope of this book the woman 
cannot possibly have anything to do with the Church. 
Again, Christian Science has made the most absurd 
claim that this woman represents the instrument of 
Satan, the deluded woman, whom they worship as the 
founder of their cult. A hundred years ago another 
sect existed in England under the leadership of a 
woman, who also claimed to be the one of this vision. 
We do not need to seek long for the true meaning of 
the woman seen by John. She represents Israel.* 
Everything in the symbolical statements bears this out, 
especially the crown with the twelve stars (Gen. 
Mxkyii sq). 

“Thus she is seen clothed with the glory of the 
sun—that is, of Christ Himself as He will presently 
appear in supreme power as Sun of Righteousness 
(Mal. iv:2); for the sun is the ruler of the day. As 
a consequence, her glory of old, before the day-dawn, 
the reflected light of her typical system, is like the 
moon under her feet. Upon her head the crown of 
twelve stars speaks naturally of her twelve tribes, 
planets now around the central sun.” 

It is Israel, what she is in the purposes of God. 
And the child, the nation brought forth, is the Mes- 
siah, Christ. Even so Paul writes of Israel “of whom 
as according to the flesh Christ came, who is over 
all, God blessed forever (Rom. ix:5). The identity 
of the child is established beyond controversy by the 
fact that the child is caught up unto God and His 
throne, destined to rule all nations with a rod of iron 
(Ps. ii:9; Rev. ii:28). The great red Dragan, the 





*Change “wonder” in 1 verse to “sign.” 


—— 


THE REVELATION 75 


enemy of the woman and the child, is Satan. Seven 
crowns are symbolical of his authority as the god of 
this age and the ten horns symbolical of his power. 
These historical facts are seen first through this vision. 
But this is done for the one purpose of bringing into 
view what is yet in store for Israel during the end time. 
Christ ascended upon high, took His place at the right 
hand of God, is waiting till His enemies are made His 
footstool. Then the present Christian age began. It is 
not recorded in this vision at all. He who came from 
Israel and who was rejected by His own, is neverthe- 
less Israel’s Messiah, the Hope of Israel. In Him 
and through Him alone the promises made to Israel 
can be fulfilled. The fulfillment of these promises is 
preceded by great sorrows and tribulation, the travail 
pains which come upon Israel during the great tribula- 
tion, before He, whom Israel once disowned, is re- 
vealed as Deliverer and King. And the red Dragon 
will do His most awful work during that period of 
tribulation, a work of hatred against the faithful seed 
of the woman. 

3. The Escape of the Woman. Verse 6. The flight 
of the woman, Israel, has been taken by some to mean 
the dispersion of that nation during this age and 
Israel’s miraculous preservation. But that is incorrect. 
It is true Israel has been miraculously preserved and 
Satan’s hatred too has been against that nation. But 
here we have a special period mentioned, the 1,260 
days, the last three and one-half years of Daniel’s 
seventieth week. It means therefore that when the 





*It is Satan manifested or acting in the revived Roman 
empire. Compare chap. xvii, 3. 


76 THE REVELATION 


Dragon rises in all his furious power to exterminate 
the nation, God will preserve her. However, before 
we are told the details of that preservation and Satan’s 
hatred, we read of the war in heaven. Satan is cast 
out of heaven, down upon the earth. Verses 15-1 7 and 
the entire chapter xiii will tell us what he will do on 
the earth. 

4. War in Heaven and Satan Cast Out of Heaven. 
Verses 7-12, This great scene takes place before the 
great tribulation begins. Satan’s place is not in hell 
at this time. As we saw in the message to Pergamos 
his throne is on earth, he is the god of this age. His 
dominion is the air, he is the Prince of the power of 
the air (Eph. ii: 2). Our present conflict as believers 
is “against principalities, against authorities, against 
the rulers of the darkness of this world, against the 
wicked spirits in the heavenlies” (Eph. vi: 12). ‘Gatan 
as the accuser of the brethren has even access into the 
presence of God. The scene in Job i and ii is not a 
poetical invention, but presents a reality. He is 
still the accuser and our Lord Jesus Christ is our 
advocate. When the Saints are brought into glory 
they will not only behold the Lord Jesus Christ face 
to face, but, we believe Satan, that great fallen being, 
may also be seen by the Saints. The Lord will rebuke 
him (Zech. iii: 2). His accusations are ended. All 
the redeemed are gathered before the throne. All the 
malice and power of Satan could not frustrate the pur- 
pose of God. His Grace and Power have been vic- 
torious. Thus when the Saints come into the heavenly 
possession Satan’s dominion there is at an end. The 
purchased possession, the region above, will be re- 





THE REVELATION 77 


deemed by the power of God (Eph. i:13). Michael 
and his angels will begin their short and decisive war 
against Satan and his angels. Michael is the one 
archangel mentioned in Scripture. It is not the first 
time he met Satan face to face. (Jude 9). And Daniel 
speaks of Michael, “And at that time shall Michael 
stand up, the great prince which standeth for the 
children of thy people; and there shall be a time of 
trouble, such as never was since there was a nation 
even to that same time; and at that time thy people 
shall be delivered, every one that shall be found writ- 
ten in the book” (Dan. xii:1). From this we learn 
that Michael will not only cause the expulsion of 
Satan out of heaven, but he will also stand up for the 
believing portion of Israel. 

Satan is then cast out into the earth and his angels 
are cast out with him. It is identical with what we 
have seen already under the fifth trumpet, the star 
fallen out of heaven, opening the pit of the abyss with 
the darkening smoke and the locust swarms coming 
forth. Then there is joy in heaven because the accuser 
is cast down and his accusations are forever silenced. 
And the “woe” is pronounced upon those who dwell 
on the earth. 

5. The Dragon Persecuting the Woman. Verses 
13-17. He turns in fury against the woman which 
brought forth the man child. Satan realizes now 
that his time is short. His expulsion from heaven will 
soon be followed by his arrest and imprisonment in 
the pit for a thousand years, and after that there is 
prepared for him his eternal home of misery, the lake 
of fire. As he knows that Israel is mostly concerned 


78 THE REVELATION 


in the final drama, and the believing portion of that 
nation will inherit the kingdom, he turns in wrath 
against them. Verse 6 should be connected with 
verse 14. It is symbolical language we have here 
again. The wilderness is a place of isolation, and 
the place prepared, speaks of God’s care for them. 
But it is not the entire nation. The apostate part 
sides with Satan and with Satan’s man, the Anti- 
christ. But there is another part, which is preserved. 
This part is in the place of isolation among the nations. 
The water cast out by Satan is symbolical of the 
hatred which Satan stirs up against the people amongst 
the nations. These nations like Russia and others 
under Satanic control will persecute them. But there 
will be other agencies in the earth by which this 
Satanic attempt to wipe off the face of the earth this 
faithful part of the nation will be frustrated. ‘These 
agencies will probably be those nations who have be- 
lieved the final message, the Gospel of the Kingdom. 
Satan seeing himself defeated turns next-against the 
godly remnant in the land itself (verse 17). 


Chapter XIII. The Beast Out of the Sea. Verses 
r-10. ‘This chapter brings now fully into view the 
Satanic powers operating during the great tribulation 
—the forty-two months. Satan’s masterpieces are on 
the earth; energized by him and endued with His 
powers they work together to stamp out all that is 
left of the truth on earth. Their combined efforts 
are directed against the godly remnant of Jews and 
against those Gentiles who accepted the message of 
the Gospel of the Kingdom, who are seert in the 


THE REVELATION 79 


seventh chapter merging out of the great tribulation. 
They are called Beasts. The first is the revived Roman 
empire, which has over it a mighty leader. A careful 
study of Daniel’s prophecy in chapter vii is here 
needed. The beast which John sees rising out of the 
sea is the Roman empire. This Daniel saw as a great 
nondescript, a dreadful beast with iron teeth and with 
ten horns. And John also sees this beast having ten 
horns* with crowns and seven heads and these heads 
had names of blasphemy. Daniel had seen Babylonia, 
Medo-Persia and Greco-Macedonia under the emblem 
of the lion, the bear and the leopard. John sees this 
beast here like a leopard, with bear’s feet and lion’s 
mouth. This revived Roman empire is an amalgama- 
tion of parts of the previous world empires. The pre- 
ceding ones are absorbed by the last, the Roman 
empire. Therefore the revived Roman empire will 
contain the different elements in one great monster. 
This Roman empire will be revived in the first part 
of the final seven years. We saw this under the first 
seal. Here is the beginning of the forty-two months 
the Dragon gives to him his power, and his throne and 
great authority. It becomes now fully possessed by 
Satan. he ten horns are the ten kingdoms which 
will exist in that empire. We are told later that these 
ten kings “have one mind and shall give their power 
and strength unto the beast” (xvii: 13). In the same 
chapter the beast is also seen coming out of the abyss 
(xvii: 8) denoting its Satanic origin. The heads rep- 





* The correct reading as given in the Revised Version is to 
put the horns first and the seven heads in the second place. 


80 THE REVELATION 


resent the seven forms of government which have 
characterized the empire in the past, the seventh be- 
comes the eighth. One of the heads is especially men- 
tioned; later we read “he is the eighth, and is of the 
seven, and goeth into perdition” (xvii:11). It was 
as it were wounded to death, and his deadly wound 
was healed, and all the world wondered after the beast. 
This head denotes the imperial form of government, 
which had died, and now is revived in the person of 
the leader, the Prince of Daniel ix: 27, the little horn, 
which Daniel saw in the midst of the ten horns. This 
will be Satan’s man, one of his masterpieces. The 
whole earth will wonder after that beast and its Satan 
possessed head. 


“The Beast will represent a picture hitherto unknown 
and unseen—one unexampled in the history of the 
race. A human power endowed with Satanic energy— 
openly defying God, and invested with the royal power 
and world-wide authority of Satan—will engage the 
rapt gaze of the whole earth. It will marvel at the sight. 
We see no reason to limit the phrase ‘the whole earth.’ 
The revival of the empire must be a matter of interest 
to all embraced within its range and influence. The 
authority of the dragon, and his far-reaching influence 
go far beyond the geographical limits of the ten king- 
doms. The beast to whom he delegates his authority, 
exercises a commanding influence all over the earth— 
reaching even to the limits of heathendom.’”* 


Then when the head of the Beast has his’ Satanic 
power, the Dragon and the Beast are worshipped and 





*W. Scott. is 


THE REVELATION 81 


for the forty-two months he blasphemes and makes 
war with the Saints and overcomes them (the Jewish 
Saints). And he had power over all kindreds and 
tongues and nations. It is interesting to see that 
Daniel and Revelation agree perfectly in this matter. 
There is only this difference, Daniel describes mostly 
the head of the revived Roman empire, the little horn; 
John sees the empire as such. We quote the following 
from our book on Daniel: 


Daniel 

Daniel saw the fourth 
beast, a great nondescript, 
with ten horns. 

The little horn “had eyes 
and a mouth that spake very 
great things.” 

The little horn: “He shall 
speak words against the 
Most High.” 

The little horn: “He shall 
wear out the Saints of the 
Most High.” 

The little horn’s time of 
domineering power is “a 
time and times and dividing 
of times.” 


Revelation 

John beholds a beast out 
of the sea, with ten horns 
crowned (ten kings) and 
seven heads. 

To the Beast “was given 
a mouth speaking great 
things and blasphemies.” 


The Beast: “He opened 
his mouth in blasphemy 
against God.” 

The Beast: “And it was 


given to him to make war 
with the Saints and to over- 
come them.” 
The Beast has power for 
42 months (3% years). 


“We see from this parallel that the same things 
are said of the Beast in Revelation xiii which are 
said of the little horn. They must therefore be 
identical. But how can we harmonize this if Reve- 
lation xiii, the Beast out of the sea, means the resur- 
rected Roman empire? There lived a French King, 
Louis XIV, and in a famous speech he made the 
declaration ‘I am France.’ The little horn will possess 


6 


82 THE REVELATION 


such ‘domineering powers, given to him by Satan, that 
he too can say ‘I am the empire.’ He will control 
the entire political sphere of the empire and thus gives 
to it his own Satanic God-defying character. In 
Daniel we see the same lesson, only in another setting.” 

7. The Beast Out of the Earth. Verses 11-18. The 
second Beast is not an empire with a great leader, but 
a person. ‘The first Beast is out of the sea; the 
second out of the earth (land). ‘The first has ten 
horns; the second has two. The Beast out of the sea 
comes first; the other Beast follows him. ‘The first 
Beast is a political power; the second is a religious 
leader. The first is a Gentile power and its head a 
Gentile; the second is a Jew. ‘The first Beast has 
Satanic power; so has the second Beast. The second 
Beast induced the worship of the first Beast whose 
dominion is over the entire Roman world and after 
whom the whole earth wanders; the sphere of the 
second Beast is Palestine. The first Beast through 
its head makes in the beginning of the seven years a 
covenant with many of the Jews, but in the middle of 
the week he breaks that covenant (Daniel ix: 27). 
That covenant will be probably the permission given 
to the Jews to build a temple and to resume their 
sacrificial worship. ‘The first and the second Beast 
make a covenant, which marks the beginning of the 
seventieth week of Daniel. But when the little horn, 
the first Beast, becomes energized by Satan, he breaks 
that covenant. Then the second Beast demands the 
worship of the first Beast as well as the worship of 
himself. This second Beast is the final, personal Anti- 
christ. He has two horns like a lamb, and speaks like 


THE REVELATION 83 


a dragon. He is a counterfeit lamb and his two horns 
are an imitation of the priestly and kingly authority of 
Christ. He is the one of whose coming our Lord spoke 
(John v: 43). He is the man of sin, the son of perdi- 
tion described by Paul in 2 Thess. ii. He must be a 
Jew or his claim of being Israel’s true Messiah would 
not be accepted by the Jews. The view that he will 
be Judas Iscariot raised from the dead is a fanciful 
speculation. Daniel also gives an interesting prophetic 
picturé which bears out his Jewish character and his 
wicked, satanic ways. See Daniel xi: 36-39. This 
second Beast is also called the false Prophet (xvi: 13; 
xix: 20; xx:10). He does lying wonders. He reigns 
as the false king in Jerusalem and sits as god in the 
temple. He will be the religious head of apostate 
Judaism and apostate Christendom. It is the strong 
delusion of the second chapter of Second Thessalon- 
ians. He also demands the worship of the first Beast. 
He makes an image of the first Beast and gives breath 
to it, so that it can speak. Compare with the image 
which Nebuchadnezzar set up (Daniel iii). This 
image will most likely be put up outside of the land 
of Palestine, perhaps in Rome, and in this way the 
Beast will be worshipped. The most terrible perse- 
cution is connected with this idol-worship. The most 
awful tyranny exists then, for all commerce is con- 
trolled by the Beast. Whosoever has not the mark of 
the Beast on hand and forehead cannot buy nor sell, 
and whosoever does not worship the Beast will be 
killed. And those who worship the Beast and receive 
the mark are lost souls. Great will be the number 


84 THE REVELATION 

of martyrs at that time. To find out what the mark 
is and some of the other details would only be guess- 
work. No one can imagine the horrors of that time 
when Satan rules for a short time on earth and pro- 
duces the great tribulation, such as was not before on 
earth, nor ever can be again. May we praise Him 
for His infinite Grace which saves us from that hour 
and may we reach out for those who, without Christ 
and without hope, are the subjects of this coming 
doom and eternal misery besides. 

But what does the number 666 mean? If we were 
to state all the different views on this number and 
the different applications we would have to fill many 
pages and then we would not know what is right and 
wrong. Seven is the complete perfect number; six 
is incomplete and is man’s number.* Here we 
have three times six. It is humanity fallen, filled with 
pride, defying God. The number 666 signifies man’s 
day and man’s defiance of God under Satan’s power 
in its culmination. 


FIFTH DIVISION. THE POWER OF GOD IN 
INTERVENTION. GRACE AND JUDGMENT 
MANIFESTED. 


Chapter XIV, 


I. The Lamb Upon Zion and the 144,000. Verses 
I-5. A series of blessed visions follow the darkest 
chapter in the Book of Revelation. ‘The awful condi- 


* Six is the number of man. “Six days shalt thou labor.” 
Six repeated three times is man fully manifested in evil. 


si its a 


THE REVELATION 85 


tions under the domineering power of the two Beasts 
are going to be changed. The Lord will answer the 
prayers of the persecuted Jewish people and deliver 
them by His personal coming out of the opened 
heaven. This glorious manifestation is fully revealed 
in the nineteenth chapter. Here it is anticipated. 
There is much said about this intervention in behalf of 
the suffering godly remnant in the Old Testament. 
As an illustration we call attention to Psalms xliv and 
xlv. In the forty-fourth Psalm we find a description 
of their suffering and the cry to heaven “Arise for 
our help, and redeem us for thy mercies sake.” In the 
forty-fifth Psalm the answer to this prayer is recorded. 
The King riding in majesty, dealing with His enemies, 
surrounded by redeemed companies is beheld in that 
Psalm. The entire Book of Psalms should be studied 
from the viewpoint of prophecy; it will shed much 
light upon these events of this portion of Revelation. 
But who are the 144,000 standing with the Lamb upon 
Mount Zion, having His Name* and His Father’s 
Name written on their foreheads? In the previous 
chapter we saw a company on earth who have the 
mark of the Beast on their foreheads; but here is a 
company who have His Name and the Father’s Name 
on the forehead. A good many have made of this 
company a portion of the Church, a first fruits, who, 
according to this theory, have lived separated lives 
and are caught up into heaven, while the other be- 
lievers, who did not live as near to God as they did, 





* This has been unfortunately omitted in the Authorized 
Version. 


86 THE REVELATION 


will’ have to suffer in the great tribulation. The 
reader who has followed the unfolding of this book 
will see at once that such an interpretation is impos- 
sible. These 144,000 have nothing to do whatever with 
the Church. The Elders are mentioned in verse 3 
and as distinct from the 144,000, and, as we saw, the 
twenty-four Elders include and represent the Church. 
The 144,000 are the same company which was sealed 
in chapter vii, but they also include the distinctly Jew- 
ish remnant which suffered more specifically in Pales- 
tine. The number 144,000 being symbolical and not 
actual permits such an interpretation. In one word 
they represent the “all Israel” saved by the coming of 
the deliverer out of Zion (Rom. xi: 26). They have 
passed through the great tribulation and are seen as 
redeemed from the earth. And then there is heard 
the voice of harpers, making sweet music with their 
harps. They sing a new song (not as it were) before 
the throne and before the living creatures and the 
Elders. And the 144,000 learn to sing this new song. 
Who then are the harpers? They are the martyred 
company seen in connection with the fifth seal and 
they also include now their brethren which were slain 
during the great tribulation. The characteristics of 
the 144,000 are next given. Verse 4 must not be inter- 
preted in a literal sense. Those who apply it to a first 
fruits of the church have done so and it has led to 
much confusion and even worse things. Literal im- 
purity is not in view. If it had a literal meaning this 
company would consist of men only. The woman, the 
great harlot Bablyon and her daughters, the God-less 
and Christ-less religious world-systems (chapter Xvii) 


sy 


' THE REVELATION 87 


are then on earth. They did not defile themselves 
with the corruptions and idolatries prevalent on the 
earth. They kept themselves from spiritual fornica- 
tion. They are the firstfruits and the earnest of the 
- blessings soon in store for the earth.* They were 
devoted to the Lamb and no lie (not guile) was in 
their mouth. The lie and delusion of the end-time were 
utterly repudiated by them. 


2. The Proclamation of the Everlasting Gospel. 
Verses 6-7. This has nothing to do with the preaching 
of the Gospel during this church-age. The Angel 
must not be taken as a literal angel. The preaching 
of any Gospel to those who dwell on earth is never 
committed to angels, but to men. This is true of the 
Gospel of Grace which redeemed sinners are privi- 
leged to proclaim during this age, and of the ever- 
lasting Gospel during the end of the age. The Gospel 
preached is the Gospel of the Kingdom and the preach- 
ers are this faithful remnant of God’s earthly people. 
Nothing of this preaching was said in chapter vii, 
though the result, the gathered multitude coming out 
of the great tribulation is seen there. But here, where 
the moral and spiritual characteristics of the remnant 
of Israel is seen, their testimony also comes into view. 
What this everlasting Gospel is we need not explain 


*The term firstfruits is also applied to true believers 
constituting the Church (Rom. viii: 23; 1 Cor. xv: 20-22; 
James i:18). We are the first fruits, the earnest of the 
coming blessing for Israel and the nations. If the faith- 
ful remnant of Israel keeps itself undefiled from the religious 
corruption of the end-time, how much more should we keep 
ourselves as a separated people (2 Cor. vi:14; 2 Tim. ii: 20- 
21). 


88 THE REVELATION 


for verse 7 gives us the information. It is everlasting 
because it concerns the Creator as the only object of 
worship. And it will sound the loudest and go forth 
in no uncertain sound at the time when pandemonium 
reigns on earth, and heaven is about to open to mani- 
fest the King of Glory. How great is God’s mercy! 
And the nations who hear and turn to God will enter 
the coming Kingdom. Read in connection with verses 
6 and 7 Psalm xcvi. It will give you a great deal of 
light on this portion of Revelation. 


3. Babylon has Fallen. Verse 8, This is an antici- 
pative announcement of what will also happen as the 
great tribulation nears its close. The particulars are 
not given here. These and what Babylon is and how 
Babylon the great (city must be omitted in this verse) 
falls, we shall find in chapters xvii and xviii. God’s 
intervention in judgment upon the great whore is 
simply mentioned here. 


4. The Eternal Wrath for the Worshippers of the 
Beast. Verses 9-11. Here we have a third angelic an- 
nouncement. It concerns the worshippers of the 
Beast. They drink of the wrath of God. It is “with- 
out mixture,” that is, no mercy is found in the cup of 
His indignation. It serves as a solemn warning. Baby- 
lon falls prior to the glorious appearing of the King, 
and the Beast will afterward manifest his power as 
never before. Therefore, the warning concerning the 
inevitable fate of those who worship the Beast and take 
its mark. The warning cannot be twisted, though 
false teachers attempt it. It is Satan’s deception, this 
increasing denial of the solemn truth of an everlast- 


fide ee 


THE REVELATION 89 


ing, conscious and awful punishment of the wicked. By 
these denials, Satan prepares gradually, but surely, 
for the final great apostasy. “The smoke of their 
torment ascendeth forever and ever.” ‘There is no 
end to it. Unsaved reader! Be warned and accept 
Christ. : 

5. The Blessed Dead Who Die in the Lord. Verses 
12-13. It is a voice which proclaims this. It refers 
especially to those who die as martyrs at that time. 
Certainly all our loved ones who fall asleep in Jesus 
are blessed. They are absent from the body and con- 
sciously present with the Lord. But here is the com- 
fort for those who faithfully resist the worship of the 
Beast, who refuse to take the mark. They become 
martyrs. The Book of Revelation will be read and 
studied during the great tribulation. Satan through 
the Beasts, will try to annihilate it and the rest of the 
Bible. But it will be a failure as all former attempts 
to get the Bible out of the world have failed. Here 
then, is first the warning. If they worship the Beast 
they will be lost forever. Then there is the alternative 
to resist the Beast and be killed as to the body, but die 
in the Lord. “From henceforth” means during the 
tribulation when the great persecution goes on. 

6. The Harvest: and the Vintage. Verses 14-20, 
This brings now the Coming of the Son of Man with 
judgment power into view. The harvest and the vin- 
tage have come. The sickle is put in. The reapers 
used will be angels (Matt. xiii: 41). The day of venge- 
ance has come. Read Isaiah Ixiii: 1-6; Joel it; 
Zechariah xii-xiv. This will greatly help to a better 
understanding of the harvest and the vintage. The 


90 THE REVELATION 


nations and their armies will be in the land; the Assy- 
rian from the North, foreshadowed by the wicked 
work of Antiochus Epiphanes (Dan. viii) will do its 
awful work; the false prophet, the second Beast is in 
Jerusalem. But then the judgment clouds break. The 
battle of Armageddon comes into view for the first 
time in verse 20. How we ought to praise Him, for 
His infinite grace which has separated us from these 
awful judgments of vengeance and wrath. His peo- 
ple will be home when these things come to pass. 


SIXTH DIVISION: THE SEVEN ANGELS HAVING 
THE SEVEN PLAGUES. THE VIALS OF WRATH. 


Chapters XV-XVI. 


Chapter XV. 1. The Seven Angels with the Seven 
Plagues. Verse 1. And now the last seven angels 
appear. Seven seal judgments first, followed by seven 
angels with trumpets and next the last seven angels. 
With these seven angels who have the seven last 
plagues for the world, the wrath of God is completed. 
These great final manifestations of the wrath of God 
upon an apostate world are therefore conclusive. 
What wonderful order prevails in this book! What 
unfoldings of the future! What harmony with the 
previous portions of God’s Word! Surely a human 
mind—a genius—could never have put these things 
together in this manner. It is revelation. 

2. Another Scene of Worship. Verses 2-4. Before 
these angels go forth we behold another worship scene, 
Who are they? Not the twenty-four Elders, but they 
are the harpers which we saw harping and singing in 
chapter xiv:2-3. They are the martyred company 


THE REVELATION 91 


worshipping in glory. Here we are told of their vic- 
tory and their song, the song of Moses and of the 
Lamb. The song of Moses (Exod: xv) is the song of 
an earthly deliverance and the song of the Lamb con- 
cerns a spiritual deliverance. They are redeemed by 
power and by blood. : 


3. The Seven Angels Proceeding out of the Temple. 
Verses 5-8. A wonderful sight it is. There is again 
an ominous silence similar to the silence in connection 
with the opening of the seventh seal. The silence is 
not mentioned. But the text shows an impressive 
scene of silence. Quietly the procession of these min- 
isters of judgment file out of the temple. They are 
clothed in pure, white linen; this is symbolical of the 
righteousness which demands the judgment wrath 
about to be poured out. And the golden girdles with 
which their breasts are girdled speak still more of 
divine righteousness. God in His righteousness must 
judge and now His wrath in completeness is about 
to be felt on the earth. The angels left the temple 
empty-handed, but the four living creatures give into 
their hands the bowls full of the wrath of God. And 
behind that smoke is the fire of judgment. He is 
hidden in the thick darkness of His Glory (Exod. 
xix:18; Ps. xviii:8; Isaiah vi: 4). 


Chapter XVI. 4. The First Vial. Verses 1-2. 
The great voice commands the seven angels to go on 
their way and to empty the bowls upon the earth 
(Ps. Ixix:24). And these vials of judgments affect 
‘not only the Roman empire, but the entire world, 
for the whole world is guilty before God. The first 


92 THE REVELATION 


vial poured out produces a grievous sore upon the 
worshippers of the Beast. While it is undoubtedly 
true that we have symbols also in these vial judg- 
ments, it is nevertheless possible that some of these 
plagues may have, besides the symbolical, also a 
literal meaning. The sixth plague which came upon 
Egypt, the first judgment upon the persons of the 
Egyptians, was also a sore (Exod. ix: 10-11). The 
worshippers of the Beast and of the image will be 
dreadfully afflicted. All the internal corruption will 
be outwardly manifested. There will be connected 
with it great agony and suffering; and as a sore is a 
vile thing to behold, we may think of the great vileness 
connected with the moral, apostate conditions in the 
earth, which God will permit to break out. 

5. The Second Vial. Verse 3. This is poured out 
into the sea. The sea represents the Gentiles. ‘These 
will now experience the wrath of God. See the plague 
in Egypt (Exod. vii: 17-25.) That was a literal thing ; 
but not so here. Some apply it to the continued car- 
nage which will be one of the leading features of the 
final history of the times of the Gentiles. That it 
presents a state of the most unspeakable corruption 
and spiritual death is obvious. How little we can say 
of all these awful scenes of wrath coming upon the 
earth. It is far better to acknowledge our ignorance 
in some of these matters than to indulge in fanciful 
speculations. 

6. The Third Vial. Verses 4-7. Another scene 
in which the blood is prominent. The Apostates de- 
nied the blood, sneered at it as the Unitarians and 
Christian Scientists do in our own days, and new the 





THE REVELATION 93 


angel of the waters saith, “Thou hast given them blood 
to drink, for they are worthy.” They have to feel the 
dreadful results of having rejected the Christ of God 
and accepted the man of sin. The children of Israel 
had to taste their own idolatry when Moses put the 
ashes of the burnt golden calf in the water and made 
them drink it (Exod. xxxii: 20). They have to taste 
the vileness and bitterness of their apostasy. They 
reap what they sow. All the joys of life typified by 
rivers and fountains of water, are poisoned and cor- 
rupted. It is a retributive judgment of God falling 
then upon the earth. 

7. The Fourth Vial. Verses 8-9. The fourth vial 
is poured into the sun and men are scorched with 
great heat. Some also apply this literally, but the 
symbolical meaning is to be preferred. There can be 
no doubt but the powers of nature will also bear 
witness to the wrath of God. Famines, droughts, 
great floods, volcanic disturbances, great and wide- 
spread earthquakes and other physical phenomena will 
occur throughout these days of tribulation. However, 
the sun here is not the physical sun, but means, as 
under the fourth trumpet, the supreme authority gov- 
erning them (the Roman empire). Under the fourth 
trumpet great moral darkness came upon all; here it 
is fearful, fiery agony “scorched with great heat.” 
The government, Satan-ruled as it is, becomes now the 
source of the most awful torment to those who are 
under its dominion. God, in judgment and in His 
wrath, permits those terrible things to come to pass. 
Everything under these vial judgments will become 
more aggravated than under the trumpet judgment. 


94. THE REVELATION 


And what will those do who are drinking the cup of 
wrath? They do not repent, but blaspheme. What 
an evidence of their hopeless condition! 

8. The Fifth Vial. Verses ro-11. Under the fifth 
trumpet we saw the star fallen from heaven. It 
synchronizes with chapter xii: 7-12—Satan cast out of 
heaven. Then Satan fallen from heaven gave his 
power and authority to the Beast, the head of the 
empire. Here the throne (not seat) of the Beast 
is dealt with. His throne and his kingdom is deluged 
with wrath. All becomes darkness.* The boast had 
been “Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to 
make war with him?” (xiii:4). Here God answers 
this boast with wrath. Then they begin to gnaw their 
tongues with pain. However, it is not yet the com- 
plete judgment of the two Beasts. That comes later. 

9. The Sixth Vial. Verse 12. Once more the river 
Euphrates is mentioned. It dries up when the sixth 
bowl is poured out so that the way of the kings of 
the East (literal: from the rising of the sun) might 
be prepared. We have hinted before at the corre- 
spondence between the trumpet judgments and the 
pouring out of the vials. This becomes now very 
marked, for under the sixth trumpet the river 
Euphrates is also mentioned. There the forces which 
keep back hostile powers are removed and here the 
river is dried up. The historical interpretation is re- 
sponsible for the theory that the Euphrates is Turkey. 
But is there anything in Revelation which would war- 
rant the interpretation that this river means Turkey? 
We know nothing whatever. If the Euphrates really 





*See the judgment plague upon Egypt (Exod. x: 21-23). 


oiteakn spunea teint i aii ta) 


THE REVELATION 95 


meant the Turkish power then the drying up of the 
river has been going on for a number of decades. But 
here it is not a gradual thing but a sudden event. Nor 
does this event take place as long as the true Church 
is here, but after the Church is removed. As already 
stated the Euphrates was the boundary of the Roman 
empire and the land of Israel. It is a kind of barrier 
which separates the West from the East. This bar- 
rier symbolized by the river Euphrates is now com- 
pletely removed, so that the kings from the sunrise 
can invade the land. This invasion is also seen in con- 
nection with the sixth trumpet. The nations must 
gather from all quarters in and about Palestine. We 
find much of this revealed in the Old Testament and 
it would be strange if the Revelation were silent on so 
important an event. Ezekiel describes a great in- 
vader, a confederacy of nations (Ezek. xxxviii and 
xxxix). Gog, Magog, the Prince of Rosh* (Russia), 
Meshech, Tubel, Persia, Cush and Put are mentioned 
as forming this confederacy. The term “Kings of 
the sunrise” may even mean the far Eastern Asiatic 
nations, like China and Japan. We hear much of 
“the yellow peril” in our day. The drying up of the 
Euphrates seems therefore to mean the removal of 
the barrier, so that the predicted gathering of the na- 
tions may take place (Joel iii:2). What began under 
the sixth trumpet is consummated when the sixth vial 
is poured out. It is an act of judgment-wrath, while 
at the same time these opposing nations are gathering 
for the great day of God Almighty. 





* This is the correct translation of “chief prince.” 


96 THE REVELATION 


Between the Sixth and Seventh Vial. ‘A Paren- 
thetical Vision. Verses 13-16. Just as we had a 
parenthetical vision between the sixth and seventh 
seal, and between the sixth and seventh trumpet, so 
we find here a very brief one between the sixth and 
seventh vial judgment. Armageddon is not yet, but 
it comes now in view. Unclean spirits, like frogs, 
creatures of the slimy, evil-smelling swamps and of 
the night, now proceed out of the mouth of the trinity 
of evil. The Dragon is Satan; the Beast the political 
head of the empire and the false Prophet, the Anti- 
christ. Satanic influences, emanating from him and 
his two master-pieces are then at work; and they are 
of such a nature that we cannot fully understand them. 


They are the spirits of demons, working miracles. . 


Doctrines of seducing spirits and demons, like Chris- 
tian Science, Spiritism and Theosophy are already in 
the world. They are Satan’s instruments. But when 
the three unclean spirits come forth it will be far 
worse. It is a judgment also. Compare with 1 Kings 
Xxil: 13-23. The kings are gathered for the battle 
which is to come. And it is God Himself who does 
this gathering. What will happen when they are 
gathered we see in chapter xix. A final warning is 
given of His coming. 

10. The Seventh Vial. Verses 17-21. ‘The seventh 
angel pours his vial into the air. This is Satan’s 
sphere. His power and dominion is now dealt with in 
wrath. While Satan was cast out of heaven, he may 
still maintain part of the atmosphere immediately 
above the earth, thus upholding his claim as the prince 


of the power of the air (Eph. ii:2). A great voice 


i a? ae 


THE REVELATION 97 


declares “It is done.” All that follows shows that 
the climax is reached. The judgment shown is sweep- 
ing everything. A great earthquake as under the sixth 
seal and the seventh trumpet takes place. The great 
city Bablyon is divided into three parts; the cities of 
the nations fall. It is the hour of collapse, when the 
stone from above does its smiting work (Dan. ii). 
“It is done!” ‘The Lord has come. The nineteenth 
chapter will furnish us the particulars. 


SEVENTH DIVISION. THE GREAT HARLOT 
BABYLON AND HER JUDGMENT. 


Chapters XVII-XVIII. 


Chapter XVII. 1. The Description of the Woman. 
Verses 1-6. Babylon was mentioned for the first time 
in this book in chapter xiv: 8; her fall was then antici- 
pated. In two chapters we have a description of her 
and the details of her overthrow and complete destruc- 
tion. Babylon is seen as a great, world-wide ecclesi- 
astical, political and commercial system, and her 
dwelling place, from where she exercises authority, 
is a great city, which is the seven-hilled city Rome. 
There are many who believe that the literal Babylon 
is in view here in these two chapters. It is claimed 
that literal Babylon on the banks of the Euphrates is 
to become once more a large city and the seat of 
government during the end of this age. Literal Baby- 
lon never was a part of the Roman empire, and as the 
Babylon of Revelation xvii and xviii is seen in closest 
identification with the empire, and for a time at least 
is its center and capital, the Babylon in Asia is ruled 
out at once. Rome was the great center of the Roman 


7 


98 THE REVELATION 


empire and Rome will once more become the seat 
where the woman pictured in this chapter will exer- 
cise her authority. We fully believe, however, that 
ancient Babylon will also be rebuilt. One only needs 
to turn to Isaiah xiii: 20-22 to find the proof of that. 
Such a destruction of literal Babylon has never been. 
Babylon at the present time is quite an influential 
town and constantly growing. Great irrigation 
schemes and railroads are planned for Mesopotamia. 
When Euphrates comes into prominence, as we have 
seen under the sixth trumpet and the sixth vial, and the 
invasion from the far East, from the “sun-rise” takes 
place, there must needs arise on the banks of the 
Euphrates the ancient city and become a city of 
prominence once more. Then after that her final 
destruction will come. See Jeremiah li. All this is 
clear and cannot be denied. But it is equally clear 
that the Babylon described in these two chapters in 
Revelation is not the literal Babylon. 

In the first part of this chapter we have a description 
of the great harlot Babylon. Who then is this woman, 
branded a harlot, which one of the seven angels who 
poured out the vials showed to John? She represents 
the Papal system in its final power and control in the 
world. We shall see how this assertion is fully con- 
firmed by the words of this chapter. We saw in the 
church-message to Thyatira, which stands for the 
Papacy and its great corruption, that Rome is pictured 
as the woman Jezebel, corresponding to the woman in 
the parable of the leaven. And of Thyatira it is 
said “she repents not.” ‘This shows that Rome will 
continue in her corrupt ways to the end, till judg- 


sonics vig 


Seles 


ve 


THE REVELATION 99 


ment overtakes her. She is to be cast into great tribu- 
lation (ii:22). When the true Church is caught up, 
the Papal system, as we call it, the Roman Catholic 
“church” will see a great revival. For a time she has 


been stripped of the temporal power she once had, but 


it will be restored to her. Along with the revival of the 
Roman empire there will be a revival of Papal 
Rome. Indications of this are numerous at the present 
time. While we see the possible European Confed- 
eracy looming up, culminating in the resurrected em- 
pire, we see also that Rome will soon see her revival. 
Many voices are heard in Protestantism suggesting a 
union with Rome, thus producing a great “world- 
church,” a strange and significant term. This present 
war must end some day and we should not at all be 
surprised if the man, who claims to be “the head of the 
church on earth,” will play an important part when 
peace is made. The negotiations for peace may be 
made in the city of Rome. But we must look very 
briefly at some of the descriptions of this woman, the 
harlot. “She sitteth upon many waters.” We find 
the interpretation in verse 15. “The waters which 
thou sawest, where the whore sitteth are peoples, and 
multitudes, and nations and tongues.” Rome even 
now can boast of her children among all nations. She 
gets her support from the whole world. And when 
she gets her revival she will have a still greater domin- 
ion. The kings of the earth then yield once more to 
her spiritual fornication. Then John saw the woman 
upon a scarlet colored beast, full of names of blas- 
phemy, having seven heads and ten horns. Who is 
the Beast she rides? It is the first Beast of chapter 


100 THE REVELATION 


xiii} the revived Roman empire. She becomes iden- 
tified with that empire. Her attire is in purple, scarlet 
and she is decked with gold and precious stones and 
pearls. The Pope and his Cardinals wear these colors. 
Purple and scarlet are the leading colors displayed in 
great Romish celebrations. And gold, precious stones 
and pearls describe her enormous wealth and dazzling 
glory, so attractive to the natural man. And in her 
hand was a golden cup full of abominations and 
filthiness of her fornication. How clearly this de- 
scribes Papal Rome. Her service, called worship, 
her rituals, her splendid edifices, etc., all is fair to 
behold and pleasing to the eye, like a golden cup. But 
inside we find her filthiness in doctrine and in prac- 
tices. She encourages sin by her indulgences. With 
the celibacy there is also filth connected. And then 
the vileness and abomination of the confessional. Her 
shameless character is written upon her forehead. The 
true Church is to have His name upon the forehead 
and the great harlot-system bears also an inscription. 
“Mystery” is the first word. It has been well put by 
another: 

“Her name is Mystery, yet it is written on her forehead. 
Her character is plain, if only you can read it. If you are 
pure, you. may soon know that she is not. If you are 
true, you may quite easily detect her falsehood. In lands 
where she bears sway, as represented in this picture, she 
has managed to divorce morality from religion in such a 
manner that all the world knows the width of the breach. 
Her priests are used to convey the sacraments; and one 
need not look at the hands too closely that do’ so needful 
a work. In truth, it is an affair of the hands, with the 
magic of a little breath by means of which the most sinful 
of His creatures can create the God that madé him, and 


ea eae 


ee io 


| 


THE REVELATION , 101 


easily new-create, therefore, another mortal like himself. 
This is a great mystery, which she herself conceives as 
“sacrament,” and you may see this clearly on her fore- 
head then. It is the trick of her trade, without which it 
could not exist. With it, a little oil and water and spittle 
become of marvelous efficacy (the wafer in the mass) her 
capital stock indeed, out of which, at the smallest cost, 
the church can create riches and power, and much that 
has unquestionable value in her eyes.”’* 

And she is “Babylon the Great.” Babylon means 
confusion; it is the great confusion, all the evils and 
perversions of the truth of God brought into one pow- 
erful organization. And she is the mother of all har- 
lots and abominations of the earth. Every religious 
system which aims at worldly power and grandeur 
and which shares more or less her assumptions and 
false doctrines is one of her offsprings. ‘These sys- 
tems, after the restraining power of the Holy Spirit 
is gone, will naturally unite with “mother church” 
and form the great Babylon.t And she was drunken 
with the blood of the Saints and with the blood of 
the martyrs of Jesus, so that John wondered with a 
great wonder. Such were her cruel, wicked, Satanic 
deeds in the past. 


The inquisition, the torture-chambers, the countless 
victims who were burned to death and cruelly tortured, 
the unspeakable horrors of centuries of violence and 
murder come to our mind as we read this description. 


* Numerical Bible. 


+A good part of the “Church of England” is ready to 
unite with Rome. Leading Protestant preachers have also 
said that Christendom should soon unite and acknowledge 
Rome. 


102 THE REVELATION 


It could never be true of the literal Babylon. Nor 
does it mean, as Romish expositors of this book claim, 
pagan Rome, for if it meant the persecutions under 
the Roman Emperors, John would not have won- 
dered with a great wonder. And the last page of her 
cruel, horrible, persecutions is not yet written. When 
she comes in power again, she will do the same thing, 
enabled, no doubt, by the power of the Beast. Papal 
Rome, the blood-thirsty, corrupt system is what we 
see here and Rome is seen in her coming revival. 

2. The Interpretation by the Angel. Verses 7-15. 
The interpreting angel told John who the Beast is, 
the Beast, that was, and is not, and yet is (verse 
8). It is the Roman empire, as stated before. It was, 
in an imperial form in John’s day. In the fifth cen- 
tury, A.D., it ceased existing as imperial Rome; it 
is not. But it is to be again, a revival which is here 
described as coming out of the pit of the abyss (chap- 
ter xiii). Verse 9 shows Rome (seven mountains ) * 
where the woman sitteth. Therefore Rome speaks of 
“the See of the Papacy,” and “See” is derived from the 
Latin Sedes, which means seat or throne. 

The seven kings or heads in verse 10 mean different 
forms of government of the Roman empire. Five are 
fallen; these were Kings, Consuls, Dictators, Decem- 
virs and Military Tribunes. These are past forms of 
government. But in John’s day the empire had the 
imperial form of government. This is the meaning of 
“one is.” The other and final form of the Roman 
empire “is not yet come.” ‘That is in John’s day 


_*Romans call the seven hills upon which “the eternal 
city”’—so-called, is built Montes—mountains. 


J EE pe eal 


oa 


THE REVELATION 103 


it had not yet come. It is the Satanic revival and con- 
trol of the empire as we saw it in chapter xiii. And 
the eighth head, which goeth into perdition, is the man 
who heads the empire, the little horn, which Daniel saw 
on the ten-horned Beast. ‘The ten horns in verses 
12-13 are the kings. They cofrespond to the ten 
toes on Nebuchadnezzar’s image and the ten horns 
on the fourth Beast which Daniel saw coming out of 
the sea. And these ten kings yield their power and 
strength unto the Beast. In verse 14, their awful 
future is seen. We shall see this more fully in chapter 
xix:11I-21. They are going to make war with the 
Lamb, and the Lamb, who is Lord of lords and King 
of kings, will overcome them. With Him are the 
called, the chosen and the faithful, that is the re- 
deemed, who come with Him and are manifested when 
He appears. 


3. The Desolation of the Whore. Verses 16-18. 
The woman rides the Beast for a short time only. 
She will not be long successful in her regained power. 
The ten horns, the ten kingdoms, and the Beast* 
hate her and turn against the whore. First they 
were all for her and now they unite in making her 
desolate and naked and burn her with fire. But 
more than that “and shall eat her flesh,” just as 
Jezebel was eaten by the dogs. It is God in His 
righteous judgment who decreed her desolation in this 
way. “And the woman which thou sawest is that 


*“And the Beast” is not in the authorized version; it is 
added in the Revised Version and belongs rightfully into 
the text. 


104 THE REVELATION 
great city, which reigneth over the kings of the earth.” 
The City is none other than Rome. 


Chapter XVIII. 4. The Angelic Announcement. 
Verses 1-3. Babylon is now seen under another 
aspect. In the former chapter we have the religious 
center of Rome and her wicked idolatries, in the 
present chapter it includes also the whole system of 
apostate Christendom in its social and commercial as- 
pect, the so-called “Christian civilization” in its final 
apostate condition and doom. Papal Rome in her 
short revival becomes the head of apostate Chris- 
tendom and controls everything till her appointed 
doom comes upon her. While we saw in the preceding 
chapter the desolation of the whore by the ten kings 
and the Beast, here we see how God views her and that 
He dethrones this system by His judgment. A strong 


angel comes down to announce her doom and to lay _ 


bare her inner and most awful corruption. A strong 
descending Angel* whose glory lightened the earth, 
shows what the boasting thing, she, who bore the 
blessed name of Christ, has become. She is seen to be 
the habitation of demons. Even now behind all the 
denials of the doctrine of Christ and the false doctrines 
which mark the onward march of the predicted apos- 
tasy, demons are the leaders (1 Tim. iv: 1). But what 
will it be when the demons are in full power on the 
earth and all Christendom has joined itself to the 


*This angel may represent the Lord Himself, If this is 
correct we have the third manifestation of our Lord in the 
garb of an angel. viii: 3 in His priestly dignity; x:1 in His 
royal dignity and here as the herald and executo? of the 
vengeance of God upon Babylon. 





THE REVELATION 105 


Romish whore! That great “world-church” has be- 
come “the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of 
every unclean and hateful bird.” ‘The mustard tree 
parable (Matthew xiii) points out this also. The 
birds which flock into the branches are unclean things. 
Christendom has been this in the past and it is now, 
but when at last all is united with Rome and forms 
one vast ecclesiastical system, then every foul spirit, 
every unclean and hateful bird will be found in her. 
And the nations drank eagerly her cup and the kings 
committed fornication with her. These kings are not 
the ten kings of the Empire for they are used in the 
judgment of the whore, while th: kings mentioned 
here bewail her destruction (verse 9). And with 
the system there was connected great commerce; mer- 
chants through her became rich. 

5. The Call to Separate. Verses 4-5. God always 
calls out His true children from that which is evil. 
His own must be a separate people. Saints in past 
centuries have heard this call and left behind the 
Romish abominations and thousands sealed their testi- 
mony with their blood. And in these days in which 
our lot is cast, days with increasing signs, heralding 
as never before the approaching end and the home- 
call of His people to meet Him in the air, in these 
days God demands the separation of His true chil- 
dren. Christendom is becoming daily more and more 
the religious camp of apostasy. And therefore He 
calls “Let us go forth unto Him without the camp 
bearing His reproach” (Heb. xiii: 13). He who re- 
mains in that which denies His Name, is partaker of 
her sins (verse 4 compare with 2 John, verses 10-II). 


106 THE REVELATION 


As all drifts back to Rome and the coming political 
and religious confederacy, this final Babylon looms up, 
God’s people must hear that call. And what shall we 
say of certain professional evangelists who instead of 
sounding this divine call, laud Rome, speak well of 
her, so that their supposed “converts” unite with the 
Romish whore by the hundreds! But there is to be 
a final call to come out of her, after the true Church 
is gone. To whom is this call addressed? Undoubtedly 
to the remnant of God’s ancient people, the believing 
remnant* and also to that large number of Gentiles 


who hear the final message, the Gospel of the Kingdom. 


6. Her Pride and Righteous Destruction. Verses 
6-5. The language of righteous retribution used in the 
sixth verse reminds of Psalm cxxxvii:8. “O daugh- 
ter of Babylon, thou shalt be destroyed; happy shall 
he be that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us.” 
It is the language not of Christians, who are 


exhorted not to recompense evil for evil, but of the . 


remnant of Israel. Like ancient Babylon, the whole 
apostate system, Rome and all her offsprings, was 
filled with pride. She was lifted up in all her earthly 
glory and now God breaks her completely. “She shall 
be utterly burned with fire.” As her smoke is to arise 
forever and ever (xix: 3) it is possible that the proud 
city, Rome, the center of the system of apostasy and 
commerce will be destroyed by volcanic action, and 
where the seven-hilled city once stood there may be 
instead an immense crater, testifying throughout the 
millennium of God’s righteous retribution. In view of 





*Jeremah li:6 concerns the literal Babylon of the past. 
Godly Jews were exhorted to flee her. 





‘ 
¥ 
} 


THE REVELATION 107 


the volcanic conditions on the Italian peninsula this is 
more than possible. Rome means “strong,” but her 
strength will be broken when the strong Lord God 
judgeth her. The judgment which Babylon executed 
on God’s people is now executed upon Babylon. 


7. The Universal Lamentation Over Her. Verses 
9-19. And now follows the great and universal lamen- 
tation over the destruction of the great world-system. 
There is weeping and wailing when at last this Anti- 
christian civilization, all Christendom united with 
Rome, and for a time controlling the commerce of the 
world, is wiped out by the hand of God. The kings, 
~ the merchants, the shipmasters, the company in ships 
and sailors, all are seen mourning, weeping and wail- 
ing. The destruction of the system and of its proud 
city affects them all. They bewail their great loss. 
Notice twenty-eight things are mentioned by them. 
The first is gold and the last the souls of men. How 
this describes Rome! She is the trafficker in souls and 
the destroyer of souls as well. And in studying the 
articles of the commerce of apostate Christendom we 
notice that these are nearly all articles of luxury. The, 
greatest panic has then come and there will be no 
recovery of the market. The rich men will weep and 
howl for their misery is come upon them (James v: 1). 
See also Zeph. i: 11, 18. 


8. The Rejoicing Heavens. Verse 20. Heaven is 
called to rejoice over her and three classes are meti- 
tioned (Revised Version) Saints, Apostles and Proph- 
ets. “For God hath judged your judgment on her.” 
This is the better rendering. The judgment which the 


108 THE REVELATION 


saints pronounced on her is now executed. The next 
chapter shows us more fully the rejoicing heavens. 


9. Her Utter and Everlasting Destruction. Verses 
21-23. In Jeremiah li: 60-64 we read that Seraiah was 
commissioned by Jeremiah to attach a stone to the 
book containing the prophet’s words and to cast it into 
the Euphrates. “And thou shalt say, thus shall Baby- 
Jon sink and shall not rise from the evil that I will 
bring upon her and they shall be weary.” Here an 
angel took up a millstone and cast it into the sea 
showing by this action the complete and final destruc- 
tion of the wicked system and the equally wicked city. 
And what revelation there is in the statement “for 
by thy sorceries were all nations deceived.” In chapter 
xx we read that the old Serpent deceives the nations. 
Sorceries, wicked spirits, demon-powers blinded the 
eyes of the nations to follow Rome’s seductive lure. 
And thus it is with a life-less, spirit-less Protestantism 
and its blood-less Gospel. The sorceries of Rome, the 
demons underneath it all, attract apostate Christendom 
so that all will be united in the great, final Babylon, 


10. The Blood of the Saints Found in Her. Verse 
24. So that we may not err that both chapters refer 
to Rome, though the entire Apostate Christendom is 
also in view, her blood-guiltiness is mentioned once 
more. Chapter xvii: 6.% 


* Alas! she has erected the prisons, and prepared the 
rack, and lighted the fires of what she calls the holy office 
of the Inquisition in Italy, Spain, America, and India. She 
lauds one of her canonized Popes, Pius the Fifth, in her 
Breviary, as an inflexible Inquisitor. She has engraven the 
massacre of St. Bartholomew’s Day on her Papal coins, and 


THE REVELATION 109 


EIGHTH DIVISION. THE MANIFESTATION OF 
THE KING AND THE MILLENNIUM. 


Chapters XIX-XX: 16 


We reach the great climax in this wonderful book. 
The King in His glorious majesty is now to be mani- 
fested to deal with the earth in the great judgment 
and to receive the throne which is promised unto Him. 
The seven years of darkness, apostasy and tribulation, 
the years in which man’s day reached its awful cul- 
mination, the years of manifestation of demon powers 
which produced the greatest wickedness and _blas- 
phemy the earth has seen, are about over. The Lamb 
of God, the Lion of the tribe of Judah executed the 
decreed judgments from above. The seals of the 
book He received were opened by Him. The angels 
have blown their judgment trumpets and the things 
written have come to pass. ‘The other seven angels 
have poured out their vials upon the earth. The begin- 
ning of sorrow was followed by the great tribulation. 
Political and ecclesiastical upheavals indescribable have 
taken place. The great nations formed their con- 
federacy, the revived Roman empire, and Satan put 
his man, the little horn, at the head of the empire. 
Out of Israel’s land and in the midst of that land the 
second Beast arose, the false prophet, the false Mes- 
siah. These two Satan possessed instruments, as we 
saw, worked together and through them and other 
agencies, Satan, cast out of heaven, produced the great 





there represents it as a work done by an angel from heaven. 
And the Roman Pontiff of that day went publicly to Church 
to return thanks to God for that savage and treacherous 
deed.—_W ordsworth. 








110 SA Eee ATIO 
tribulation. In the midst of all these terrible scenes of 
bloodshed, revolution and indescribable confusion the 
remnant of Israel gave their faithful testimony, while 
the remnant in the land suffered and thousands of 
these faithful witnesses were martyred, because they 
refused to worship the Beast and to receive the mark 
of the Beast. And a great multitude of Gentiles were 
saved through the preaching of the Gospel of the 
kingdom, which they heard from the sealed remnant 
of Israel. Then we saw Babylon, the final ecclesias- 
tical condition of apostate Christendom, headed by 
Rome in a world-wide system, and we saw the fall and 
total destruction of the city and the system. The end 
of the seven years has come and heaven is now to 
speak and the King with His heavenly company, the 
Saints and also His angels, is about to appear crowned 
with many crowns. The King is about to come, for 
the great day of God Almighty, when He, as the 
executor of the day of vengeance, is to tread the wine- 
press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. 
Before we enter upon the exposition of this great 
and long-predicted event, the visible and glorious com- 
ing of our Lord, let us picture briefly the conditions 
on earth when the heavens are about to open and He 
comes back. No human being, however, can do that 
fully, for the conditions and scenes which will exist 
then beggar description. In the previous chapter we 
heard the wail and lamentation over the destruction 
of the great Babylon. They cast dust on their heads 
and there was weeping and wailing (xviii: 19). These 
lamentations over the loss of earthly _ prosperity, 
over the destruction of the great ecclesiastical and 









‘ Ws, 
THE REVELATION 





111 


commercial system will continue. But there is 
greater fear than that. The approaching day is felt 
by all. What we saw under the sixth seal is now 
being fully enacted. The fulfillment of the words 
of our Lord in Luke xxi: 25-27 is at hand. “And 
there shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and 
in the stars; and upon the earth distress of nations 
with perplexity; the sea and the waves roaring; men’s 
hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after 
those things which are coming on the earth, for the 
powers of the heavens shall be shaken. And then shall 
they see the Son of Man coming in a cloud with power 
and great glory.” While such fear takes hold upon 
the people and the terror of the coming Lord is upon 
them, the Beast, that is the head of the Roman em- 
_ pire, and the kings of the earth with him, take an- 
other attitude. They become under Satanic leadership 
so darkened and possessed that they rush towards the 
land of Israel. ‘The defiance pictured in the Second 
Psalm has reached its climax. Besides this the great 
gathering from beyond the Euphrates under the leader- 
ship of the King of the North and the Kings from 
the Sunrise has taken place. The northern and eastern 
hordes sweep into the land and threaten the Beast and 
the Kings with him. ‘The nations are massed with 
their armies in Palestine. In Jerusalem the greatest 
distress prevails. The second Beast, the Anti-christ, 
called also the false Prophet, has his seat there, and as 
we saw in the eleventh chapter as well as in the thir- 
teenth, large numbers of the faithful Jewish remnant 
are slain by him. The city is surrounded by the hostile 
armies and the siege described by Zechariah is taking 


112 THE REVELATION 


place. And those who endure ‘to the end and hold 
out against the false Messiah (Matt. xxiv) pray as 
never before and call for heaven’s intervention. Their 
prayer will be “Oh that Thou wouldest rend the 
heavens and come down” (Is. Ixiv: 1). Itis then when 
the nations rage and Satan’s power is at its height 
that the answer comes from above. The earth shakes 
in its very foundations and now the powers of the 
heavens also begin to shake. The ominous signs in 
the Sun, in the Moon and in the Stars are seen. The 
fact that something startling is about to happen from 
above is realized by the Beast, and the kings with their 
armies. Then the Beast, the kings of the earth and 
their armies, utterly blinded by Satan, are ready to 
make war against Him who is about to be manifested. 
No doubt their well-equipped aeroplanes and other air- 
crafts circle upward to interfere with the coming King 
and His army. Then the blow falls upon them. The 
stone, which Nebuchadnezzar saw falling out of 
heaven, strikes at last and the Son of Man appears 
in the clouds of heaven to take the kingdom. We 
must now look at the details of this great revelation. 
Chapter XIX. 1. The Four Hallelujahs in Heaven. 
The Marriage of the Lamb. Verses 1-10. Once more 
we find the significant phrase “after these things” 
(chapter iv: 1; vii: 1; xviii:1). “After these things” 
—the things which are described in chapters xvii and 
xviii, the fall of Babylon and the complete destruction 
of the whore and the system over which she presided 
and domineered, after these things, voices in heaven 
are heard again. We were first introduced to the 
heavens in this book in the fourth chapter. Then 


THE REVELATION 113 


a door was opened in heaven, symbolical of the en- 
trance of the Saints of God of all ages into glory. It 
is the fulfillment of 1 Thess. iv: 13-18. Then we saw 
what transpired in glory. All the Saints, God’s re- 
deemed people gathered around the throne and occu- 
pying thrones worshipping and singing the song of re- 
demption. Under the fifth seal we-had another glimpse 
of heaven. ‘The first martyred company, the souls 
under the altar cried with a loud voice, How long O 
Lord? And they received their white robes. Then 
we read of silence in heaven and saw the Angel-Priest 
in His ministration at the altar (viii: 1-5) while in the 
tenth chapter we beheld Him descending out of heaven. 
The martyred Saints during the tribulation we saw, 
raised from the dead and taken in the cloud into 
heaven (xi: 12) while immediately after, when the sev- 
enth angel trumpeted, the heavens were celebrating in 
worship and in praise the consummation reached and 
the coming reign of the King. Again in the twelfth 
chapter we saw the rejoicing heavens. They that 
dwell in them rejoiced because the accuser of the 
brethren was cast down, and knowing what it means 
for the earth when Satan is there, the heavens pro- 
nounced their woe. In chapter xiv we beheld the 
heavens again, the redeemed company praising as 
well as the harpers. Chapter xv revealed another 
heavenly scene. Babylon’s fall was also known to the 
tenants of heaven. ‘This brief review is to show that 
while these things are going on in the earth, the glori- 
fied Saints, we His people who will then be in His 
presence, will know, and not be ignorant of the events 
on earth. We shall see them all from above and praise 


8 


114 THE REVELATION 


Him for His grace which saved us and brought us to 
glory. 

In chapter xviii: 20 we heard the words addressed to 
heaven “Rejoice over her, thou heaven, and ye holy 
apostles and prophets, for God hath avenged you on 
her.’ And now we see heaven rejoicing. “I heard 
as it were* a great voice of a great multitude in 
heaven saying “Hallelujah.” Hallelujah means “Praise 
ye Jehovah.” ‘This Hebrew word is not found else- 
where in the New Testament. Four times this word 
of praise is found in the beginning of this chapter; 
the Hallelujah times for heaven and earth are immi- 
nent. ‘The Book of Psalms closes with many Halle- 
lujahs; the blessed time which the Psalms so often 
anticipate, when the earth is judged in righteousness 
and the glory of the Lord is manifested, is now at 
hand. The praise here is on account of the right- 
eousness of God exhibited in the judgment of the 
great whore “which did corrupt the earth with her 
fornication” and because the blood of God’s servants 
shed by her is now avenged. The great multitude 
whose Hallelujah is heard first must be the company of 
martyrs who died during the tribulation. The souls 
under the altar and their brethren which were slain 
later utter this praise now. They are seen as a dis- 
tinct company from the twenty-four Elders. A second 
Hallelujah is uttered by them, while the smoke of the 
destroyed city goes up forever and ever. “And the 
four and twenty Elders and the four living Creatures 
fell down and worshipped God that sitteth on the 





* Revised Version. 
.Y 


THE REVELATION 115 


throne, saying, Amen, Hallelujah.” The whole re- 
deemed company, Old and New Testament Saints, add 
their Amen and Hallelujah to the outburst of praise 
on account of the execution of the righteous judgment. 
And they worship God for it is His righteousness 
which accomplished the destruction of the great whore. 
In the midst of this wonderful and impressive worship- 
scene the throne begins to be heard. A voice from the 
throne said “Give Praise unto God all ye His servants 
and ye that fear Him both small and great.” And the 
command is at once obeyed. John hears the fourth 
Hallelujah and it is the greatest, the most mangnificent. 
It is the great Hallelujah-chorus of heaven. Like the 
voice of many, roaring waters, like the voice of mighty 
thunderings a great multitude saith “Hallelujah for the 
Lord our God Omnipotent reigneth.” Who is this 
great multitude? In the first verse we heard the Halle- 
lujah of the martyred companies. The twenty-four 
Elders and four living Creatures did not join in this 
first Hallelujah. Their Hallelujah followed. And now 
the great outburst of a great multitude. This multi- 
tude includes all the redeemed in glory. And they 
rejoice and give glory for an additional reason which 
is made known for the first time in this book. The 
marriage of the Lamb is about to be consummated. 
“Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to Him, 
for the marriage of the Lamb is come and His wife has 
made herself ready.” The harlot, which claimed to be 
the bride, being judged, the true bride of Christ is 
seen in glory. And it is the marriage of the Lamb. 
His joy is now filled full for He receives her, who is 
bone of His bone and flesh of His flesh. The second 


116 THE REVELATION 


Man, the last Adam, is joined to her who is to rule 
and reign with Him. But who is the bride about to 
become the Lamb’s wife? Some teach that it is Israel 
to be united with the Lord in the closest bonds. But 
these expositors forget that the scene is a heavenly 
one. This marriage does not take place on earth where 
the faithful remnant looks up expecting Him to appear 
for their deliverance, but this marriage is in glory. It 
is true such relationship is declared to be Israel’s in the 
Old Testament. She was married to Jehovah in a legal 
covenant and on account of her faithless condition, 
because Jerusalem played the harlot (Ezek. xvi: 35) 
she was put away. For a time Israel was the wife 
of Jehovah (Is. liv:1) and then on account of her 
wickedness became divorced. She will be taken back 
in the day of her national repentance when the Lord 
comes, But as one who had been divorced she can- 
not be a bride again. The bride of Christ to become 
the Lamb’s wife is the Church of the New Testament. 
All who accepted Christ as Saviour and Lord since the 
day of Pentecost constitute the bride of Christ. The 
Church began on Pentecost and her completion will 
be the translation to glory (1 Thess. iv: 17). She is 
both the body of Christ and the bride of Christ, as 
Eve was of the body of Adam and also his bride. The 
Church is the nearest and the most beloved object to 
His loving heart. ,““He loved the Church and gave 
Himself for it; that He might sanctify and cleanse it 
with the washing of the water by the word, that He 
might present to Himself a glorious church not having 
spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should 
be holy and without blemish” (Eph. v: 25-27). She 


THE REVELATION 117 


is the pearl of great price for which He sold all He 
had. The Church is this bride of Christ, and even be- 
fore the marriage the Spirit of God in anticipation 
addressed her as such. “For I have espoused you. to 
one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin 
to Christ” (2 Cor. xi:2). And when the Holy Spirit 
gives the blessed exhortation to the Christian family 
and indicates its deeper meaning, that the Christian 
family is typical of Christ and the Church, He adds “I 
speak concerning Christ and the Church.” For we are 
members of His body, of His flesh and of His bones. 
The church is now presented in glory to Himself; 
this is before us in this passage. She comes into view 
as the Lamb’s wife. It is very significant that the 
twenty-four Elders are no longer mentioned after this. 
As we saw the twenty-four Elders are typical of all 
the redeemed, the Saints of both Testaments. But 
here a division takes place. The bride, the church 
takes her exalted position along side of Himself and! 
the Old Testament Saints are there as the friends of | 
the Bridegroom (John iii: 29). But they do not belong 
to the Church and do not compose the bride of Christ. | 
But how has she made herself ready? And what 
does it mean “And to her was granted that she should 
be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white for the linen 
is the righteousness of the Saints”? The Grace of God 
has supplied the robe and the precious blood is her 
title to glory. In this respect she was ready. But 
the words here refer us to the judgment seat of Christ, 
that award seat before which we must appear. Then 
the hidden things are brought to light and the wood 
and the hay and stubble is burned (1 Cor. iii: 12-15). 


118 THE REVELATION 


Theti “every man shall have praise of God” (1 Cor. 
iv:5) and what Grace accomplished in each one and 
through each will be manifested. And the clean white 
linen “is the righteousness of the Saints.” The word 
“righteousness” is in the plural. It means more than 
the righteousness which we are in Christ or the 
faith in Him, which is counted for righteousness 
(Rom. iv:3). It includes all the blessed results in 
life and service produced by the Holy Spirit, the 
practical righteousness of the Saints. And yet even 
these need the washing in that precious blood without 
which all is unclean and unholy. And so it is Grace 
after all as indicated by the word “given.”*—“it was 
given to her to be clothed in fine linen, bright and 
pure.” He Himself has made her ready and removed 
every spot, every wrinkle and every blemish. God 
grant that we His people may daily meditate on this 
coming glorious event, the marriage of the Lamb, and 
walk worthy of such a Lord and such a calling. Once 
more John is commissioned to write. “Write, Blessed 
are they which are bidden to the marriage supper 
of the Lamb.” And who can estimate the blessed- 
ness of being in His ever blessed Presence, at His 
table, at the marriage supper of the Lamb! And to 
this feast sinners are called by the Gospel throughout 
this age, and they who accept the gracious invitation, 
and become His, cap look forward with holy antici- 
pation to the coming marriage and the marriage sup- 
per, the feast of joy and gladness. And to this is added 
the very seal of God. “These are the true words of 





* Revised. Version. x 


THE REVELATION 119 


God.” What assurance this gives to our souls! Be- 
cause these are the very words of God, all will come 
to pass as promised here. It does not matter if our 
years come and go, the ultimate accomplishment will 
surely come. And John was overwhelmed and fell at 
the feet of the angel to worship him. Beautiful it is 
how the angel takes the place as a servant, a fellow- 
servant of those that have the testimony of Jesus. The 
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of Prophecy. And the 
testimony of Jestis bears witness to His resurrection, 
His presence in glory, and His coming again, and all 
the blessed things connected with that day, so fully 
revealed in God’s Word. Thus the testimony of Jesus 
is the spirit of Prophecy. All Prophecy concerns the 
Lord Jesus Christ and all intelligent, scriptural procla- 
mation of the coming events are a testimony concern- 
ing Himself. 

2, Heaven Opened. The Coming of the King. 
Verses 11-16. And now we reach the great event so 
often mentioned in the Old Testament, the event for 
which this world is waiting, the visible manifesta- 
tion of Him, whom the heavens received, who returns 
to judge the earth, to receive the promised Kingdom 
and rule over the earth for a thousand years. We 
have reached the great climax in the Revelation. In 
the beginning of the book we read the announcement 
“Behold, He cometh with clouds and every eye shall 
see Him,” and now this long predicted and long ex- 
pected event takes place. To quote the predictions in 
the Old Testament prophetic Word which speak of the 
Coming of the King and His rule would fill many 
pages. Without quoting the words we give a number 


120 THE REVELATION 


of passages which every student of Revelation should 
read and become familiar with, for they shed their 
light upon this chapter. Psalm ii; xlv; xlvi; xlvii; 
1: 1-6; Ixviii; cx; Isaiah xi; xxiv: 19-23; XXv; XXV1: 
20-21; Ixiii: 1-6; Ixv: 5-16. Daniel ii: 44-45; vil: 
9-14; Joel iti; Habak. iii; Zech. xiv. These are but a 
few of many more which could be added. His own 
wordsare to be fulfilled. “Immediately after the tribu- 
lation of those days shall the sun be darkened, and the 
moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall 
from heaven, and the powers of the heaven shall be 
shaken. And then shall appear the sign of the Son of 
Man in heaven, and then shall the tribes of the earth 
mourn, and they shall see the Son of Man coming on 
the clouds of heaven with power and great glory” 
(Matt. xxiv: 29-30). The angel’s message which was 
given when He ascended into glory is now to be ac- 
complished. “This same Jesus, which is taken up from 
you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye 
have seen Him go into heaven” (Acts i:11). The 
words of the Spirit of God addressed to the Thessa- 
lonians are also coming to pass. “The Lord Jesus shall 
be revealed from heaven with His mighty angels, in 
flaming fire taking vengeance on them that know not 
God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus’ 
Christ, who shall perish with everlasting destruction 
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of 
His power; when He shall come to be glorified in His 
Saints and marvelled at in all them that believed—in 
that day” (2 Thess. i: 7-10). 

Impressive words—“And I saw heaven opened.” 
Heaven was opened unto Him when He came out of 


THE REVELATION 121 ~ 


Jordan at His baptism. While His baptism fore- 
shadowed His death in the sinner’s place, His resur- 
rection and ascension are foreshadowed in coming out 
of the waters and the open heaven. In heaven at 
the right hand of God He has been ever since, unseen 
by human eyes. At last the time has come when 
God is to make His enemies as the footstool of His 
feet, Heaven is opened so that He might be revealed 
in His glorious majesty. And out of the opened 
heavens He comes forth. “Gird thy sword upon thy 
thigh, O most mighty, with thy glory and majesty. 
And in thy majesty ride prosperously, because of truth 
and meekness; and thy right hand shall teach thee 
terrible things. Thine arrows are sharp in the heart 
of the King’s enemies, whereby the people fall under 
thee” (Ps. xlv: 3-5). Thus the inspired Psalmist fore- 
saw long ago the great event. He comes as the mighty 
Victor to judge in righteousness and to make war. 
“And behold a white horse; and He that sat thereon 
was called Faithful and True and in righteousness 
He doth judge and make war.” The white horse is 
symbolical of victorious warfare and glorious con- 
quest. When, seven years before the first seal had 
been opened (vi:1), a rider appeared upon a white 
horse achieving great conquest. It was the false 
king who was seen then in vision. He is as the Beast 
on earth with the King and their armies to make 
war with the coming King who comes out of the opened 
heaven. Glorious sight! He is coming to conquer 
and to claim His inheritance. The appointed day has 
come in which God “will judge the world in right- 
eousness by that man, whom He hath ordained ; 


122 THE REVELATION 


whereof He has given assurance unto all men in that 
He hath raised Him from the dead” (Acts xvii: 31). 
Upon His head are many diadems. The Saints wear 
crowns, but He to whom belongs all power in heaven 
and on earth wears many diadems, encircling His head 
in dazzling splendour. We look back to see Him 
wearing a crown of thorns, the emblems of the curse. 
What a scene it was when Pilate led Him forth with 
His face marred and dishonored and the cruel thorns 
piercing His blessed brow! And now God has crowned 
Him with supreme authority and He appears in Glory 
to exercise His rights over the earth. It will be God’s 
vindication of His ever blessed Son. His Person and 
His Work has been denied and rejected. Boastingly 
a certain leader of the so-called “new theology”* 
preached not long ago on “the vanishing Christ.” He 
meant by it the denial of the doctrine of Christ, His 
essential Deity, the virgin birth, His sacrificial death 
and His physical resurrection. Thus apostate Chris- 
tendom rejects His Person, and the time comes dur- 
ing the great apostasy when they think He is a van- 
ished Christ. But when He comes as the vanquishing 
Christ, then His Person will be fully vindicated by 
that glorious event. 

“And He had a name written, that no man knew but 
Himself.” And again it is written “His Name is 
called the Word of God.” And on His vesture and on 
His thigh there is a name written “King of kings and 
Lord of lords.” The unknown Name is the name of 
His essential Deity. No human name can express 





*Tt is not a new theology, for it is the Devil’s lie as old 
as Eden; nor is it theology, but only foolish ramblings. 


THE REVELATION 123 


what He is in Himself. “No man knoweth the Son 
but the Father.” His name “the Word of God” refers 
us to the Gospel of John. As the Word He is the 
express image of God, that is He makes God visible. 
He is the expression of God in His character, His 
thoughts and counsels. And the third name men- 
tioned “King of kings and Lord of lords” expresses 
what He is in relation to the earth. 

“And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in 
blood”—“And out of His mouth goeth a sharp sword, 
that with it He should smite the nations, and He shall 
rule them with a rod of iron, and He treadeth the 
winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty 
God.” The blood dipped vesture has nothing to do 
with His work on the cross. He is described in Isaiah 
Ixiii: 1-4 as the One who has the day of vengeance in 
His heart, and this passage in Isaiah is here being ful- 
filled. The two edged sword refers us to Isaiah xt 4. 
“Te shall smite the earth with the rod of His mouth 
and with the breath of His lips shall He slay the 
wicked.” See also 2 Thess. ii:8. The sentence “He 
shall rule them (the nations) with a rod of iron’ is 
quoted from the Second Psalm. In that Psalm we 
read that God saith to Him “Ask of Me and I will 
give thee the nations for thine inheritance and the 
uttermost parts of the earth for Thy possession.” And 
He asked God after His own had been gathered 
home, and the answer is here seen. He comes to rule* 
the nations and to execute the wrath of Almighty God 
upon His enemies. But He is not alone. The armies 
of heaven follow the great King. They are like Him 


* Literal “shepherd.” 


124 THE REVELATION 


upon white horses and are clothed in fine linen, white 
and clean. These armies are not angels. It is true 
angels will be with Him as He comes, for it is written 
then He shall be revealed with His holy angels. Angels 
will be the reapers in the judgment (Matt. xiii: 41) 
when the age ends and they will be used in the re- 
gathering of Israel. (Matt. xxiv:31). But the 
armies here are not angels. They are the glorified 
Saints; the fine linen, white and clean identifies them 
fully. In faith and blessed assurance, you dear reader 
and the writer can say, we shall be in that company 
with Himself as leader. The Son brings His many 
sons unto glory (Heb. ii: 10). What a sight that will 
be for the earth-dwellers! Each in that company bears 
His own image; each reflects His own Glory. ‘Then 
He will be marvelled at in them that had believed (2 
Thess. i: 10). It is the fulfillment of what St. Paul 
wrote to the Colossians: “When Christ, who is our 
life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with Him 
in Glory” (Col. iii: 4). The first Prophet mentioned 
in the Bible, Enoch, had predicted this event for he 
prophesied “Behold the Lord cometh with ten thou- 
sands of His Saints to execute judgment” (Jude, verse 
14). Zechariah saw it in connection with the gather- 
ing of the armies against Jerusalem, when the Lord 
will fight against those nations. He announced “the 
Lord my God shall -come and all the Saints with 
Thee” (Zech. xiv:5). And the Saints who come with 
Him share His triumph, His glory, and are partakers 
in the judgment and in the reign which follows. “Know 
ye not that the Saints shall judge the world?” (i Cor 
vi:2.) Oh! beloved readers what a future is ours! 


THE REVELATION 125 


To be with Him forever and like Him in glory never- 
ending! And the Saints are seen in this new aspect 
corresponding to what He is and what He does. We 
shall then be one with Him in the fullest sense of the 
word. 

3. The Batile of Armageddon.and the Execution of 
Wrath. Verses 17-21. And what a sublime vision 
comes next! An angel is beheld by the seer standing 
in the sun, and with a loud voice he summons the 
birds that fly in mid-heaven to gather themselves to 
the great supper of God* to eat the flesh of the 
slain. The birds cf prey are summoned in anticipation 
of the battle of Armageddon which is then imminent. 
What a contrast this great supper here is with another 
great supper of which we read in the Gospel of Luke! 
(Chapter xiv:15-24). One had said to the Lord 
“Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of 
God.” ‘Then He spoke of a great supper which one 
had made, inviting the guests “Come! for all things 
are now ready.” It is the supper of love and grace 
which God, at the infinite cost-price, the price which 
His Son paid on the cross, provided for lost sinners. 
For almost two thousand years the invitation has 
gone out and uncountable multitudes have come and 
have partaken of the riches of His Grace. But the 
invitation has also been rejected. Yea, as the age 
draws to its close the rejection of the Gospel, of the 
cross of Christ, the precious blood, which alone can 
open heaven and close forever the gates of hell, be- 
comes more universal and more pronounced. Not 





* The authorized version has it “the supper of the great 
God” which is incorrect; it is “the great supper of God.” 


126 THE REVELATION 


alone are the great masses in Christendom rejecting 
the Gospel of Grace wilfully, but they are also accept- 
ing Satan’s lies and delusions, such as “salvation by 
characters,” and the anti-christian cults like “Christian 
Science”—“Theosophy” and the “new theology.” As 
long as the Lord leaves His Church on earth the sound 
of the true Gospel can never die out, It will be heard 
as long as God’s true people, who know the Gospel and 
love it, are on earth. But after the rapture of the 
Church it will be different. Then all who received not 
the love of the truth but had pleasure in unrighteous- 
ness, will be hardened; the strong delusion which 
comes into the world through Satan and his demons 
will be accepted by them. (2 Thess. ii: 10-12). We 
have seen this class in previous chapters, they are 
called, “the dwellers on the earth.” They are the 
apostates who reject the Gospel, refuse to come to the 
great supper of God’s love, and even the severest judg- 
ments of God did not lead them to repentance. Instead 
of crying “God be merciful to me, a sinner” they blas- 
phemed (ix: 20-21). And now the hour of judgment 
has come. Another supper is spread. An angel, 
standing in the sun, the place of supreme authority, 
gives the invitation to the birds of prey to be ready 
for the feast which a holy and righteous God will have 
for them. The day of wrath has come. The slain of 
the Lord shall be many (Isaiah Ixvi: 16), 

And down on earth there is the greatest gathering 
of armies the world has ever seen. The Beast, the 
head of the revived Roman empire, is the commander- 
in-chief. The kings of the earth are with him. Vast 
army camps on all sides. The great valley on the 


THE REVELATION 127 


plains of Esdrzlon is filled with soldiers. The hills 
and mountains swarm with armed men. Satan’s 
power has gathered and blinded this vast multitude 
to the utmost. The unclean spirits, the demons work- 
ing miracles, have brought them together to the battle 
of that day. And the hordes from the North, under 
the Prince of Rosh are coming later. These vast multi- 
tudes from the North and beyond Euphrates are 
described in Ezekiel xxxviii-xxxix. And in that Old 
Testament prophecy we find a statement which re- 
minds us of the great supper of God here in Revela- 
tion. “Speak unto every feathered fowl, and to every 
beast of the field, assemble yourselves and come; 
gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I 
do sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the 
mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh, and drink 
blood” (Ezek. xxxix:17). “Thus shall ye be filled at 
my table with horses and ‘chariots, with mighty men, 
and with all men of war, saith the Lord God” (verse 
20). 

Zechariah xiv:2 is now being fulfilled. While the 
vast armies are covering valleys and hills, the objective 
will be Jerusalem. All nations are gathered against 
her. “For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem 
to battle; and the city shall be taken, and the houses 
rifled, and the women ravished; and half of the city 
shall go forth into captivity, and the residue of the 
people shall not be cut off from the city.”” Jerusalem’s 
distress is the greatest of her history. And the faith- 
ful remnant looks up for the promised deliverance. 
The Beast, the Emperor of the empire and the second 
Beast, the Anti-christ, called also the false Prophet, 


128 THE REVELATION 


act together in this final drama. They are seen to- 
gether in verse 20. 

And now as these armies are massed together the 
great battle of Armageddon takes place. They are 
ready to make war against Him, who comes through 
heaven’s portals. Satan has been the usurper for al- 
most 6,000 years. As god of this age he controlled 
the kingdoms of this earth; he held them in his grasp. 
He whose right it is, who bought the earth with His 
blood is about to claim the earth and to receive the 
kingdom. And Satan makes a great attempt to dispute 
His authority. And military Christendom, the Gentile 
nations who even now as we write murder each other 
for the sake of having dominion, are Satan’s instru- 
ments in this. He goads them on with the supremest 
hatred to fight the King of kings, and so to speak, 
keep Him back from taking possession of the king- 
doms of this world. Armageddon means “the mount 
of slaughter.” It is the great plain of Esdraelon which 
has been described as follows: 

“It is called, by way of eminence, ‘the great plain’ 
in Scripture, and elsewhere, ‘the great plain,’ or ‘field 
of Esdraelon,’ ‘the field of Megiddo,’ the ‘Galilean 
plain,’ which we found one vast meadow covered with 
the richest pasture. It has been a chosen place for 
encampment in every contest from the days of Nabu- 
chonodosor, king of Assyria, to the disastrous march 
of Napoleon Bonaparte into Syria. Jews, Gentiles, 
Saracens, Christian Crusaders, and anti-Christian 
Frenchmen, Egyptians, Persians, Druses, Turks and 
Arabs, warriors of every nation that is under heaven, 
have pitched their tents on the plain of Esdraelon, 


THE REVELATION 129 


and have beheld the banners of their nations wet with 
the dew of Tabor and Hermon.” 

See also Joel iii:2, 9-12. And then heaven has 
opened. The prayers of the Jewish remnant are an- 
swered. ‘Triumphantly they will say as they see the 
heavenly glory, the returning Shekinah, “Lo, this is 
our God; we have waited for Him, and He will save 
us; this is the Lord; we have waited for Him; we will 
be glad and rejoice in His salvation” (Is. xxv:9). 
“Then shall the Lord go forth, and fight against those 
nations.” (Zech. xiv: 2). The battle does not consume 
much time. Sennacherib’s army was suddenly smitten 
and they all perished, and here are armies in compari- 
son with which Sennacherib’s forces were insignificant. 
One mighty blow from above, one flash of glory and 
all their strength and power is gone. The stone has 
fallen (Dan. ii). With one blow the dominion and 
misrule of the Gentiles is at an end. The Kings 
-of the present day might profitably listen to 
Nebuchadnezzar’s letter in Daniel iv. He began at 
the times of the Gentiles, and has left this 
letter to be read by his successors. The words 
our Lord spoke while on earth “on whom this stone 
falls it shall grind him to powder” have been fulfilled 
(Matt. xxi:44). Such is the awful fate which 
“Christian civilization (?)” and “Kultur (!)” and a 
Christ-less Christendom is rapidly approaching. Oh! 
that the kings and rulers would hear His word. “Be 
wise now therefore, O ye kings; be instructed ye 
judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and 
rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest He be angry 
and ye perish in the way—yet a little and His wrath 


9 


130 THE REVELATION 


will be kindled” (Ps. ii: 9-12). But they will not hear. 
They cast away His Word and ere long the times of 
the Gentiles will end forever in this indescribable 
catastrophe. And while the armies perish as to the 
body and God’s wrath sweeps the earth clean of the 
mass of apostates, taking vengeance on them that 
know not God and that obey not the Gospel, the 
Beast (the head of the empire) and the false Prophet 
(the second Beast of chapter xiii), that is the false 
Messiah, the Anti-christ, are cast alive into a lake of 
fire burning with brimstone.* They were not anni- 
hilated, for a thousand years later we still find them 
there (xx: 10); and still they are in existence and will 
ever be as individuals in that place of eternal punish- 
ment. And those that were slain as to the body will 
be raised after the millennium and also share the 
place with the two, whom they followed and wor- 
shipped. 


Chapter XX. 4. The Binding of Satan. Verses I-3. 
And now Satan, who was cast out of heaven three 
and one-half years before the visible and glorious 
coming of the Lord, and who has been on earth in 
person, though not beheld by human eyes, is now 
seized to be put into his prison for a thousand years. 
And the demons, who were liberated by Satan (chap- 
ter ix) are likewise shut up into the bottomless pit, 
though this is not mentioned because it is self-evident, 
The terms “key” and “great chain” are of course 





*The King of the North, the great invader (the Assyrian 
of the end-time) will also be cast into the lake of fire. See 
Isaiah xxx, 33. . 


THE REVELATION 131 


figurative. He is mentioned in all his infamous titles. 
He is called dragon on account of his horrible cruelty 
and vileness, the old serpent on account of his mali- 
ciousness, guile and deception ; he is the devil ; the arch- 
tempter of man, and Satan because he is the accuser 
of the brethren, the one who opposed Christ and His 
people. He is now dethroned as the god of this age, 
completely stripped of his power and his dethrone- 
ment means the complete enthronement of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. And here is the important statement 
that this being, the once glorious Lucifer, the Son of 
the morning and light-bearer, who fell through pride, 
has been the deceiver of the nations. It would take 
pages to describe his deceptions and his lies. Never 
before has he been so successful as now, blinding the 
eyes of them that believe not. Idolatry and all the 
perversions of the Truth of God are his work. He is 
the author and supporter of every cult which denies 
Christ. He is the real parent of Higher criticism, 
Mormonism, Russellism, Christian Science, Spiritism, 
Theosophy, Romanism, and all other isms which deny 
the Truth of God. No blessing can be expected, no 
millennium of this earth, till he is bound and thus 
completely restrained from deceiving the nations, 
And this is done. What a happy day it will be when 
he is shut up. Interesting and helpful in connection 
with these opening verses of our chapter are the words 
we find in Isaiah’s little apocalypse (Is. xxiv-xxvii). 
“And it shall come to pass in that day (the day of the 
Lord’s glorious manifestation) that the Lord shall 
punish the host of the high ones on high, and the 
kings of the earth upon the earth. And they shall 


132 THE REVELATION 


be gathered together as prisoners are gathered in 
the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison, and after 
many days shall they be visited” (Is. xxiv: 21-22). 

5. The Reign of Christ and His Saints for a Thou- 
sand Years. Verses 4-6. Thrones are seen next by 
the Seer. “And I saw thrones, and they sat upon 
them and judgment was given unto them.” Daniel also 
saw thrones in connection with the judgment of the 
Beast, but nothing is said of those occupying the 
thrones in Daniel’s vision. Here we have the com- 
plete revelation, and several times the blessed state- 
ment is made that Christ and His Saints shall reign 
with Him for a thousand years. The new age in 
which all things are put in subjection of His feet, the 
personal reign of Christ, in which all His redeemed 
people have a share, begins. It will last a thousand 
years. Six times we read of the thousand years in this 
chapter. Because this coming age will last a thousand 
years it has been called by the Latin word “millen- 
nium,” not a few have made the astonishing declara- 
tion that such a period of time during which Christ 
and His Saints reign over the earth has but little 
foundation in the Scripture. It is quite true that the 
only place in which the duration of such an age is 
given is this great final Book of Revelation. And that 
should be sufficient for any Christian to believe in such 
an age of a thousand years. However, this age of un- 
speakable blessing and glory for this earth is revealed 
throughout the entire Bible. The Old Testament con- 
tains hundreds of unfulfilled promises of blessing for 
Israel, the nations of the earth and even for all cre- 
ation, which have never seen even a partial fulfillment. 


THE REVELATION 133 


Isaiah is full of such promises. In the New Testa- 
ment there are also passages which clearly teach and 
point to such an age of glory for this earth. Read 
Matt. xix: 28; Acts iii: 19-21; Romans viii: 19-23; 
Eph. 1:10; Col. i:20; Phil. ii: 9-11. What awful dis- 
heartening pessimism it would be if we had to believe, 
that the terrible conditions prevailing on the earth 
now, conditions which have steadily become worse, 
were to continue and that man’s work is to remedy 
them and produce something better. This earth has a 
bright and glorious future. Nations will some day 
no longer turn, as they do now their plowshares into 
swords, but change their swords into plowshares. 
Righteousness and peace will surely kiss each other 
and creation’s curse and travail pains will end. Mercy 
and truth meet together. 

But when? Never as long as the great unfoldings 
of this book, which we have briefly followed, have 
not come to pass. There can be no better day for the 
earth as long as He is absent and not on the throne, 
which belongs to Him. But when He comes, when He 
has appeared in glory and in majesty, then the earth 
will find her rest and groaning creation will be deliv- 
ered. As we do not write on the great blessings and 
glories to come when He comes, we must refrain from 
following these things. Here in our book the revelation 
is given that Christ shall reign for a thousand years 
and His Saints shall reign with Him. Let us notice 
briefly the different classes mentioned who are asso- 
ciated with Christ in His personal reign. The entire 
company of the redeemed, as we saw them under 
the symbolical figure of the twenty-four Elders, occu- 


134 THE REVELATION 


pying thrones and wearing crowns, are undoubtedly 
meant by the first statement “they sat upon them and 
judgment was given unto them.” They judge with 
Him. This is the raptured company whom we saw 
first in glory in chapters iv and v; and we, dear fellow- 
believer, belong to this company. Then follow the 
martyrs, which we saw under the fifth seal (vi: 9-11) 
“And I saw the souls of them that had been beheaded 
on account of the testimony of Jesus and for the 
Word of God.” ‘Then we have a third company. 
“And I saw those who had not worshipped the Beast, 
nor his image, and had not received his mark on their 
forehead, or in their hands.” ‘These are the other 
martyrs who were slain during the great tribulation, 
when the Beast set up the image and demanded its 
worship (xiii). They lived and reigned with Christ a 
thousand years. The first resurrection is passed and 
all who have part in it reign with Christ, are priests 
of God and of Christ and shall reign with Him a 
thousand years. Oh! wonderful grace which has saved 
us! Grace which has saved us in Christ and through 
His ever precious blood delivered us from eternal 
perdition! Grace which saved us from Satan’s power, 
from sin and all its curse! Grace which has lifted 
into such heights of Glory and has made us the sons 
of God and the joint-heirs of the Lord Jesus Christ! 
And how little after all we enter into all these things, 
which ought to be our daily joy and delight. How 
little we know of the power of the coming glory of 
being with Christ and reigning with Him! How we 
do cling to the passing things of a fast passing age. 
May the Holy Spirit bless us all dear readers as we 


THE REVELATION 135 


look forward into the coming glory of sharing the 
glorious inheritance of our Saviour Lord and may 
our lives tell out the wonderful story that we are the 
joint-heirs of Christ. 

And even if we were now to enlarge upon the reign 
of Christ, the throne of Christ, the dominion of Christ, 
the glory of Christ, the righteous judgments and 
government of the King, it would be but with a 
feeble pen and with a stammering tongue. Not the 
half can be told. But this we know we shall be 
with Him and enjoy with Him His glorious reign 
and inheritance. The rest of the dead mentioned in 
the fifth verse are the wicked dead; we shall hear more 
of them at the close of this chapter. 


NINTH DIVISION: AFTER THE THOUSAND 
YEARS. THE VISION OF THE NEW 
JERUSALEM. 


Chapters XX: 7-XXII: 5 


The Millennium, the thousand years’ reign of Christ 
with His Saints, will be earth’s jubilee. From certain 
sides, especially the Seventh Day Adventists, the state- 
ment is made in our days that the world is soon going 
to end, that God will destroy the earth by fire and 
thus end all. This is an unscriptural assertion. If it 
were true and the world would come to an end this 
year, or next year, the last word would belong to 
Satan, and God would confess Himself defeated. The 
blessed redemption work of our Lord would then 
likewise be proven insufficient to put things back into 
the condition before sin entered the world. God can- 


136 THE REVELATION 


not permit the destruction of the earth in the con- 
dition in which it is now. And as already stated the 
entire Bible bears witness to it that there will come a 
better day for this earth before the predicted destruc- 
tion by fire comes. And that promised age of bless- 
ing and glory comes when the King, our Lord, has 
come and reigns in righteousness with His Saints over 
the earth. “For He must reign till He hath put all 
enemies under His feet. The last enemy that shall be 
destroyed is death. For he hath put all things under 
His feet, But when He saith, All things are put under 
Him, it is manifest that He is excepted, which did put 
all things under Him” (1 Cor. xv:25-27). In that 
age which begins, as we have seen, with His visible 
manifestation, the unfulfilled predictions of the Old 
Testament will find their literal and most blessed 
fulfillment. “In His days shall the righteous flourish; 
and abundance of peace, so long as the moon endureth. 
He shall have dominion also from sea to sea and from 
the river unto the ends of the earth” (Ps. Ixxii: 7-8). 
“And He shall judge among the nations, and shall re- 
buke many people, and they shall beat their swords 
into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks, 
nation shall not lift sword up against nation neither 
shall they learn war any more” (Isaiah ii: 4). “The 
wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion 
shall eat straw like the bullock, and dust shall be 
the serpent’s meat; they shall not hurt or destroy in 
all my holy mountain, saith the Lord” (Isaiah xv: 25). 
And mariy other prophecies could be added which 
will then find a literal accomplishment. Long ago 
Jehovah had said “But as truly as I live all the earth 


THE REVELATION 137 


shall be filled with the glory of the Lord” (Numb. 
xiv:21). And this utterance of an Almighty Lord will 
find its fulfillment in the day when He reigns. “For 
the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the 
glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea” (Hab. 
ii:14). “The whole earth is full of His glory” (Isaiah 
vi:3). The earth will be full of His glory and there 
will be an increase and a blessing which no pen can 
describe. 

But this great and glorious future of the earth is 
not a permanent state. If man had thought this 
out and invented such a future for this earth, man 
might have added, that in this blessed condition the 
earth would remain forever. But no human mind 
could think out all this; what follows now shows us 
that we have here revelation. 


Chapter XX. 1. Satan Loosed. The Last Revolt. 
Verses 7-9. Satan who was put into the abyss a 
thousand years before, is now loosed out of his prison. 
God permits him to come forth once more. Who 
could have ever thought of such a thing! The arch- 
enemy who had done his vile and wicked work among 
the human race for a thousand years, put at last into 
the place of perfect restraint, and now loosed once 
more to continue, for a brief season, his work! And 
he finds nations ready for his deception, not a few, 
but a number “as the sand of the sea.” God permits 
Satan to come out of his prison, so that the absolute 
corruption of man might be demonstrated. Man has 
been tried and tested under every possible condition. 
He has failed in every age. He failed under the law 


138 THE REVELATION 


- 


and lie failed even more in the grace-dispensation, and 
now under the most glorious conditions, during the 
millennium, when the Lord Himself is known in all 
the earth and reigns in righteousness, when want 
and nearly all the sorrows of a ruined creation are _ 
banished, when there is peace on earth, man also fails 
and does not fully respond to a gracious Lord. But 
here is a difficulty which many have. Many a sincere 
post-Millennialist, who has studied the pre-millennial 
coming of our Lord, has asked this question, “If the 
whole world is converted during the millennium, how 
is it then that Satan finds nations ready to side with 
him after the thousand year reign of Christ and then 
leads them on to destruction?” ‘The difficulty is far 
from being as great as it is generally made. In fact 
it is easily explained. As far as Israel is concerned, 
the all Israel living, when He comes, the trusting rem- 
nant of Israel, they will constitute the blessed nation 
in possession of all her promised blessings. ‘I'hey are 
not mentioned as siding with Satan. No more back- 
sliding for that nation. Isaiah lix: 20-21 vouches for 
this. “And the Redeemer shall come to Zion (His 
second coming), and unto them that turn from trans- 
gression in Jacob, saith the Lord. As for me, this is 
my covenant with them, saith the Lord. My Spirit 
that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in 
thy mouth, shall not, depart out of thy mouth, nor 
out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth 
of thy seed’s seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and 
forever.” “Neither will 1 hide my face any more from 
them for I have poured out my Spirit upon the house 
of Israel, saith the Lord God” (Ezek. XXxix? 29), 


THE REVELATION 139 


And the Gentile nations in the beginning of the 
millennium will also be converted. However the hu- 
man conditions of the earth will continue. The nations 
are not in a glorified state. Marriage will continue. 
Children will be born during the millennium. Indeed 
the earth will be populated as never before. Billions 
of human beings can be sustained upon our planet 
and they will come into existence by natural genera- 
tion during the golden age of glory. Wars will be 
unknown. No longer will the flower of manhood 
be cruelly murdered by human passion in that 
legalized horrible thing called war. Earthquakes 
will no longer sweep thousands upon thousands into 
an untimely grave, nor can famines and pestilences 
claim their millions. Nor will there be the great 
infant mortality. Physical death will no longer be 
the universal rule, but rather an exception (See Isaiah 
Ixv:20). Now every child born during the millennium 
of the converted nations comes into the world the 
same as the children in the present age. It is still 
true, conceived and born in sin. And it is equally 
true, they must be born again. And as many children 
of pious, godly parents in this age are Gospel hard- 
ened and live on in sin, though they hear the Gospel 
and see its power, so in the millennium, an enormous 
multitude will see the glory, live under the best and 
most glorious conditions the earth has seen since the 
fall of man, and yet they will be Glory hardened and 
only submit to the righteousness of that age and yield 
obedience through fear, for disobedience to the gov- 
erning laws of the kingdom on earth, will mean sudden 
and certain judgment. It is not the obedience pro- 


140 THE REVELATION 


duced by a believing, trusting heart, but only a feigned 
obedience. Three prophetic Psalms which speak of 
these millennial conditions make this clear, if we con- 
sider the marginal reading. “As soon as they hear of 
Me, they shall obey Me, the strangers shall yield 
feigned obedience unto Me” (Ps. xviii: 44). “Say 
unto God, How terrible art Thou in Thy works! 
Through the greatness of Thy power shall Thine 
enemies yield feigned obedience unto Thee” CPs 
Ixvi: 3). “The haters of the Lord yield feigned obedi- 
ence unto Him, but their time might have endured for- 
ever” (Ixxxi:15). Study these Psalms in their mil- 
lennial bearing. Thus many nations submit while 
sin is in their heart and in their blindness they long 
and hope for the day when they may cast off the 
restraint.* And that day comes when Satan is loosed 





*In the Millennium, the heavenly is displayed in con- 
nection with the earthly. The glory of God is manifested, 
so that the earth is filled with the knowledge of it as the 
waters cover the sea. Righteousness rules, and evil is afraid 
to lift its head. The curse is taken from the ground, which 
responds with wondrous fruitfulness. Amid all this, the 
spiritual condition is by no means in correspondence with 
_ the outward blessing. Even the manifest connections of 
righteousness and Prosperity cannot avail to make men love 
righteousness; nor the goodness of God, though evidenced 
on every side, to bring men to repentance. At the “four 
corners of the earth,” retreating as far as possible, from 
the central glory, there are still those who represent Israel’s 
old antagonists, and thus are called by their names “Gog 
and Magog.” Nor are they remnants, but masses of popu- 
lations brought together by sympathetic hatred of God and 
His people—crowding alike out of light into the darkness: a 
last and terrible answer to the question, “Lord, what #s man?” 


—F. W. G. 


THE REVELATION 141 


out of his prison to deceive these nations which are 
in the four quarters of the earth. Nor must we over- 
look the fact that before all this happened, through- 
out the millennium, the nations were warned of the 
possibility and the consequences of such a revolt. As 
already quoted in Isaiah Ixv:25 we read that while 
the curse is removed from anitnal creation, the ser- 
pent alone remains in the place where the curse has 
placed that creature. “And dust shall be the ser- 
pent’s meat.” The serpent continues crawling in the 
dust, a warning to the nations that the age of glory 
and blessing will end in a manifestation of Satan. 
And there is still another warning voice during the 
thousand year reign of Christ. “And it shall come 
to pass, that from one new moon to another, and 
from one sabbath unto another, shall all flesh come 
to worship before Me, saith the Lord. And they shall 
go forth and look upon the carcases of the men that 
have transgressed against Me; for their worm shall 
not die, neither shall their fire be quenched, and they 
shall be an abhorring unto all flesh” (Is. Ixvi: 23-24). 
Here we read that during the millennium the nations 
will go up to Jerusalem to worship there. And after 
they have done so and beheld the visible glory of the 
Lord, which will be seen in and above the city, they 
will be led out to look upon a most awful scene. There 
at one side of Jerusalem is a deep valley. In looking 
down they behold the carcases of the men who trans- 
gressed against the Lord. Their bodies are seen; a 
never dying worm gnaws there and an unquenchable 
fire burns. An awful picture of another place, where 
the worm does not die and the fire is not quenched. 


142 THE REVELATION 


It is‘a solemn warning to these nations that the story 
of sin and apostasy is not yet completed. 

Gog and Magog here must not be identified with 
Gog and Magog of Ezekiel xxxviii and xxxix. The 
invasion of Israel’s land described by Ezekiel took 
place before the millennium, it is pre-millennial. Gog 
and Magog here must not be taken in a literal meaning, 
it is used metaphorically, The invasion before the 
millennium is the prototype of this final revolt. Utterly 
blinded, as these multitudes must be, they follow will- 
ingly Satan’s leadership. Gathering from the four 
corners of the earth they compass the camp of the 
Saints and the beloved city. The beloved city is 
Jerusalem. The “camp of the Saints” may mean the 
heavenly Saints. The redeemed are above the earth 
in the new Jerusalem, and yet they have also access 
to the earth and are with the King in the government 
of the earth. Nothing is said about the camp of the 
Saints and the beloved city. They know the outcome. 
God permits the invading hosts with Satan at the 
head to compass them. But suddenly God acts. A 
swift and awful judgment overtakes them. Solemnly 
brief is the announcement “fire came down from God 
out of heaven and devoured them.” Not a wicked one 
is left; the earth is completely purged of evil-doers. 

2. The Devil's Eternal Doom. Verse ro. It was 
the final attempt of the dethroned usurper to regain 
his lost dominion. For thousands of years, in the 
all-wise purposes of God, he was permitted to be the 
prince of the power of the air and the god of this 
age. We have followed his history in this book and 
seen how he was cast out of heaven upon the earth 


THE REVELATION 143 


where he caused the great tribulation. Then we be- 
held him stripped of all his power. The kingdoms 
of the world became the kingdom of Christ and the 
old serpent was cast into the abyss where he remained 
a thousand years. Loosed for a little season he tried 
once more to become earth’s master. And fire out of 
heaven devoured the nations who had revolted. The 
devil receives his final doom. He is cast into the 
lake of fire and brimstone. He goes to a fixed place, 
a locality where unspeakable and eternal torment is 
his portion. This place is prepared for the devil 
and his angels (Matt. xxv: 41). And all the wicked 
will share that place. And he finds others there. 
The first beings who were cast into this final abode 
were the Beast (the emperor of the Roman empire, 
the little horn of Dan. vii), and the false prophet 
(the personal Anti-christ, the second Beast of chapter 
xiii). ‘They were put there a thousand years before 
and as they are there as persons it shows they were 
not annihilated. Annihilation is an unscriptural and 
evil doctrine. And they shall be tormented day and 
night for ever and ever—for the ages of ages—never 
ending—for all eternity. What a solemn truth this is! 
Yet men meddle with it and deny future, conscious and 
eternal punishment. Besides these three persons, the 
nations who were judged and condemned in the be- 
ginning of the millennium, when the Son of Man sat 
upon the throne of His glory (Matt. xxv: 31) are also 
in the Lake of Fire. 

‘There is an awful fitness in the sovereign arrange- 
ment of the holy God, that the devil, and those who, 
by persistence in sin, had made themselves more and 


144 THE REVELATION 


more like him, should spend their eternity together— 
and that eternity in a place shut out from all that is 
good, which they had hated, and in outer darkness, 
where there is wailing and gnashing of teeth. And 
of this hell-fire, into which those wicked living on 
the earth were cast when Christ had judged them, the 
language used is, that it was ‘prepared for the devil 
and his angels.’ But these words seem certainly to 
imply that he had not then been cast into it.”* 

3. The Great White Throne Judgment. Verses 11- 
15. And now we reach the last great judgment scene 
of God’s holy Word. Much confusion prevails among 
Christians about this judgment. ‘There is no such 
thing in the Word of God as a universal judgment, 
nor is there a universal resurrection. Every human 
being which has died will be raised at some time. Our 
Lord spoke (John v: 28) of two resurrections, a resur- 
rection unto life and a resurrection unto judgment. 
The Revelation speaks of the first resurrection. “This 
is the first resurrection” (xx:5). And before the 
Apostle wrote of a resurrection from among the dead 
(Phil. iii:11). The first resurrection was finished 
in the beginning of the millennium. “But the rest 
of the dead lived not again until the thousand years 
were finished.” The rest of the dead come now into 
view and they are of necessity the wicked dead, who 
died in their sins, and whose is the resurrection unto 
judgment. Some, like “Pastor” Russell, who echoes 
the evil teachings of others, have invented a third 
resurrection, a resurrection of the unsaved for a 
second chance. In the light of this final Bible book 


x 





*Lincoln on Revelation. 


THE REVELATION 145 


there is no room whatever for such a resurrection, 
which would give the lost another opportunity. Nor 
does the rest of the Bible mention such a third resur- 
rection. And this great judgment is not a universal 
judgment. It is taught that the entire human race, 
the living and the dead, will appear before this 
great white throne. But this is incorrect, for it saith 
“I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God.” 
No living people are there at all. Again the judgment- 
scene in Matthew xxv: 31, etc., is spoken of as being 
the universal judgment and identical with the judg- 
ment here in Revelation. But this is another error. 
In the judgment of Matthew xxv the dead are not 
there, but living nations are judged in the beginning 
of the Millennium. And these nations are judged on 
account of the treatment of the Jewish preachers of 
the Gospel of the Kingdom heralded by them during 
the jast seven years of the age. They did not accept 
the last offer of mercy and that is why they treated 
the messengers as they did. Furthermore the throne 
which the Son of Man occupies in Matthew xxv is 
upon the earth; the throne in Revelation xx: 11 comes 
into view after carth and heaven fled away. The 
church and the Saints of God are not concerned at 
all in the judgment of Matthew xxv, nor in the great 
white throne judgment. They are at that time in 
His own presence glorified. Every Christian should 
have these things clearly defined and know that for 
him, as in Christ, there is no more judgment or con- 
demnation (John v: 24; Rom. viii: 1). The judgment 
seat of Christ before which believers have to appear 
10 


146 THE REVELATION 


(2 Gor. v: 10) does not concern their eternal salvation, 
but their works and rewards. 

Who is the occupant of this great White Throne? 
Not God the Father, but God the Son. “The Father 
judgeth no man but hath committed all judgment unto 
the Son” (John v:22). The earth and heaven fled 
from His face. Sin-stained and defiled as they were 
they flee away from the face of the holy One. The 
great conflagration of 2 Peter iii: 7-12 takes place. 
Fire of judgment swept the earth before the millen- 
nium, the day of the Lord, began; but the all consum- 
ing fire comes after the millennium. Out of that great 
conflagration there arises a new heaven and a new 
earth (xxi:1). 

“One could readily imagine that the present scene, 
so marred and wrecked, would at once disappear be- 
fore the glory and majesty of such an One, but that 
is not what is seen here. It is the earth and the heaven 
constituted by the Lord Himself as spheres to display 
His glory and righteousness, that cannot abide the 
glory of His face. The millennial scene, both in its 
higher and lower departments, is at the best an im- 
perfect condition. “The earth and heaven fled’—not 
passed out of existence, not annihilated—the next 
clause carefully guards against any such unscriptural 
deduction, ‘place was not found for them.’ It does 
intimate the complete disappearance of the millennial 
earth and heaven. "Consequent upon the removal of 
these, new heavens and a new earth fitted, furnished, 
and constituted for eternity take their place—are made, 
(Isa. Ixvi: 22; 2 Peter iii: 13). Between the passing 
away of the millennial scene and the introduction of 


THE REVELATION 147 


the eternal world, material in both cases—the great 
white throne is set up. This consideration imparts 
profound solemnity to the scene before us. For the 
throne is not set on the earth, nor in relation to its 
dispensations and times. It is a scene outside human 
history entirely. We have passed out of time and into 
eternity. The judgment therefore of the throne is final 
and in its very nature eternal. We are in God’s eter- 
nity. There can be no measures of time nor limita- 
tions bounded by the globe, for that by which all is 
measured and limited has passed away. The judgment 
is of souls in their individual relation to God and is 
consequently final and eternal.’’* 

But what about the millions of saved Israelites and 
Gentiles who are on the millennial earth? Where are 
they during this great conflagration? What becomes 
of them? “That they share the eternal blessings and 
glories in the eternal state is certain. But their abode 
between the burning of the earth and the calling into 
existence of the new heaven and the new earth is 
unrevealed. Speculation on it would be wrong. We 
should accept the silences of Scripture as much in 
faith as we accept the promises of God. 

And John sees the dead standing before the Throne. 
Books were opened and another book was opened, 
the book of life. “And the dead were judged out of 
the things which were written in the books, according 
to their works.” The books are symbolical; con< 
science and memory will speak loudly. Twice we read 
that they are judged according to their works. Upor 





*W. Scott on Revelation. 


148 THE REVELATION 


Rorhans v: 12, the marginal reading “in whom (Adam) 
all have sinned” some have taught that man is held 
responsible for the sin of Adam and the corrupt 
nature man has. But that is a mistake. We are not 
held responsible for having a fallen nature. We are 
responsible for the outworking of that nature. There- 
fore the dead are judged “according to their works.” 
And in the “Book of Life” none of their names were 
written, or they would not have been in that company. 
“All this would seem to show that, though a millen- 
nium has passed since the first resurrection, yet no 
righteous dead can stand among this throng. The 
suggestion of the “Book of Life” has seemed to many 
to imply that there are such; but it is not said that 
there are, and the words “whosoever was not found 
written in the Book of Life was cast into the lake 
of fire’ may be simply a solemn declaration (now 
affirmed by the result) that grace is man’s only pos- 
sible escape from the judgment.”* 

The second resurrection takes place. The sea gives 
up the dead and death and hades give up the dead. 
Hades gives up the souls, and Death, used here for 
the grave, gives up the bodies. Death and Hades were 
cast into the lake of fire. Both had come into exist- 
ence because man had sinned, and therefore they are 
cast into the place, where all belongs which is con- 
trary to the holiness and righteousness of God. And 
then that solemn word! “And whosoever was not 
found written in the Book of Life was cast into the 
lake of fire.” It corresponds to that other solemn 
statement in John iii: 36. “He that believeth on the 


» 





* Numerical Bible. 


ee 


THE REVELATION 149 


Son hath everlasting life; and he that believeth not 
the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God 
abideth upon him.” To be written in the “Book of 
Life” means to have life in Christ. Not our works, 
not our character, not our religiousness, not our tears, 
our prayers and our service can put our names in the 
“Book of Life.” Grace alone can do it, and Grace 
does it as we believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. Reader! 
is your name written there? 

The Saints of God are in eternal glory; the wicked 
dead, the lost are in an eternal lake of fire and suffer 
conscious, eternal punishment. And how man, blind, 
presumptuous man, yea even such who know God, rise 
up against this solemn truth, the eternal punishment 
of the wicked. They accuse God of injustice, as if 
the judge of all the earth would not do right. That 
the suffering of the lost differs is obvious. It is eternal 
because the evil condition remains unchanged, There 
is no repentance, no faith, no new birth in hell. As 
there are different rewards for the faithful service 
of the saints, so are there different degrees of punish- 
ment for the unsaved (Luke xii: 47-48). This is the 
second death, not blotting out of existence, but end- 
less existence in separation from God. The following 
helpful summary appeared in “Our Hope.” 

1. Each individual is in the only possible place for 
which he is adapted by life and nature—his own place. 

2. The varying rewards or penalties have been 
“worked out” by the individual, and are not indis- 
criminate. 

3. Where there has been no opposing will, as in the 
case of infants or those irresponsible, then the will of 


150 THE REVELATION 


God is not hindered, and He willeth not the death of 
any. By the ransom He has found in Christ all such 
are saved forever. 

4. It is due to human will, not divine, that any are 
lost. 

5. Not one protest will then be heard in any part 
of the universe against the justice of God. 

6. All creation will thus be reconciled to, and in 
harmony at least, in the confession of the righteous- 
ness of God. 

7. And thus God shall be all in all; the one to whom 
all submission is accorded, by all, everywhere.* 


Chapter XXI. 4. The Eternal State. Verses 1-8. 
And now the eternal state comes into view. “And I 
saw a new heaven and a new earth; for the first 
heaven and the first earth were passed away and the 
sea is no more.” ‘This is the revelation concerning 
the final and eternal state of the earth. “Thou hast 
established the earth and it abideth” (Ps. cxix: go); 
“But the earth abideth forever” (Eccl. i:4). These 
divine statements are now fulfilled. Many Christians 
have a very vague conception of the eternal state of 
the earth and the abode of the redeemed. They think 
of it as a spiritual state destitute of any locality. 
But it is not so. The earth and the heaven abide as 
definite places throughout all eternity. What a marvel- 
lous fact this is! In chapter xx:11 we read that the 
earth and the heaven fled away and there was found 
no place. We saw that at that time the great con- 


*“Our Hope” May, 191s. Notes on Revelation by F.C. J. 


THE REVELATION 15] 


flagration of which Peter speaks took place, when “‘the 
heaven shall pass away with a great noise and the 
elements shall be dissolved with fervent heat, the 
earth also and the works that are therein shall be 
burned up.” (2 Peter iii: 10.) But we read in the 
same chapter “nevertheless we, according to His 
promise look for new heavens and a new earth, 
wherein dwelleth righteousness.” (verse 13). During 
the millennium righteousness reigns upon the earth, 
but now a state comes for the earth when righteousness 
shall dwell there. The great burning up meant not 
an annihilation of the earth and the heavens; God does 
not annihilate anything, nor does Scripture teach an 
annihilation of material things and much less the 
annihilation of human beings, as false teachers claim. 
The conflagration of the earth and the heaven means 
their complete purification. We can do nothing better 
to help in the understanding of this than quoting 
what another has written on this important and inter- 
esting subject. 

“Let us look at the question of continuity between 
the earth that flees away and the earth that succeeds 
it. At first sight we should surely say, they cannot 
be identical. The well-known passage in the epistle of 
Peter would seem to confirm this (2 Peter iii: 10, 12). 
There we learn that ‘the heavens shall pass away with 
a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent 
heat; the earth also, and the works that are therein, 
shall be burned up.’ And it is repeated, and thus em- 
phasized by repetition, that ‘the heavens being on fire 
shall be dissolved, and the elements shall melt with | 
fervent heat.’ 


152 THE REVELATION 


“Vet, as we look more closely, we shall find reason 
to doubt whether more is meant than the destruction 
of the earth as the place of human habitation. In the 
deluge, to which it is compared (verses 5-7), ‘the 
world that then was perished’: yet its continuity with 
the present no one doubts. Fire, though the instru- 
ment of a more penetrating judgment, yet does not 
annihilate the material upon which it fastens. The 
melting even of elements implies rather the reverse, 
and dissolution is not (in this sense) destruction. 

“Yet the heavens and the earth pass away—that is, 
in the form in which now we know them; or, as the 
apostle speaks to the Corinthians, ‘the fashion of this 
world passes away’ (1 Cor. vii: 21): and that this is 
the sense in which we are to understand it, other 
scriptures come to assure us. 

“A ‘new’ earth does not necessarily mean another 
earth, except as a ‘new’ man means another man— 
‘new’ in the sense of renewed. And even the words 
here, ‘there was no more sea,’ naturally suggest another 
state of the earth than now exists. This fact is a 
significant one: that which is the type of instability 
and barrenness, and condemns to it so large a portion 
of the globe, is gone utterly and forever. At the 
beginning of Genesis we find the whole earth buried 
under it; emerging on the third day, and the waters 
given their bounds, which but once afterward they 
pass. Now they are gone forever, as are the wicked, 
to whom Isaiah compares it: ‘The wicked are like the 
troubled sea when it cannot rest, whose waters cast 
up mire and dirt.’ This last is the effect of chafing 
against its bounds, as the ‘mind of the flesh’ is “not sub- 


THE REVELATION 153 


ject to the law of God, neither indeed can be’ (Rom. 
vos) 

With this we fully agree. The heaven mentioned 
cannot be the entire heavens; for there is a heaven 
which cannot be touched by these fires of purification. 
The heaven is that which surrounds the earth and 
which was once the peculiar sphere of the great 
usurper, the prince of the power in the air. And when 
Peter writes that all this is according to His promise, 
he had a well-known prophetic statement in Isaiah 
in mind. “For as the new heaven and the new earth, 
which I will make, shall remain before me, saith 
the Lord, so shall your seed and your name remain.” 
(Isaiah Ixvi:22. See also Ixv:17). From this state- 
ment we get very definite information that the re- 
deemed Israel established upon the new earth will 
throughout the eternal state be distinct from the 
saved nations. They will throughout all eternity bear 
witness to God’s faithfulness as the covenant keeping 
God. The new heaven and the new earth are there- 
fore the abodes of the redeemed. The new earth, the 
eternal glory spot of redeemed Israel and the re- 
deemed nations. And the new Jerusalem will come 
out of heaven to fill the new earth and the new heaven 
as well. “And I, John, saw the holy city, new Jeru- 
salem, coming down from God out of heaven, pre- 
pared as a bride adorned for her husband.” 

The new Jerusalem, the holy city, comes into view. 
During the millennium the city of Jerusalem was 
known as the place of glory for the earth. Numerous 
Old Testament predictions were fulfilled. See Isaiah 





*E. W. Grant. 


154 THE REVELATION 


iv: 5-6; liv: 11-14; Ix: 11-22. In chapter xx: 9 she is 
called “the beloved city.” But in Revelation ii: 12 
we have another Jerusalem mentioned, the same city 
which John sees coming down out of heaven, the 
place of the highest glory. It is the church in all her 
glory; the statement “prepared as a bride adorned for 
her husband” establishes this beyond controversy. She 
is called “holy” for all is holy; and a “city” because 
the Saints are in blessed communion and fellowship 
there. In the highest glory she had her abode. But 
now she is being revealed in all her eternal glory and 
beauty. During the millennial reign this wonderful 
city was above the earth and from there Christ reigned 
and His Saints with Him. But here she comes down 
out of heaven. A thousand years before the mar- 
riage of the lamb had taken place (xix: 7-8), and now 
after a thousand years of unspeakable glory, she is still 
seen “as a bride adorned for her husband.” And yet 
all these things are given in figurative language. What 
will be the reality!) The masterwork of God is at last 
fully manifested; what He accomplished through Him, 
who left the Glory to die on the Cross, is made known. 
The eternal, never ending riches, purchased by Him 
who was rich and became poor for our sakes, are 
beginning to be displayed in all their unfading splendor. 
Then the Saints of God will learn to know the full 


meaning of Eph. i: 7, “that in the ages to come He . 


might display the surpassing riches of His grace in 
kindness towards us through Christ Jesus.” “And I 
heard a loud voice out of heaven, saying, Behold the 
tabernacle of God is with men, and He will dwell 
with them, and they shall be His people, and God 


THE REVELATION 155 


Himself shall be with them, and be their God.” This 
is the glorious consummation. It is the goal of a 
holy, loving God. In Eden He visited man unfallen, 
walked and talked with Him. Then sin severed this 
fellowship. He dwelt in the midst of Israel in the 
holiest of the tabernacle. In this age the church is 
His habitation by the Spirit, but the blessed consum- 
mation in the eternal state will result in God dwelling 
with His redeemed Creatures. What holy, glorious, 
never-ending intimacy that will be! It is the time when 
God is all in all (1 Cor. xv: 28). When that time has 
come all the former things are passed away. “And 
God shall wipe away every tear from their eyes, and 
there shall be no more death, nor sorrow, nor crying, 
neither shall there be any more pain; for the former 
things are passed away.” ‘Tears, death, sorrow, cry- 
ing, pain and suffering, these came into existence 
through sin. And all these things, the effects of sin, 
are now gone. What relief and what joy! The Saints 
of God in countless numbers, ever since sin came into 
the world with all its attending miseries, have looked 
forward through their tears of sorrow and of pain, 
to the blessed day when sorrow and sighing should 
flee away and all mourning be turned into joy. Yea, 
weeping endureth during the night, the dark night of 
sin, but joy cometh in the morning. The morning, 
when the eternal day breaks, will chase all the shadows 
of the night away. May we learn, in the midst of tears 
and grief, sorrow and pain, to look forward in holy 
and blessed anticipation to the day “when God shall 
wipe away every tear.” 

Then we hear God’s own voice. “And He that sat 


aa 


156 THE REVELATION 


on the throne said, Behold I make all things new. 
And He saith to me, Write: for these words are true 
and faithful. And He said unto me, It is done. Iam 
Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end. I will 
give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the 
water of life freely. He that overcomes shall inherit 
all things; and I will be His God and he shall be my 
Son.” “Tt is done,” tells us that all is now accom- 
plished through the power of God. At the close of 
the twenty-second Psalm, the Psalm in which the suf- 
ferings of Christ and His coming glories are revealed, 
we find the significant ending, “He hath done it.”* 
When He hung on the cross and was about to bow His 
blessed head and give His life in death, He said, “It 
is finished.” The great work was done. And that 
work which was accomplished on the cross is the foun- 
dation of everything. Then in chapter xvi: 17, the 
voice out of the temple from the throne spoke, “Tt is 
done.” The end of man’s day had then come and 
the day of millennial blessing and glory was ushered 
in. And here it is for the last time that we find this 
divine utterance. All is now accomplished; nothing 
else needs to be done. And it is most blessed to see 
that the precious Gospel itself is not overlooked. Is 
the Gospel precious to our hearts? It certainly is to 
any redeemed one. But we must not forget that the 
same Gospel is even more precious to God Himself, 
for in the Gospel His own righteousness has been so 
wonderfully exalted and His love has been made 
known. The Gospel is His Gospel and the Gospel of 
His Son, our Lord Jesus Christ. It is the power of 


* Revised Version, 


THE REVELATION 157 


God unto salvation. And so God delights to mention 
it in this last Book of the Bible a number of times. 
It was a reminder of the Gospel when we heard in 
chapter xix, “Blessed are they which are called unto 
the marriage supper of the Lamb!” And once more 
in the very end of this book we shall find the Gospel 
invitation, “And let him that is athirst come. And 
whosoever will let him come and take the water of 
life freely.” (xxii:17.) And here it is the Gospel. 
God, so to speak, in revealing this great consumma- 
tion in the eternal state, when He will be all in all, 
sounds forth once more the blessed Gospel promise 
and assurance. The water of life, He will give freely 
to all who thirst. And what a consummation of the 
Gospel, unfathomably deep—“I will be his God, and he 
shall be my Son!” Perhaps this simple volume may 
fall into the hands of some who have neglected so great 
a salvation, who have rejected God’s bountiful offer. 
Then let me speak to you, dear reader. God wants 
you in His eternal home and glory. Oh! come to 
Him, who still waits and is ready to give you the water 
of life freely. 

And next comes the eternal state of those who have 
rejected the Gospel, who lived in their sins and died 
in their sins, unsaved, unregenerated. “But the fear- 
ful, and unbelieving, and abominable, and murderers, 
and fornicators, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all 
liars shall have their part in the lake which burneth 
with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.” 
God still speaks. How many false teachers are 
meddling to-day with the solemn Scripture doctrine 
on the endless punishment of the wicked. Texts of 


158 THE REVELATION 


the Word of God which declare this solemn truth are 
perverted by them and handled deceitfully. Other 
texts which these men declare do not belong in the 
Bible, they brand as interpolations. But he who 
touches these words in this chapter touches the Word 
of God Himself, and the teacher who declares that 
there is no eternal punishment rejects the very Word 
as it comes from God. There is an actual place, the 
new heaven and the new earth, for the redeemed ; there 
is also an actual and everlasting place of punishment 
for the last. Eternal is the glory; eternal is the punish- 
ment. The human heart, unregenerated, is here un- 
covered once more* in the description of those who 
find their eternal abode in the lake of fire. And that 
lake of fire “burneth”; there is no cessation. It is a 
fire prepared for the devil and his angels who are 
spirits. The fire that causes such intense suffering to 
the body is the symbol of it. 

5. The Vision of the Holy City, Jerusalem. Verses 
9-27. We have followed from chapter xix:1 events 
which are chronological. First we heard the Halle- 
lujahs in glory, heaven celebrating Babylon’s fall. 
Then followed the marriage of the Lamb, and the 
Bride, the glorified church came more fully in view. 
We saw heaven opened and the Lord in all his glo- 
rious majesty coming forth, attended by the Saints. 
The coming of the Lord with His Saints took place. 
Then followed the battle of Armageddon, the Beast 
and the false prophet were cast into the lake of fire; 
the supper of the great God, the day of wrath had 
come. Satan was cast into the abyss and the reign of 


a 


* See Matt. xv: ro. 


THE REVELATION 159 


Christ with His Saints for a thousand years followed. 
Without any interruption we saw what happens after 
the thousand years are complete: Satan loosed for a 
little season, the final great revolt and its sudden 
termination by the fire of judgment. Then heaven 
and earth fled away, the second resurrection and the 
great white throne judgment. Then we saw the eter- 
nal state of the redeemed and the lost. 

With the ninth verse we are brought back once more 
to the millennial state. What was briefly stated in 
chapter xx: 4-6 is now more fully revealed and we have 
a description of the Bride, the Lamb’s wife in her 
millennial glory, in relation to Israel and to the nations 
on the earth. One of the angels which had the seven 
vials appears on the scene to show something to the 
Seer. We had a similar scene in chapter xvii: 1-3. 
There one of these angelic bearers of the vials showed 
to John, the harlot woman and her judgment; but 
now he is to see, the Bride, the Lamb’s wife. “And 
he carried me away in the Spirit, and set me on a 
great, high mountain and showed me the holy City, 
Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God.” 
She is seen coming down out of heaven. This coming 
down precedes the one mentioned in verses 2-3 by a 
thousand years. Her coming down does not mean 
here that she comes actually down upon the earth, to 
dwell on earth during the millennium. Her coming 
out of heaven in verses 2-3 is undoubtedly to the 
new earth. But here she comes down to be over the 
earth. 1 Thess. iv: 17 may serve as an illustration. 
When the Lord descends out of heaven with a shout, 
He does not come down to earth, but He descends to a 


160 THE REVELATION 

place above the earth. And so here the Bride, the 
Lamb’s wife, descends out of heaven from God to 
hover above the earth. This description is symboli- 
cal; nor is the city described the Jerusalem on the 
earth as some have taken it in an ultra-literal sense. 
The earthly Jerusalem never leaves the earth at all, 
and the glories of the Jerusalem on the earth during 
millennial times are fully pictured by the Prophets 
in the Old Testament; there is no need for an angel 
to show the beauty and glory spot of the millennial 
age to John. Isaiah Ixii: 2-5 is one of these blessed 
descriptions of the Jerusalem on the earth. “And the 
Gentiles shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy 
glory, and thou shalt be called by a new name, which 
the mouth of the Lord shall name. Thou shalt also 
be a crown of glory in the hand of the Lord and a 
royal diadem in the hand of thy God. Thou shalt no 
more be termed Forsaken; neither shall thy land any 
more be termed Desolate; but thou shalt be called 
Hephzi-bah (my delight is in her), and thy land 
Beulah (married) ; for the Lord delighteth in thee, 
and thy land shall be married. For as a young man 
marrieth a virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee, and as 
the bridegroom rejoiceth over the Bride, so shall thy 
God rejoice over thee.” Such will be Jerusalem’s 
earthly glory and Israel’s relation to God throughout 
the millennium. But here we see the Bride, the Lamb’s 
wife as the holy city Jerusalem descending out of 
heaven from God. This is the building of God Him- 
self in all its glory, the eternal home of the Saints. 
“Having the Glory of God.” Who is able to under- 
stand this one brief sentence? It is more than a re- 


THE REVELATION 161 


flection of the Glory of God; the very Glory will be 
her portion. It will be the glorious, though distant 
vision, for the inhabitants of the earth throughout the 
millennium. ‘This marvellous city will be seen, re- 
splendent with glory, suspended in the heavens and 
human eyes will look up to behold the flashes of glory, 
never ceasing. In Psalm xix we read “the heavens 
declare the Glory of God and the firmament showeth 
His handiwork.” In beholding the work of His 
fingers, the moon and the stars, (Psalm viii:3) we 
behold now His glory as the omnipotent Creator. But 
is one of the millennial Psalms, a Psalm which de- 
scribes the reigning of Jehovah and a rejoicing earth, 
as well as His judgments, we also read of the heavens 
and what they will then declare. “The heavens de- 
clare His righteousness and all the people see His 
glory” (Psalm xcvii:6). This, no doubt, refers to 
the bright and glorious city, Jerusalem above, as it 
will be seen by the nations during the coming millen- 
nium. “And her light was like unto a stone most 
precious, even like a Jasper stone, clear as crystal.” 
The Jasper is not transparent. This precious stone 
mentioned here once more shows the complete identi- 
fication of the God of Glory with this holy city. (Com- 
pare with iv:3.) “Having a wall great and high, 
having twelve gates and at the gates twelve angels 
and names written thereon, which are the names of 
the twelve tribes of the children of Israel.” And 
this symbolical city, composed not of material stones, 
but of the living stones, has a great and high wall. A 
wall, is the means to keep out and to keep in; it denotes 
separation and security. And of course the city itself 
II 


162 THE REVELATION 


is behind the wall. Seven times the number twelve is 
found in this description. Twelve gates, twelve angels, 
twelve names of Israel, twelve names of the Apostles, 
twelve foundations, twelve pearls, and the measure- 
ment of the wall of the city is twelve by twelve cubits. 
Twelve is the number which expresses government, 
and here we have the perfect government revealed. 
This wall with its twelve gates, twelve angels, twelve 
names of the tribes of Israel, twelve foundations with 
the names of the Apostles of the Lamb, shows some 
kind of connection between the holy city, the Bride 
of the Lamb, and the earthly Jerusalem. (See Ezekiel 
xlviii: 31-34.) “The wall is what fences a city off 
from without; the gate is what gives it communication 
with that which is without. In that which marks the 
exclusive distinction of the Church the Apostles ap- 
pear; in that which marks its relationship with the 
world the twelve tribes appear; for the Apostles are 
the foundation of the Church, whereas Israel is always 
God’s first thought in His government of the world. 
In that which symbolizes the going forth of the 
Church’s authority towards the world Israel therefore 
naturally comes into prominence.”* The administra- 
tion of Israel is from the heavenly city, which admin- 
istration will rest ix the hands of the twelve Apostles 
according to the promise of our Lord “ye shall sit 
upon twelve thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel” 
(Matt. xix: 28). Then the twelve angels at the gates 
are, what angels always will he, ministering spirits, 
They are at the disposal of the Saints, who judge the 
world and angels (1 Cor. xi: 2-3). The twelve founda- 


2 


*T. B. Baines on Revelation, 


THE REVELATION 163 


tions with the names of the twelve Apostles reminds 
us of Eph. ii:20. “And are built upon the founda- 
tion of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ Him- 
self being the chief corner stone.” And it is a signifi- 
cant as well as blessed expression “the Apostles of the 
Lamb.” ‘The Lamb is the foundation of all. But the 
wall itself seems to represent symbolically Israel in her 
sphere of blessing to the millennial earth, standing be- 
tween the heavenly and the earthly. No doubt there 
will be communication also between the earthly Jeru- 
salem and the heavenly. It is well to confess our 
ignorance in all these matters. How little after all we 
know of the full meaning. When at last we shall be 
in that city with all the Saints, we shall know as we are 
known. 

“And the city lieth four-square, and the length 
thereof is as great as the breadth; and he measured 
the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs.’ The 
length and breadth and the height of it are equal. And 
he measured the wall thereof, one hundred and forty 
and four cubits, according to the measure of a man, 
that is of an angel.” ‘The city is perfect in structure. 
It is described as being a cube. And by this is signi- 
fied that it is the climax of perfection in the symmetry 
of its construction. Such will be the church in glory. 
That this city cannot be an earthly habitation is seen 
by its measurement. It is twelve thousand furlongs 
in length, breadth and height. Twelve thousand fur- 
longs are fifteen hundred miles. This is beyond human 
comprehension. “In Ezekiel (describing the millennial 
Jerusalem) the city is large, becoming a splendid 
earthly metropolis; in Revelation the holy city is vast 





164 THE REVELATION 


a 
Mh 
a 


ae 


beyond all possible earthly limits. In Ezekiel it is of 
the quadrangular form, often used in Scripture to indi- 
cate perfect earthly symmetry; in Revelation there is 
another dimension, a height equal to the length and the. 
breadth, showing a perfect cube, a still higher order of 
symmetry, heavenly in character, and manifestly — 
unsuited to the earth.” a 
“Tt is surely no mere coincidence that the Ho 
holies in the temple was of the same cubic form. 
_ oracle in the forepart was twenty cubits in length, 
twenty cubits in breadth and twenty cubits in tl 
height thereof: and he overlaid it with pure gol 
(1 Kings vi: 20). Now David gave to Solomon 
pattern of all that he had by the Spirit of the co 
of the house of the Lord.’ (1 Chron. xxviii: 12.) 
plans therefore, like those of Moses, were a me 1¢ 
after a heavenly model, and had a typical significatio 
so that the cubic form of the holiest place in the templ 
‘was an inspired type of the perfect symmetry of tha 
‘habitation of God’ which formed the pattern of thes 
earthly structures. Here too the number of adn 
_ istrative perfection twice appears in the twelve thor 
sand furlongs, which is the length of the side, and 
the twelve times twelve, or one ‘hundred and for 
_ four cubits,’ of the height of the wall. 
_ “The measure is ‘the measure of a man, that - 
the angel.” The standard therefore is after the m 
hi Bre of man, not in his earthly body, chee in L the 


ae 
























D 


wath his house which is from heaven, In ae 
4 ual bodies’ the ‘children of ee au 


THE REVELATION 165 


to this new condition that the standard of measure- 
ment is conformed. The scene, though all symbolic, 
is throughout symbolic of the heavenly, and not of 
the earthly. The symbols are, of course, borrowed 
from the earth, but each has a heavenly stamp im- 
pressed upon it.”* : 

_ And the foundations were all adorned by precious 
ones and these twelve stones all tell out divine glory. ; 
he Jasper again stands first; the wall itself is of — 
sper, while the first foundation stone mentioned is 
_ also Jasper. It stands for the Glory of God. Then 
_ the stones follow in their order. The Sapphire (blue) ; 
the Chalcedony (a combination of grey, blue and 



















le blue); the Sardius (bloodred); the Chrysolite 
urple and green); the Beryl (bluish green); the 


uixed blue, green and yellow); the Jacinth (com- 
nation of red, violet and yellow), and the Amethyst 
urple). And what must be the deeper meaning of 
all these precious stones! What varied aspects of 
the Glory of God they must represent! And the Re- 
deemed in their heavenly city shall know, understand 
d enjoy it all. What wonderful, unspeakable glory 
is ahead of us! May we look forward to it every day 
and willingly serve and suffer the little while down 
ere; 

_ The city itself was seen by John as of pure gold. 
ld typifies the righteousness of God in His nature 
d such the holy city is, composed of the Saints who 
vere made through grace the partakers of the divine 


llow) ; the Emerald (green); the Sardonyx (of a He 


paz (pale green or golden); the Chrysoprasus 





166 THE REVELATION 


nature. “And the twelve gates were twelve pearls, 
each one of the several gates was of one pearl, and 
the street of the city was pure gold as it were trans- 
parent glass.” How suitable the pearl to form each 
gate, the entrance to the city divine. The Pearl is a 
type of the Church. She is the one pearl of great 
price for which the Lord gave all He had (Matt. xiii: 
45-46). And the golden street like unto pure glass 
shows that all the ways and walks in that city are 
according to righteousness and defilement is eternally 
impossible. 

And there was no temple in that city; the Lord 
God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. 
There is no need any longer of a certain access into 
the presence of God, as it was on earth, but there is a 
free and unhindered fellowship with God and with His 
ever blessed Son, the Lamb. Precious it is to hear 
Him again mentioned as the Lamb. His blessed work 
which He accomplished can never be forgotten by the 
Saints in Glory. And the light is not created light, 
but the light is the Glory of God and the lamp thereof 
is the Lamb. The Glory of God and Christ the Lamb 
of God will be the light and supersede all created light. 

“And the nations shall walk by its light and the 
kings of the earth bring their glory and honor unto 


it*; and the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day | 


for there shall be no night there. And they shall bring 
the glory and honor ‘of the nations unto it”. From this 
we learn that the glory light which shines eternally and 
undiminished in the holy city is the light in which the 
saved millennial nations on the earth walk. And the 





» 


* This is the better rendering. 





Me 


THE REVELATION 167 


i] 
kings of the earth bring their glory and honor unto 
it; not “into” as it is rendered in the Authorized Ver- 
sion. ‘The heavens then rule, for Christ and His co- 
heirs are in that holy city, and the.Government and 
tule over the earth proceeds from there. The kings 
bring their glory and honor unto it, they bow in homage 
in the presence of the holy city. Heaven is acknowl- 
edged as the source of all light, glory and blessing. 
When the nations and the kings of the earth go up to 
Jerusalem to worship the Lord of Hosts during the 
millennial age (Psalm Ixxii:8-11; Is. Ix: t-3;. Zech. 
xiv: 16) we doubt not, they will turn their faces up- 
ward. Mount Zion in Israel’s land will have resting 
upon it the glory and then above it the vision of the 
City in which the Glory dwells and from which the 
Glory emanates. And unto it they bring the honor 
and glory. The open gates, never closed, denote 
security and suggest also communication and inter- 
course with the earth. “There shall be no night there”; 
the night of sin and sorrow is forever gone for the 
dwellers in the holy city. “And there shall in no wise 
enter into it anything that defileth, neither whatsoever 
worketh abomination, or maketh a lie, but they which 
are written in the Lamb’s book of life.” 


Chapter XXII. The River and the Tree of Life. 
Verses 1-2, “And he shewed me a pure river of water 
of life, bright as crystal, proceeding out of the throne 
of God and of the Lamb. In the midst of the street 
of it, and on either side of the river was the tree of 
life, bearing twelve manner of fruits, yielding its fruit 
every month, and the leaves of the tree were for the 


168 THE REVELATION 


healing of the nations.” We must remember that 
this is the heavenly Jerusalem, the holy city over the 
earth. The Jerusalem on the earth in her millennial 
glory has also a river of water. Ezekiel in his great 
temple vision describes that stream. “Afterward he 
brought me again unto the door of the house, and 
behold waters issued out from under the threshold of 
the house eastward” (Ez. xlvii: 1). And Zechariah in 
his final vision, in the chapter in which we see “His 
feet standing upon the Mount of Olives,” tells of that 
stream. “And it shall be in that day that living waters 
shall go out from Jerusalem” (Zech. xiv:8). That 
stream of living water flowing forth from the earthly 
Jerusalem is no doubt a real river of water, healing, 
as it will, the waters of the Dead Sea. It also denotes 
the spiritual blessings which will flow forth from 
Jerusalem. But the pure river of water of life, bright 
as crystal, in the heavenly Jerusalem does not proceed 
from the temple, but from the throne of God and the 
Lamb. The heavenly river is in the fullest sense of 
the word the symbol of all life, blessing, joy, peace 
and all the spiritual blessings the Saints possess and 
enjoy. And when we examine Ezekiel xlvii again we 
find something which corresponds with this vision of 
the heavenly city. “And by the river upon the bank 
thereof, on this side and on that side, shall grow 
every tree for meat, whose leaf shall bring forth new 
fruit according to his months, because their waters 
issued out of the sanctuary, and the fruit thereof shall 
be for meat, and the leaf thereof for healing” (Ezek. 
xlvii: 12). We repeat, this will be in the Jerusalem on 
the earth. Well has it been said “the earthly things 


THE REVELATION 169 


are moulded after the heavenly” (See Ex. xxv: 40; 
XXvVi: 30; xxvii: 8). The river on earth with its trees, 
fruits and healing, is but a shadow of the tree of life, 
bearing twelve manner of fruits, in the Jerusalem 
above. The tree of life reminds us of Eden. It was 
there, but Adam did not eat of it in his unfallen state 
and when he became a transgressor by eating of the 
tree of the knowledge of good and evil, the way to 
the tree of life was barred by the Cherubim with the 
flaming sword. Eating of that tree would have meant 
for Adam to live forever as to the body.* And here 
in the holy city. the tree of life is seen and the 
blessed fruit from it is eaten. The tree of the knowl- 
edge of good and evil is no longer seen. As another 
has said “that tree whose taste brought death, was 
withered up by the cross.” And the millennial earth 
receives the blessing from these glorious conditions 
above. The light from above, as we saw, is the light 
in which the millennial nations walk; the government 
proceeds from above and the leaves of the tree of life 
are for the healing of the nations. But the Saints 
above eat the fruits of that tree. But what will this 
all mean! Surely the half has not been told. 


5. The Seven Glories of the Redeemed. Verses 3-5. 
Unspeakably beautiful and glorious are the concluding 
statements of this glory-section of the Revelation. 
Seven glories of the Redeemed are enumerated. 1. 
There will be no more curse. It means a perfect 
sinlessness; perfect holiness. 2. The throne of God 
and of the Lamb is there and the redeemed are forever 





* He did not lose immortality of soul by his transgression 


170 THE REVELATION 


linked with that throne. It is a perfect and blessed 
government which can never be disturbed by disorder. 
3- His servants shall serve Him. Heaven will not 
consist in idleness. The holy city knows of service. 
And the service the Saints will render to God in glory 
will be a perfect service. What will it be? We do 
not know what service it will be. God will have many 
surprises for His Saints in glory. 4. There is also an 
eternal vision. “And they shall see His face.” Oh! 
joy of all the joys in glory to see Him as He is and 
never lose sight of Him in all eternity. 5. His name 
shall be in their foreheads. It tells of eternal owner- 
ship and eternal possession. His name and the Glory 
connected with it will be ours in eternal ages. 6. An 
eternal day. No more night; no need of any light. 
He is the light for all eternity. 7. An eternal reign. 
And they shall reign forever and ever. What glory 
and blessedness all this means. Such are the coming 
glories of the Redeemed. Oh! the deceitfulness of sin 
and Satan’s power to blind the eyes of humanity! 
They prefer to serve sin and the master who stands 
behind sin and despise such riches of glory which the 
grace of God offers in the Lord Jesus Christ to every 
sinner. Reader! what will be your home in eternity? 


TENTH DIVISION. THE FINAL MESSAGES. 
Chapter XXII: 6-21 
Chapter XXII. The Angel’s Message. Verses 
6-11. The Prophetic Part of the Revelation is ended 


and the Epilogue, containing the final messages of the 
Book, remains to be considered. Once more*the as- 


THE REVELATION 171 


surance is given that these sayings (words) are faith- 
ful and true. In chapter xxi: 5 God Himself had com- 
manded to write for these words are faithful and true. 
Here it is an angel who speaks. “And the Lord God 
of the holy Prophets (literal: of the spirits of the 
Prophets) sent his angel to show unto His servants 
the things which must shortly be done.” This reminds 
us of the beginning of the book, where we find a sim- 
ilar announcement. Suddenly some day these things 
will come to pass. The Lord will call His people to 
glory in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, and 
then these things John had beheld will shortly come to 
pass. And then His own voice breaks in: “Behold I 
come quickly; Blessed is He that keepeth the sayings 
of the prophecy of this Book.” ‘Three times we find 
this announcement in the last chapter (verses 7, 12 and 
20). Here it is connected with the walk of the believer. 
Just as in the beginning of the book a blessing is pro- 
nounced upon them that read the words of this 
prophecy (i:3), so we have at the close of Revelation 
a similar beatitude. And keeping these blessed words 
means more than believing in them; their power is to 
shape our conduct and walk. What godly lives God’s 
people would live on earth, what unselfish and sacri- 
ficing lives, if they remembered constantly Him who 
thus testifies three times in the last chapter of the 
Bible “Behold I come quickly.” And the awful re- 
sults in Christendom to-day for not having kept the 
sayings of the Prophecy of this Book. The nations 
to-day would not be fighting and killing as they do if 
they believed the sayings of this Prophecy. And John 
fell down to worship before the feet of the angel, 


172 THE REVELATION 


who had been the instrument to show him these things. 
But this angel like the other angel in chapter xix: 10 
refused the worship of the Apostle. The humility of 
angels is a forgotten truth. They have nothing of the 
crime of the devil, which is pride, in themselves; they 
honor and worship God and are jealous of His rights. 
What an answer to Romanism the angels are in their 
rejection of worship! Very foolishly some people 
have used the angel’s words “Worship God” as an 
indication that the Lord Jesus should not be wor- 
shipped. One of these teachers approached the writer 
with this strange assertion and demanded scriptural 
proof that the Lord Jesus should be worshipped. We 
referred him to John v:23. And he owes us still the 
reply to our letter. 

Then the Seer is told not to seal the sayings of this 
Prophecy. Daniel was told to do the opposite (Dan. 
xii: 4). Old Testament prophecy reveals prophetic 
events in the far distance. They could then not be 
fully comprehended. But after Christ came and the 
full revelation of things to come is given, no sealing is 
needed; the evenis are at hand, yet grace has delayed 
and delays still the fulfillment. And the heavenly 
messenger announces also the fixed state of the two 
classes into which all humanity is divided. The un- 
just and filthy, the unsaved, continue to exist in the 
nature which they possess, and the fact that the desires 
of that corrupt nature can no longer be gratified must 
constitute in itself an unspeakable torment. ‘The 
righteous and holy, those saved by grace, partakers of 
the divine nature will always be righteous and holy. 
Utterly false is it to teach, as it is being done, that 


THE REVELATION 173 


the righteous are Christians who are justified, and the 
holy are the “believers who made a deeper experience.” 
Every Christian who is justified by faith is also sancti- 
fied. 


2. The Message of the Lord. Verses I2-13. And 
now the Lord speaks again. -For the second time 
He announces His coming. Here it is in connection 
with rewards. “My reward is with Me.” He Him- 
self will receive His reward which is due Him as the 
sin-bearer. He will see the travail of His soul and be 
satisfied. And with His coming, His own people 
will receive their rewards. What a stimulating power 
His soon coming is to service! And the coming One 
is the Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, the 
beginning and the end. 


3. The Two classes, Verses 14-15. Once more the 
two classes come into view. This is in fullest keeping 
with the end of the Book and the end of the Bible. 
The Authorized Version here is faulty. Instead of 
“Blessed are they that do His commandments” the 
correct reading is “Blessed are they that wash their 
robes.” The former is an interpolation; the latter is 
the divine statement.* Eternal life and eternal glory 
cannot be obtained by keeping commandments, by 
the works of the law. The blood of the Lamb alone 
is the title to glory. And then the other class. The 
one who rejects Christ and thereby denies his lost 
condition and need of a Savior, loveth and maketh a 





* All leading scholars like Alford, Darby, etc., make the 
change. Even the Vulgate has it “Beati, qui lavant stolas 
suas in sanguinem Agni.” 


174 THE REVELATION 


lie. “He lives according to the old nature and the 
fruits of the flesh are there. 


4. The Final Testimony of Christ Concerning Him- 
self. Verse 16. How He speaks in this last Bible 
book! In the beginning of Revelation we find His 
self-witness in the church-message and once more we 
hear His voice, bearing testimony to Himself. How 
majestic, I, Jesus! He reveals Himself once more 
by the name of humiliation. What comfort it must 
have been to John! What comfort it is to us! Then 
He speaks of Himself as the Root and Offspring of 
David. He is David’s Lord and David’s son (Psalm 
cx:1I). Heis the Hope of Israel and in Him the prom- 
ises made to David will all be realized. This will be 
the case when He comes to reign in power and great 
glory. But He also speaks of Himself as “the bright 
and morning-star.” His coming in power and glory 
is the sun-rise for Israel and the Gentiles, the breaking 
of the millennial day. But for His Church He comes 
first as the morning-star, as the morning-star in the 
eastern sky precedes the rising of the sun in all His 
glory. The Lord will come as the morning-star some 
time in the interval between the 69th and 7oth week 
of Daniel and as the Sun of Righteousness after that 
week has come to an end. 


5. The Answer of the Spirit and the Bride. Verse 
17. As soon as He mentions Himself as the morning- 
star, there is an answer from the earth. The Spirit 
now down here, for He came down from heaven on 
Pentecost, and the Bride, the Church, say, “Come.” 
It is addressed to the Lord. They both long for 


THE REVELATION 175 


His coming. And each individual believer who heareth 
is asked to join in with this “Come.” Surely in these 
days of darkness and world-confusion, the Spirit 
saith, “Come!” And never before were there so many 
individual believers on earth who say “Come,” who 
wait for His coming. And the, Come—from loving 
hearts will increase and become a loud and pleading 
cry, till one blessed day He will answer and come 
to take His waiting people home. Here also is the 
final Gospel message of the Bible. He that will 
let him take the water of life freely. Once more a 
loving God makes it clear that the water of life is free 
to all who want it. It is the last “Whosoever” in the 
Bible. 


6. The Final Warning. Verses 18-19. And what 
a solemn warning is given! Ina larger sense the warn- 
ing applies to the entire Word of God. Higher criti- 
cism, which takes away, and false teachers, who add 
unto it, find written here their deserved judgment. 
But the Revelation is specially in view. Whosoever 
meddles with His Revelation must fall under the 
severest divine displeasure. Beware! oh ye critics! 
Beware! ye who call this Book un-inspired and warn 
against the study of it! 


7. The Final Message. The Final Prayer. The 
Final Benediction. Verses 20-21. We reach the final 
statements of this great Book. For the third time He 
announces His Coming. “He that testifieth these 
things saith, surely I come quickly.” It is the last 
time our Lord speaks from heaven. ‘The next time His 
voice will be heard will be on that day when He 


176 THE REVELATION 


descends out of heaven with a shout. While the 
two former announcements of His coming found in 
this chapter are preceded by the word, “Behold,” this 
last one affirms the absolute certainty of the event. 
And there is the answer, the blessed response. “Amen. 
Even so, come, Lord Jesus.” It is the Church which 
answers His positive and certain announcement. It 
is the last word recorded in the Bible coming from the 
lips of man. The first word we hear man address to 
the Lord in the Bible is the solemn word “I heard thy 
voice in the garden, and I was afraid” (Gen. iii: 10). 
The last word addressed to the Lord by redeemed man 
is “even so, Come, Lord Jesus.” And between these 
two utterances in Genesis and Revelation is the story 
of redemption. Well might this final prayer of the 
Bible be termed, the forgotten prayer. But it is 
equally true, with the revival of the study of prophecy, 
more hearts and lips are praying to-day for His Com- 
ing, than ever before. And the prayer will be an- 
swered. May the reader and the writer pray for His 
Coming daily and may our lives too bear witness to 
the fact that we expect Him to answer the petition 
of His people. The final benediction assures us once 
more of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. The 
better rendering is “The Grace of our Lord Jesus 
Christ be with all the Saints.” Grace in all its divine 
and never failing fullness will sustain all the Saints, 
till they are gathered into the Father’s house. 


Our task is finished. Humbly we put it into His 
hands and lay this exposition at His. feet: Ti 
pleases Him to use it in making the future, coming 


nt 


THE REVELATION 177 


things, and especially His own person and glory, a 
greater reality in the hearts and lives of His people, 
we shall forever praise Him. 


178 THE REVELATION 


APPENDIX I. 
The Seventy-Week Prophecy* 


Daniel ix: 24-27. 


‘A Corrected Text of the Prophecy. 'The Authorized 
Version is somewhat incorrect. We give therefore 
first of all a corrected translation. 


Seventy weeks are apportioned out upon thy people and 
upon the holy city to finish the transgression and to make an 
end of sins, and to cover iniquity, and to bring in the right- 
eousness of the ages, and to seal the vision and prophet, and 
to anoint the holy of holies. Know therefore and under- 
stand: From the going forth of the word to restore and 
to rebuild Jerusalem unto Messiah, the Prince, shall be Seven 
Weeks and Sixty-two Weeks. The street and the wall shall 
be built again, even in troublous times. And after the 
Sixty-two Weeks shall Messiah be cut off, and shall have 
nothing; and the people of the prince that shall come shall 
destroy the city and the sanctuary; and the end thereof 
shall be with an overflow, and unto the end war, the desola- 
tions determined. And he shall confirm a covenant with the 
many for one week; and in the midst of the week he shall 
cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease and because of 
the protection of abominations there shall be a desolator, 
even until the consummation and what is determined shall be 
poured out upon the desolator (verses 24-27). 


What are the Seventy Weeks? 'To many readers of 
the Book of Daniel it is not quite clear what the ex- 
pression “seventy weeks’ means, and when it is stated 
that each week represents a period of seven years, 


*This Prophecy is of such importance in the Study of 
Revelation that we quote the exposition as given in our 
Book on. Daniel. \ 


THE REVELATION 179 


many Christians do not know why such is the case. 
A brief word of explanation may therefore be in order. 
The literal translation of the term “seventy weeks” is 
“seventy sevens.” Now this word “sevens” translated 
“weeks” may mean “days” and it may mean “years.” 
What then is meant here, seventy times seven days or 
seventy times seven years? It is evident that the 
“sevens” mean year weeks, seven years to each pro- 
phetic week. Daniel was occupied in reading the 
books and in prayer with the seventy years of the 
Babylonian captivity. And now Gabriel is going to 
reveal to him something which will take place in 
“seventy sevens,’ which means seventy times seven 
years. The proof that such is the case is furnished by 
the fulfillment of the prophecy itself. Now seventy 
times seven years makes 490 years. 


What is to be Accomplished? Verse 24 gives the 
great things, which are to be accomplished during these 
seventy year weeks of 490 years. They are the fol- 
lowing: (1) To finish the transgression. (2) To 
make an end of sins. (3) To cover iniquity. (4) To 
bring in the righteousness of ages. (5) To seal the 
vision and prophet. (6) To anoint the Holy of Holies. 


Now it must be borne in mind that these things con- 
cern exclusively Daniel’s people and not Gentiles but 
the holy city Jerusalem. It is clear that the finishing 
of transgression, the end of sins and the covering of 
iniquity has a special meaning for Israel as a nation. 
The foundation upon which this future work of Grace 
for His earthly people rests is the death of Christ. Our 
blessed Lord “died for that nation” as He also died for 


180 THE REVELATION 


us who are sinners of the Gentiles (John xi: 50). Up 
to now the transgression of the Jewish people is not 
yet finished, nor is for them “an end made of sins.” 
The death of Christ has made this possible for the 
nations, but before it becomes applied this period of 
time, 490 years, must have passed, and when they are 
accomplished the transgression of His people will be 
finished and all the other blessings will come upon 
them. That will be according to other Scriptures when 
the times of the Gentiles end and when the Son of 
Man, the rejected One, appears the second time. Then 
“He shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob” and 
“will take away their sins” (Rom. xi: 26-27). Many 
passages in the prophetic Word reveal the same prom- 
ises of national cleansing and forgiveness, into which 
we cannot enter more fully. We see at once that the 
blessings promised here to Daniel’s people and to the 
holy city refer us to the time when the Son of Man is 
manifested, the time when the remnant of the nation 
shall look upon Him whom they have pierced (Zech. 
xii). 

And the same time when God will be merciful to His 
people and cover their iniquity “the righteousness of 
or eternal justification or righteousness of the ages” 
will be brought in. This means the beginning of that 
age of blessing, which in the New Testament is called 
“the dispensation of the fullness of times” (Ephes. 
i: 10), in which the King shall reign in righteousness. 
Then righteousness will be established on this earth 
and the holy city, as Gabriel calls Jerusalem, will 
not only be a sharer of the blessings and.glory, but 


THE REVELATION 181 


will herself be righteous. It is written of Jerusalem 
“afterward thou shalt be called, The City of righteous- 
ness” (Isaiah i: 26). Still greater is Jeremiah’s word 
he received from the Lord concerning that day when 
the righteousness of the ages has come. 


Behold, the days come, saith the’ Lord, that I will per- 
form that good thing which I have promised unto the 
house of Israel and to the house of Judah. In those days, 
and at that time, will I cause the Branch of righteousness 
to grow up unto David; and he shall execute Judgment 
and righteousness in the land. In those days shall Judah 
be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell safely and this is the 
name wherewith she shall be called, The Lord our righteous- 
ness (Jeremiah xxxiii, 14-16). 

The vision and prophecy will be sealed, that is ac- 
credited, because their final accomplishment has been 
reached in these events of blessings for God’s earthly 
people. Also the Holy of Holies will be anointed, a 
statement which many have applied to our Lord. It 
has nothing whatever to do with Him, but it is the 
anointing of the Holy of Holies in another temple, 
which will stand in the midst of Jerusalem. Of this 
great millennial temple the prophetic Word is not 
silent. The other prophet of the captivity, Ezekiel, had 
a vision of this temple and its worship. 

It is of the greatest importance to grasp the thought 
that these things have nothing to do with Gentiles or 
with the Church. They concern Daniel’s people, the 
Jews and Jerusalem. If this had been understood the 
commentators would not have made that mis- 
taken interpretation of the seventy weeks prophecy 
which is so universally taught in our day. We shall 


SE 
: " 
Af 


182 THE REVELATION 


touch upon these errors in the course of our exposi- 
tion. 


The Division of the S eventy Weeks. After the gen- 
eral announcement of the seventy sevens and what is 
to be accomplished for Jerusalem and Daniel’s people 
when this prophetic period of time expires, Gabriel 
gives further information to the Prophet. This in- 
formation is introduced by the exhortation to know 
and to understand or to discriminate. What follows 
is the division of the seventy weeks into three parts. 
The first part consists of seven year weeks, that is 49 
years. The second part consists of sixty-two weeks or 
434 years, then there is one week, the seventieth, left, 
which gives us the third part. 


The Beginning of the S eventy Weeks. We have to 
ascertain in examining the prophetic history of these 
different divisions when the seventy year weeks began. 
If we were to touch upon the different views and ex- 
planations, which have been made on this point we 
would have to fill numerous pages. One is reminded 
of Job xxxviii:2 in reading the theories of commen- 
tators, “Who is this that darkeneth counsel by words 
without knowledge?” ‘The text is very plain. We 
read the definite beginning in verse 2 5. It is when the 
command was to be given to restore and build Jerusa- 
lem. From that time to Messiah the Prince are to be 
seven weeks and sixty-two weeks, that is 483 years. 
These seventy year weeks should not be reckoned 
from the time Daniel prayed nor from the time Cyrus 
gave permission for the people to return and to build 
the temple. In Ezra, chapter i, we read that‘it was in 


THE REVELATION 183 


the first year of Cyrus, King of Persia, that the Lord 
stirred him up, whose coming and work Isaiah had an- 
nounced long before his birth. Significant is the 
proclamation, which Cyrus sent forth. But it has only 
to do with the building of the temple in Jerusalem. 
“The Lord of heaven has given me all the kingdoms 
of the earth; and He hath charged me to build Him a 
house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah.” But this edict 
is not the starting point of the seventy year weeks, for 
they are to begin with the word to restore and build 
the city itself. But in the Book of Ezra also we find in 
chapter vii what happened in the reign of Artaxerxes, 
King of Persia, known in history as Artaxerxes Longi- 
manus. In the seventh year of his reign another edict 
was issued, but a careful reading will show that that 
was not the command to restore and build Jerusalem. 
We have to turn to the second chapter of Nehemiah 
for the beginning of these seventy year weeks. It was 
in the twentieth year of the reign of Artaxerxes that 
the command was given to restore and to build Jerusa- 
lem. From that time the seventy year weeks must be 
reckoned. This twentieth year of Artaxerxes was the 
year 445 B. C., which is proven historically. The year 
is not only mentioned in Nehemiah ii but also the 
month. It was in Nisan. The seventy year weeks 
began therefore in the month of Nisan 445 B. C. 

When we read that “the street and the wall shall be 
built again, even in troublous times” and then up to the 
ime when Messiah is to be cut off, it should be sixty- 
two year weeks (434 years), we have the time revealed 
that it would take to restore the city, namely seven 
vear weeks, forty-nine years. 


184 THE REVELATION 


A remarkable prediction. We have then before us 
a remarkable prediction. ‘The exact time of the first 
advent of Christ is here predicted when Messiah the 
Prince, He who is the Hope of His people Israel, 
should appear. But still more remarkable is the fact 
that a certain event of His life on earth is predicted. 
It is not His birth which is to take place after the 
expiration of the sixty-nine year weeks, but He is to be 
“cut off and shall have nothing.” It is a prediction 
of His death on the cross. It remains to be seen if 
this has found its literal fulfillment and if Messiah 
died at the time when the 483 years reckoned from the 
month Nisan 445 B. C. had expired. Before we do so 
we must call here attention to the critics of the Book 
of Daniel and their methods. 

Because the critics do not want to believe that it is 
possible to predict far off events, such as are written 
in Daniel, the career and death of Alexander, the work 
of Antiochus Epiphanes and others, they invent an 
imaginary pious Jew who wrote the Book of Daniel 
after Antiochus Epiphanes had been on the scene. 
Now if this were true and such a “pious Jew” and not 
Daniel wrote this book, how can it be explained that 
after all there is a prediction made which clearly 
points to the death of Christ and which also outlines 
the result upon the city of Jerusalem, that the people 
of the Prince to come are to destroy the city and the 
sanctuary? These gentlemen, whose habit is to deny, 
solved the difficulty here by denying absolutely that the 
person called “Messiah the Prince” is Christ. What 
dishonest methods, juggling and twisting of words, 


» 


THE REVELATION 185 


they have used to reach this conclusion would be amus- 
ing, if it were not so sad. Chief among those is Canon 
Farrar on Daniel. We quote from this book: 


“An anointed one shall be cut off.” There can be no 
reasonable doubt that this is a reference to the deposition 
of the high priest Onias III, and his murder by Adronicus 
(B. C.), This startling event is mentioned in 2 Macc. iv: 34, 
and by Josephus, and in Daniel xi:22. It is added “and 
no......to him.” Perhaps the word “helper” (xi: 45) has 
fallen out of the text, as Graetz supposes; or the words 
may mean “there is no (priest) for it (the people).” The 
A. V. renders it “but not for himself’; and in the margin 
“and shall have nothing’; or “and they (the Jews) shall 
be no more his people.” The R. V. renders it “and shall 
have nothing.” I believe with Dr. Joel that, in the Hebrew 
words “veeyn lo” there may be a sort of cryptographic 
allusion to the name Onias. “The people of the coming 
prince shall devastate the city and the sanctuary (translation 
uncertain). This is an obvious allusion to the destruction 
and massacre inflicted on Jerusalem by Appolonius and the 
army of Antiochus Epiphanes (B. C. 167), Antiochus is 
called the prince that shall come “because he was at Rome 
when Onias III was murdered.” 


But enough of this; the way these men try to avoid 
the truth and by their reasoning methods try to get rid 
of everything God’s people have believed in the past, is 
sufficient to show what spirit stands behind them. 


The Evidence that “Messiah the Prince” ts Christ. 
The question then is do the words “Messiah the 
Prince” the One who is to be cut off and nothing for 
him, really mean Christ or some other anointed one, 
as the critics claim? The evidence that it is the Lord 
Jesus Christ is furnished in the most remarkable ful- 


186 THE REVELATION 


fillment of the prophecy in the time when our Lord 
came to Jerusalem the last time before His passion. 
Exactly 483 years after the command to restore and 
build Jerusalem had been given, the Lord Jesus Christ 
entered into Jerusalem to present Himself and His 
claims; a few days after that He was nailed to the 
cross. ‘This has been shown in a perfect chronological 
way so that it is beyond even the shadow of a doubt. 
We give an extract from “Daniel in the Critics’ Den” 
which shows this fact. 


If, therefore, the vision be a Divine prophecy, an era of 
“Sixty-nine weeks” that is 483 prophetic years, reckoned 
from the 14th of March, B. C. 445, should close with the 
public presentation and death of “Messiah the Prince.” 
No student of the Gospels can fail to see that the Lord’s 
last visit to Jerusalem was not only in fact, but in in- 
tention the crisis of His ministry. From the time that 
the accredited leaders of the nation had rejected His 
Messianic claims, He had avoided all public recognition 
of those claims. But now His testimony had been fully 
given, and the purpose of His entry into the capital was 
to openly proclaim His Messiahship and to receive His 
doom, Even His apostles themselves had again and again 
been charged that they should not make Him known; but 
now He accepted the acclamations of the whole multitude 
of the disciples. And when the Pharisees protested, He 
silenced them with the indignant rebuke, “I tell you that 
if these should hold their peace the stones would immedi- 
ately cry out.” These words can only mean that the divinely 
appointed time had arrived for the public announcement of 
His Messiahship, and that the Divine purpose could not be 
thwarted. The full significance of the words which follow 
is lost in our Authorized Version. As the cry was raised 
by His disciples, “Hosanna to the Son of David, blessed is 
the King of Israel that cometh in the Name of the Lord.” 


a ee 


THE REVELATION 187 


He looked off towards the Holy City and exclaimed, “If 
thou also hadst known, even ON THIS DAY, the things 
that belong to thy peace—but now they are hid from thine 
eyes!” The nation had already rejected Him, but this was 
the fateful day when their decision must be irrevocable. And 
we are expressly told that it was the fulfillment of prophecy, 
“Shout O daughter of Jerusalem; behold thy King cometh 
unto thee.’ It was the only occasion on which His kingly 
claims were publicly announced. 


And no other day in all His ministry will satisfy the 
words of Daniel’s vision. And the date of that first “Palm 
Sunday” can be ascertained with certainty. No year in the 
whole field of ancient history is more definitely indicated 
than that of the beginning of our Lord’s public ministry. 
According to the Evangelist it was “the fifteenth year of 
Tiberius Cesar” (Luke iii:1). Now the reign of Tiberius, 
as beginning from August 19, A. D. 14, was as well known 
a date in the time of Luke as the reign of Queen Victoria 
is in her own day. The Evangelist, moreover, with a prophetic 
anticipation of the perverseness of expositors and “reconcilers” 
goes on to name six prominent public men as holding specified 
positions in the fifteenth year of Tiberius, and each one of 
these is known to have actually held the position thus 
assigned to him in the year in question. As, therefore, the 
first Passover of the Lord’s ministry was that of Nisan, A. D. 
29, the date of the Passion is thus fixed by Scripture itself. 
For it is no longer necessary to offer proof that the cruci- 
fixion took place at the fourth Passover of the ministry. 
According to the Jewish custom, our Lord went up to Jeru- 
salem on the 8th Nisan, which, as we know, fell that year 
upon a Friday. And having spent the Sabbath at Bethany, 
He entered the Holy City the following day, as recorded in 
the Gospels. The Julian date of that 10th Nisan was Sunday 
the 6th of April, A. D. 32. What then was the length of 
the period intervening between the issuing of the decree to 
rebuild Jerusalem and this public advent of “Messiah the 
Prince”’—between the 14th of March, B. C. 445, and the 6th 
of April A. D. 32 (when He entered into Jerusalem). THE 


188 THE REVELATION 


INTERVAL WAS EXACTLY AND TO THE VERY 
DAY 173,880 DAYS, OR SEVEN TIMES SIXTY-NINE 
PROPHETIC YEARS OF 360 DAYS.* 


Here then is perfect evidence that “Messiah the 
Prince,” who was to be “cut off and shall have noth- 
ing” is our Lord Jesus Christ, for He appeared in Jeru- 
salem on exactly the day on which the sixty-nine 
prophetic weeks expired and a few days later He was 
put to death on the Cross. No wonder the critics in- 
vent all kinds of schemes and interpretations to get 
rid, so to speak, of this powerful evidence of revela- 
tion. 


The Hebrew phrase “veeyn lo” translated in the 
Authorized Version, but not for Himself, is better 
rendered by “and shall have nothing.” It has been in- 





*From B. C. 445 to A. D. 32 is 476 years = 173,740 days 
(476 x 365) +116 days for leap years. And from 14th March 
to 6th April, (reckoned inclusively according to Jewish 
practice) is 24 days. But 173,746 + 116 + 24 = 173,880, And 
69x 7 x 360 = 173,880. 


It must be borne in mind here that in reckoning years 
from B. C. to A. D. one year must always be omitted; for, 
of course, the interval between B. C. 1 and A. D. 1 is not 
two years but one year. In fact B. C. 1 ought to be called 
B. C. 0; and it is so described by astronomers, with whom 
B. C. 445 is 444. And again, as the Julian year is 11 m. 
10.46 s., or about the 129th part of a day, longer than the 
mean solar year, the Julian calendar has three leap years too 
many in every four centuries. This error is corrected by the 
Gregorian reform, which reckons three secular years out of 
four as common years. For instance, 1700, 1800, and 1900 
were common years, and 2000 will be a leap year. * 





THE REVELATION 189 


terpreted in different ways. We believe it means that 
He did not receive then the Messianic kingdom. He 
was rejected by His own and received not that which 
belongs to Him. 


The Destruction of the City Predicted. Linked with 
the cutting off of Messiah is ‘another remarkable 
prophecy. “And the people of the prince that shall 
come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary; and the 
end thereof shall be with an overflow, and unto the end 
war—the desolations determined.” Judgment accord- 
ing to this is to overtake the city which rejected 
the Messiah and both the city and the Temple were to 
be destroyed. This work was to be done “by the people 
of the prince that shall come.” The prince of course 
is not “Messiah the Prince,” it is a prince that shall 
come. But he himself is not to destroy the city and 
the sanctuary, but the people from whose midst that 
coming prince is to arise, will do the destructive work. 
Now, the people who are here in view, are the Romans. 
Out of the Roman empire there shall arise in the future 
a prince. This prince or chief of the fourth empire is 
identical with the little horn of Daniel vii. Once more 
the head of the restored Roman empire as it is to be 
during the time of the end looms up before us in the 
last two verses of this chapter. The people of the com- 
ing prince, the Romans, were to come and destroy 
both city and temple, after Messiah had been cut off 
and had nothing for Himself. And this came to pass 
as everybody knows. Our Lord had predicted this 
doom of Jerusalem and had wept over it as He beheld 
the awful doom in store for the city. The Jews had 


190 THE REVELATION 


anticipated what would come, for the chief priests and 
Pharisees declared “The Romans will come and take 
away both our palace and our nation” (John xi: 48). 
The Romans under Titus Vespasianus in the year 
seventy fulfilled this prediction and in that year the 
prophecy before us became history. But Titus is not 
“the prince that shall come.” 


The Future of the Jews Foretold. Another prophecy 
is linked with the one just examined. “The end thereof 
shall be with an overflow, and unto the end war—the 
desolations determined.” These words give us the 
history of the Jewish people, of their land and their 
city, up to the present time. It is identical with what 
our Lord said, “and they shall fall by the edge of the 
sword and shall be led away captive into all nations; 
and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the Gentiles 
until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled (Luke xxi: 
24). Both the prediction as communicated to Daniel 
by Gabriel and the words of our Lord tell of what is 
to be the lot of the Jews and of Jerusalem throughout 
this present age, till the end of the times of the Gentiles 
has been reached. History gives the answer about the 
fulfillment of these words. 


The Seventieth Vear Week. We have found up to 
this point that sixty-nine weeks of 483 years of the 
seventy year weeks are past. But what about the 
remaining seven years, the seventieth week? ‘The last 
verse of Chapter ix tells us of that one week. It has 
not yet come, but still lies in the future. 





THE REVELATION 191 


The course of the seventy year weeks was inter- 
rupted by the rejection of Messiah the Prince, who 
came to His own and they received Him not. With 
this event, as we have seen, the sixty-ninth week closed 
and an indefinite period of unreckoned time follows; 
when that is expired the last prophetic week of seven 
years will begin and run its appointed course. 

A close scrutiny of the twenty-sixth verse will make 
this clear. While we know that the Messiah was cut 
off immediately upon the close of the sixty-ninth week, 
nothing is said about the time when the destruction of 
the city and the sanctuary should take place. His- 
- tory tells us it transpired thirty-eight years after the 
death of Christ. Wars should continue to the end, but 
not a word is said when that end is to come. The one 
week, that is the seventieth week, is mentioned in the 
verse which follows this prediction, it comes, therefore, 
after this long interval has terminated. 


This unreckoned period of time at the close of the 
sixty-ninth week has already lasted almost 1900 years. 
During this time the Jewish people have been scattered 
among all the nations of the earth and the predicted 
miseries written in their own law and in the prophets 
have been fulfilled in every generation. Yet God has 
preserved them not alone physically but also as a dis- 
tinct race, even as our Lord announced when He spoke 
of the events of the last week of Daniel in His Olivet 
Discourse (Matthew xxiv). “This generation (race) 
shall not pass away till these things be fulfilled.” 


During this unreckoned period of time God has 
made known by revelation the blessed mystery of eter- 


192 THE REVELATION 


nity,,a mystery not made known in other ages, concern- 
ing the Church. There is now being gathered out 
from the ndtions a people for His Name and the 
Church is still building. The Gospel is being heralded 
world-wide. The heavens, however, are closed and 
this unreckoned period of time leading up to the end of 
the times of the Gentiles runs its appointed course. As 
we do not write on this present and, in the Old Testa- 
ment, unrevealed age and its characteristics, we must 
turn our attention to the events recorded in verse 27. 


Who Confirms a Covenant? ‘The first thing we read 
is “And he shall confirm a (not the) covenant with 
the many for one week.” We must remind ourselves 
again that all we read here concerns, as did the previ- 
ous sixty-nine weeks, Daniel’s people, the Jews, When 
the last week of seven years begins, preceding the time 
of ultimate blessing for the Jewish people, one will 
make a covenant with the mass of Jews. The ques- 
tion arises, who then is this person and what is the 
covenant he makes? 


We mentioned before an erroneous view, which 
holds that everything predicted in these seventy weeks 
has been fulfilled in the past. The view holds that 
Messiah the Prince, the one who was cut off, is our 
Lord. However, the teaching is that “the prince that 
shall come” is also Christ and that it is Christ Himself 
who confirms the covenant in the last week. We 
quote Dr. Pusey who delivered a series of very learned 
lectures on Daniel at Oxford, and whose book on Dan- 
iel is considered an authority : . 


a. 


THE REVELATION 193 


Not in, but after, these Sixty-two weeks, it is said, Mes- 
siah shall be cut off. Then follows the subdivision of the 
last week (verse 27) or seven years, wherein he was to be 
cut off, and yet not in the Sixty-nine weeks. He shall make 
then a covenant with many for one week and in the midst 
of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and oblation to 
cease.* 


The Lord Jesus Christ is believéd to be the one who 
makes the covenant. ‘The cessation of the sacrifice 
and obligation in the midst of the week is explained as 
having been accomplished by His death on the cross. 
But such a view is altogether untenable. According 
to this widely accepted theory Christ made a covenant 
for seven years. Where is this stated elsewhere in 
Scripture? Nowhere is there even a hint that Christ 
was to confirm a covenant with many for seven years, 
but His covenant is an everlasting one. ‘The error 
springs from the fact that the future of the Jewish 
people is not considered and the teaching of what is 
yet to be in the time of the end is completely passed 
by. 

The one who confirms the covenant with the many 
for one week is “the prince that shall come” of verse 
26. The prince that shall come, as we have seen, rises 
from the people who destroyed the city and the sanc- 
tuary, the Roman people. The prince that shall come 
is the dreadful little horn on the fourth beast (the 
Roman empire), the great head of the Roman empire 
seen as the Beast out of the Sea in Revelation xiii. 
When the last seven years, so pregnant with Jewish 
events, begins, the first thing will be that the Jews look 


* Pusey, Daniel, page 176. 
13 


194. THE REVELATION 


for protection to the great Man, who as a mighty prince 
controls the affairs of the Roman empire brought to- 
gether under him as head. The aim of the Jews is to 
repossess Palestine, to have a Jewish state and to 
gain possession of the city of Jerusalem, so that they 
may be able to have a temple and their sacrificial cere- 
monies again. Zionism is the step towards such a 
restoration in unbelief, the first beginning of it. This 
coming prince, the beast, will take the Jews and their 
desires into consideration, perhaps he needs them too 
in the beginning of his career. He will make a cove- 
nant with them and under this covenant, most likely, 
they will be permitted to possess Palestine and to build 
a temple in Jerusalem. He will also promise them pro- 
tection against any outside foes, especially the one 
who threateningly arises in the North, the Assyrian of 
Prophecy. 


This covenant the Roman prince will make with the 
many, not with all the Jews. Throughout the pro- 
phetic Word we find the clearest evidence of a rem- 
nant of Jews, who trusting in the Lord, will see through 
this wicked prince and refuse to have anything what- 
ever to do with that covenant. Isaiah xxviii 15 and 18 
speak of this covenant. It is there called a covenant 
with death and an agreement with hell. In the Revela- 
tion this faithful remnant is seen witnessing and suf- 
fering and refusing to worship the Beast. All this we 
have learned in our exposition. 


After the first three and one-half years of this last 
prophetic week are gone, he will break the covenant 
by causing the sacrifice and oblation to cease, From 


THE REVELATION 195 


the Book of Revelation we learn that at that time he 
will become possessed by the power of Satan. In fel- 
lowship with the second beast, the false prophet, the 
personal Anti-Christ, who is in Jerusalem, he intro- 
duces idolatry and the most awful blasphemies among 
the Jews. All the temple ceremonials, sacrifices and 
oblations will have to be abandoned. The apostate na- 
tions will accept the Anti-christ as their Messiah and 
king and fall in line with his blasphemies. Then the 
character of the little horn and what was said of him 
will fully come out. “He shall speak great words 
against the most High, and shall wear out the Saints 
of the most High (the Jews who refused to enter his 
covenant), and think to change times and laws, and 
they shall be given into his hands until a time and times 
and the dividing of time.” (Three and one-half years 
—Daniel vii: 25.) “And there was given unto him a 
mouth speaking great things and blasphemies, and 
power was given unto him to continue forty-two 
months” (Rev. xiii: 5). This shows the work he will 
do for 1,260 days, forty-two months, three and one- 
half years, the last half of the seventieth week. The 
part of the personal Anti-christ in these 1,260 days 
and three and one-half years is described in Rev. xiil: 
11-17. An image of the first beast, the wicked head 
of the Roman power will be set up and the great idol 
endued with supernatural, satanic power must be wor- 
shipped under the penalty of death. Anti-christ him- 
self, this wicked counterfeit of the true Christ, takes a 
place in the temple of God and by lying wonders shows 
himself that he is God and exalting himself above all 


196 THE REVELATION 


that is God and that is worshipped. ‘Then the great 
tribulation will be in force and the Jewish faithful 
remnant will pass through the deepest waters of suffer- 
ing. 

We have still something unexplained in the last 
verse of our chapter. We read “and because of the 
protection (lit, wing) of abominations there shall be 
a desolator, even until the consummation and what is 
determined shall be poured out upon the desolator.” 
We shall not weary our readers with giving them the 
different views and opinions on this seemingly difficult 
passage. The abominations mentioned are idols and 
idol worship. The protection, or wing, of these idols 
is sought by the people and God is completely forgotten 
and set aside by the apostate masses, who bow before 
the Anti-christ. The fulfillment of the words of our 
Lord in Matthew has come: 


When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh 
through dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none. ‘Then he 
saith, I will return into my house from whence I came out; 
and when he is come, he findeth it empty, swept, and gar- 
nished. Then goeth he, and it taketh with himself seven 
other spirits more wicked than himself, and they enter in 
and dwell there; and the last state of that man is worse 
than the first. Even so shall it be also unto this wicked 
generation (Matt. xii: 43-45). 


The wicked spirit, idolatry, will take hold of them 
and they will be swept along into the worse blas- 
phemies and worship Satan’s masterpiece. On ac- 
count of this abomination “there shall be a desolator,” 
one who desolates the land. This desolator will con- 


THE REVELATION 197 


tinue to plague the Jews from the outset, while the 
Anti-christ is with them in Jerusalem. ‘The desolator 
will devastate the land and conquer Jerusalem till the 
consummation is reached. The consummation is the 
close of the seven years. When that is reached the 
desolator himself will be dealt with in judgment as well 
as the two beasts. Who is the desolator? The King 
of the North, the Assyrian of the endtime: he is the 
one of whom we read in the previous chapter and 
whose terrible work against the apostate nation is here 
once more touched upon as falling into the second half 
of the last prophetic week. 


It is interesting to compare the two New Testament 
records which give a large vision of the events of the 
seven years which are in store for Daniel’s people and 
the Holy City, before the full blessing for the remnant 
of this people and for Jerusalem can come. ‘These 
records are Matthew xxiv and that part of Revelation 
which treats of these coming events, chapters vi-xix. 
The reader will find this followed out in our exposition 
of the Gospel of Matthew.* 


And how far is the beginning of this last week of 
Daniel from our time? No one can give an answer. 
God only knows how soon all will come to pass. How- 
ever, there is a sign present with us which is very sig- 
nificant. It is the restoration movement of the Jews 
and their inability to carry out the plans and schemes 
for their complete restoration. They are waiting for 
“the Prince that shall come.” It behooves us to wait 





* Gospel of Matthew by A. C. G., $1.50 postpaid. 


198 THE REVELATION 


and watch. The days of God’s Saints may be very few 
on earth. "The last and next great event in the un- 
reckoned period of time, between the sixty-ninth and 
seventieth week, is the coming of the Lord for His 
Saints and this is imminent. 


THE REVELATION 199 


APPENDIX II. 


Prominent Names and Their Symbolical 
Meaning in Revelation. 


Abandon. Chapter ix:11. Destruction. The King 
over the Locust army, denoting Satan and his 
agencies. 

Abyss, The. ix:1; xx:1-3. The pit of the abyss 
or the deep. ‘This expression occurs seven times in 
Revelation. Out of the deep, the lowest pit, there 
comes the demon and into the pit of the abyss Satan 
will be cast for 1,000 years. The Lake of Fire is a 
different place. 

Accuser, The. Satan is the accuser of the Brethren. 
xii: 10. His expulsion out of heaven occurs in the 
middle of the week, followed by the great tribulation 
on earth. 

Alpha. ‘The first letter in the Greek alphabet; 
Omega is the last letter. Therefore Alpha and Omega 
is equivalent to an A and Z. Symbolical of the first 
and the last... i285 xx1703 xxil:13: 

Amen, The. A name of our Lord. He is the 
“verily,” the truth, and assurance and certainty are 
expressed by this word. i: 14. 

Angels. Angels are prominently mentioned through- 
out Revelation. The exposition shows that the angel 
mentioned in viii: 1-5; x:1 is the Lord Jesus Christ. 
Angels will be used in the end of the age to carry out 
the decreed judgments. On the angels of the differ- 
ent churches, the symbolical meaning, see the exposi- 
tion chapter i: 20. 


200 THE REVELATION 


The angels are the messengers who carried the 
Lord’s message to the churches. ‘They needed the 
power of the Spirit to do it. Hence the churches were 
to hear what the Spirit said to the churches. Rev. 
i137, Cte; 

Anti-christ, The. ‘The final and personal Anti-christ 
is mentioned for the first time in Revelation in chapter 
xiii: 11-18. He is also called the false Prophet, because 
he heads up the ecclesiastical corruption and apostasy 
of the end of the age. He must not be confounded 
with the first Beast out of the Sea who is a political 
head, the emperor of the revived Roman empire, the 
little horn of Daniel vii, and the Prince that shall come 
of Dan, ix: 26. 

Antipas. An unknown faithful martyr in Pergamos, 
known to Christ. ii: 13, meaning one against all. 

Apollyon. ix:11. The Greek name of Abaddon, 
the King over the Locust army. The name means De- 
struction or Destroyer. 

Ark, The. Chapter ix:19. It is seen by John in the 

temple. It means symbolically the assured presence 
of Jehovah with His people Israel, the faithful rem- 
nant, in the trying times of Jacob’s trouble. 
_ Armageddon. Mentioned for the first time in the 
parenthesis between the sixth and seventh vial. Chap. 
xvi: 12-16. It means “The hill of slaughter.” The 
battle of Armageddon will be of brief duration. It is 
the stone of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream smiting suddenly 
the ten toes, the ten kingdoms (Dan. ii). The battle 
of Armageddon is briefly described in. chapter xix: 
19-20. . 


THE REVELATION 201 


Alleluia. “Praise ye the Lord.” The four Halle- 
lujahs are found in chapter xix: 1-5. 


Babylon. On the literal and mystical Babylon see 
exposition of chapter xvii. The literal Babylon will 
undoubtedly be restored as a city of influence. But 
the city mentioned in chapter xvii is not the literal 
Babylon, but Rome. Not only will the Roman empire 
be revived, but also papal Rome. Babylon the great, 
the mother of Harlots, will see a great revival. The 
system in its corruption is described in chapter xviii. 


Balaam. The heathen Prophet who could not curse 
Israel, but put a stumbling-block before the children of 
Israel. Used in Revelation to describe the corruption 
in the professing church in giving up the divinely de- 
manded separation from the world. Chapter ii: 14. 

Beast, The. The expression “four Beasts in Rev. 
iv and v, etc., is faulty. The correct rendering is “the 
four living Creatures” or the “four living ones.” The 
term “Beast” applies to the revived Roman empire 
and its head, the little horn of Daniel, also called Beast 
in Daniel’s vision. The Anti-christ is likewise called 
a Beast. The work of the two Beasts is seen in chap- 
ter Xliii. 

Birds, unclean and hateful. Symbolical of evil per- 
sons outwardly professing to be something but full of 
corruption. They describe the apostate masses of 
Christendom. Rev. xviii:2. Also Matt. xiii: 31-32. 


Black Horse. The black horse comes into view with 
the opening of the third seal. Black is the color of 
night, darkness and death. 


202 THE REVELATION 


Blood, with Hail and Fire. Chapter viii: 7. Not 
literal things, but symbols of divine judgment for this 
earth. 

Bow, The. Chapter vi:1. The bow without an 
arrow as in possession by the rider upon the white 
horse is the symbol of a bloodless conquest. 

Bride, The, xxi: 2. The Bride of Christ, the Lamb’s 
wife, xix: 7; it is not Israel but the church. 

Brimstone and Fire. 'The symbols of divine wrath. 
Ta. ose 33: 

Candlestick, Golden. Symbolical of that which gives 
light. Representing the seven assemblies. The church 
is on earth to give light. 

Crowns. ‘The symbols of given glory and also re- 
wards for service. The crowns seen upon the seven 
heads of the dragon (xii: 3) and upon the four horns 
of the Beast (xiii: 1) denote despotic authority. 

David, Key of. Symbolical of the right to open and 
to enter in. See Isa. xxii: 22. It is a prediction con- 
cerning Christ. The authority of the kingdom of 
heaven. 


David, Root and offspring. xxii: 16. Christ is the 
Root and offspring of David. 

Demons. Fallen spiritual beings; the wicked spirits 
over which Satan is the head. ‘They will be worshipped 
by the apostates during the end of the age. Demon- 
worship is even now going on to some extent, for the 
anti-christian cults are produced by demons. (1 Tim. 
iv:1.) See Rev. ix: 20-21. The word devils must be 
changed to demons. There is but one Devil, but 
legions of demons. R 


THE REVELATION 203 


Dwellers on the Earth. 'This class mentioned re- 
peatedly in Revelation are the large number of pro- 
fessing Christians, who did not receive the love of the 
truth and rejecting the Gospel follow the strong de- 
lusion and are utterly blinded, as well as hardened, 
during the tribulation. 4 

Eagle. viii: 13. The word angel must be changed 
to “eagle.” Symbolical of the coming judgment, as 
an eagle is a bird of prey. Eagle’s wings (xii: 13-17) 
are symbolical of swift motion, escape and deliver- 
ance. 

Earth. ‘The prophetic territory of the Roman em- 
pire is mostly described by this form, though the entire 
earth is also indicated. 

Earthquake. Symbolical of the shaking of all po- 
litical and ecclesiastical institutions. But, as we show 
in our exposition, literal earthquakes will take place. 

Elders, Twenty-four. The twenty-four elders typify 
all the redeemed in Glory. Old and New Testament 
Saints are included. After chapter xix this term does 
not appear again, because the church, the bride of 
Christ, is then seen separate from the entire company 
of the redeemed, and takes her exalted position as the 
Lamb’s wife. 

Eternal State, The. The eternal state is described 
in chapter xxi: 1-8. 

Euphrates. This great river is mentioned twice in 
Revelation, ix: 14 and xvi: 12. Itis the boundary line 
of the Roman empire and the land of Israel. See 
exposition of these passages. 

Everlasting Gospel. xiv:6. ‘The declaration of the 


204 THE REVELATION 


Gospel of the Kingdom during the tribulation, and the 
proclamation of God as Creator to the heathen nations 
of the world, to prepare them for the gospel of the 
kingdom. 

Fire. Often mentioned in this book and symbolical 
of the judgments which will be executed upon the 
earth as well as the everlasting wrath upon the un- 
saved. 

Fornication. Spiritual wickedness in departing from 
the Truth of God, followed by the literal lusts of the 
flesh. The days of Lot will be on the earth before the 
Son of Man cometh. 

Four. ‘This number appears a number of times in 
Revelation. Four living creatures; four corners of 
the earth; four horns of the golden altar; four angels ; 
four winds. Four is the number of universality. 

Frogs. Mentioned between the sixth and seventh 
vial. Symbolical of demon influences, denoting filthy 
and wicked things. Frogs come out of slimy and dark 
waters; evil doctrines. 

Glass, Sea of. Chapter iv:6. Compare with Exod. 
xxx:18-21 and 1 Kings vii: 23, etc. Symbolical of 
fixed lasting holiness. No more water needed for 
cleansing from sin, for the Saints in Glory are de- 
livered from the presence of sin itself, 

God, Supper of. Chapter xix: 17. Symbolical of 
God’s judgment upon ‘the wicked nations and the earth 
dwellers. 

Gold. Symbolical of divine righteousness, 


Grass. viii:7. Symbolical of human prosperity. 
Isa. xl: 7 and 1 Peter i: 24. . 


THE REVELATION 205 


Hades, ‘The region of disembodied spirits; liter- 
ally “the unknown.” Christ has the Keys, and Hades 
with Death, because they came into existence through 
sin, will be cast into the Lake of fire. 

Harvest of the Earth. The harvest is the end of the 
age. In chapter xiv: 14-15 we read of the Lord’s 
judgment dealing with the earth.’ 

Hidden Manna. ii:17. Symbolical of the reward 
those who overcome will receive from the Lord. 

Horns. Horn is symbolical of power. Horns mean 
typically kings, powers and kingdoms. Dan. vii: 24. 

Image of the Beast. xiii: 12-15. Compare with 
Dan. iti. It will be a literal image of the princely leader 
of the revived Roman empire, the first Beast, which 
John saw rising out of the sea. 

Islands. Mentioned under the sixth seal and the 
seventh vial. Mountains typify kingdoms and gov- 
ernments; islands are symbolical of smaller and iso- 
lated governments. All will be affected. No doubt 
when the great earthquakes will shake the very foun- 
dations of the earth, many islands will also disappear. 

Jasper. A precious stone, most likely our diamond. 
See exposition of chapter iv. 

Jerusalem. 'The earthly and the heavenly Jerusa- 
lem are mentioned in the book. During the tribula- 
tion the earthly Jerusalem will be the seat of the Anti- 
christ, the false Prophet. Jerusalem is for this reason 
called “Sodom and Egypt” (xi:8). Then Jerusalem 
will pass through her worst history. A great siege will 
take place at the close of the tribulation period and the 
city will fall (Zech. xiv). After that Jerusalem wiil 


206 THE REVELATION 


become the capital of the kingdom of Christ and a 
great temple will be erected, the universal place of 
worship during the millennium. The heavenly Jeru- 
salem is above the earth. From there the glorious 
reign of Christ and the Saints will be executed. This 
glorious city will come down out of heaven at the end 
of the millennium to find its eternal resting place on 
the new earth. (Chapter xxi-xxii.) 

Jezebel. Symbolical of the Papacy. The corruptress 
which claims to be the Bride of Christ, but plays the 
harlot. See chapters ii and xvii. 

Judgment. Judgment falls upon the earth during 
the seven years, which constitute the end of the age. 
When the Lord comes in His glory the great judgment 
of the nations takes place. Chapter xix: 11, etc., com- 
pare with Matt. xxv:31. After the millennium the 
second resurrection takes place and the great white 
throne judgment is the judgment of the wicked dead. 

King of the Nations. xv:2-4. King of the Saints 
should be changed (see margin) to King of the nations. 
Our Lord is the King of the nations, the King of kings 

Lake of Fire. The place which God has prepared 
for the Devil and his angels. The Beast and the false 
prophet will be cast there; also the Assyrian, the King 
of the North, the nations who followed the Beast and 
all the wicked dead. Death and Hades will likewise 
be put into that place. 

The Lamb. The Lamb (John i: 29), our Lord in His 
sacrificial character, is mentioned twenty-eight times in 
Revelation. The Lamb is worshipped by all. Thus we 
find the Song of the Lamb, the Throne of the Lamb 


THE REVELATION 207 


and the Marriage of the Lamb, and the Wife of the 
Lamb (the church) in this book. 

Lighining. Symbolical of the divine judgment 
Wrath. 

Locust Army. Symbolical of the host of demons, 
which come out of the abyss to torment mankind. 

Lord’s Day, The. Mentioned but once in i: 10. It 
is the first day of the week on which John saw the 
great Patmos vision. 

Man-child. Chapter xii. The Man-child is the Lord 
Jesus Christ. 

Mark of the Beast. Some special mark which de- 
clares ownership. As the Holy Spirit seals those who 
trust on Christ, so Anti-christ will put his mark upon 
those who follow him. 

Millennium, The. Millennium means “a thousand 
years.” Six times this period of blessing and glory is 
mentioned in Rev. xx. 

Moon as blood. The Moon is symbolical of derived 
authority. Blood is the symbol of death. Apostate 
Israel and the apostate church passing through the 
most severe judgments are symbolized by this figure. 

Morning Star, The. Christ in His Coming for the 
church. Chapters xxii: 16; ii: 28. 

Mountain. A kingdom. 

Mountains, Seven. Rome is the city built upon the 
seven hills. See exposition of chapter xvii. 

Nicolaitanes. Mentioned in the message of Ephesus 
and Pergamos. They signify the domineering, priestly 
class which assumed an unscriptural place of authority 
in the church. 


208 THE REVELATION 


Palms. Emblems of victory. 

Rainbow. ‘The symbol of covenant and of mercy. 
Mentioned twice. Around the Throne (chapter iv) 
and around His head (chapter x). 

Rest of the Dead. xx:5. Meaning those who had 
not part in the First Resurrection, hence the wicked 
dead. 

River of Life. xxii:1. Symbolical of the fullness 
of life, glory and blessing. 

Saints. The Saints in Revelation include all the 
Saints. The Old and New Testament Saints are seen 
under the figure of the twenty-four elders. The suf- 
fering Saints are the Jewish Saints and the remnant 
of Israel, as well as the multitude of nations, who ac- 
cept the final message and come out of the great tribu- 
lation. (Chapter vii.) 

Satan. The entire book reveals his person, his work 
and his destiny. His work may be traced in the church- 
messages. Then we have his work during the tribula- 
tion and his final work after the millennium. 

Scorpions. Symbolical of the torment caused by 
the army of demons under the fifth trumpet judgment. 

Sea. Symbol of the nations. Also the literal sea, 
which gives up the dead. Then there will be no more 
sea. All wickedness and restlessness will cease for- 
ever. 

Seven. The divine number. No other Book in the 
Bible contains so many “sevens” as this final Bible- 
book, the Revelation. There are seven angels, 
churches, attributes of the Lord, heads, horns, eyes, 
spirits, lamps, seals, trumpets, vials, plagues, stars, 
thunders, times and a sevenfold doxology. 


» 


THE REVELATION 209 


Song. The songs of the Redeemed and the Song of 
Moses and the Lamb are mentioned in the Book. 

Stars. See exposition on the meaning of the seven 
stars in His hand. Stars are also symbolical of lesser 
authorities, which will all fall during the tribulation 
period. Lights in the night. 

Sun, The symbol of supreme authority. 

Synagogue of Satan. Mentioned in the messages to 
Smyrna and Philadelphia. It means a Judaized Chris- 
tianity as seen in Ritualistic, professing Christendom. 

Temple. ‘The tribulation temple is in view in chap- 
ter xi: 1-3. The millennial temple is seen in vii: 15. 
Then there is the temple in heaven. Chapter xvi: 17. 
In the heavenly Jerusalem there is no temple. xxi: 22. 

Third Part. Mentioned in connection with men, 
the sea, the stars of heaven, the Sun and the Moon. 
It probably refers exclusively to the Roman empire, 
which in its different aspects and authorities, will be 
affected during these judgments. 

Two horns. The Beast out of the land has two horns 
like a lamb, but speaks like the dragon. He is the 
counterfeit Christ. 

Waters, Many. Symbolical of peoples and nations 
over which the Romish whore has authority. 

White. Color of righteousness and purity; also 
denoting victorious conquests. We have in Revela- 
tion, white Robes, the white horses, white linen, a 
white cloud and a white Throne. 

Witnesses. See in Rev. xi about the two witnesses. 

Wrath. We read of the Wrath of God and the 
wrath of the Lamb. The wrath of God is completed 


14 


210 THE REVELATION 


with the pouring out of the vials. The wrath of the 
Lamb will be executed when He comes in Glory. 


Zion. Mentioned only once in Rev., chapter xiv: I. 
It means the literal Zion in Palestine. Upon that holy 
hill of Zion the glory will rest during the millennium. 
See Psalm cxxxii: 13-14. 


APPENDIX III. 


List of Corrections, in Readings and Renderings 
of Revelation.* 


In ch. i. 2, for “and of all things that he saw,’ read 
“as much as he saw.” In ver. 5, for “loved,” read 
“loveth.” In ver. 6, for “kings and priests,” “a 
kingdom, even priests.” At end, omit “and ever” In 
ver. 8, omit “the beginning and the ending’; it was 
probably inserted as an explanation of “Alpha and 
Omega.” For “ihe Lord,” read “the Lord God.” In 
ver. 9, omit “who also am.” Omit “Christ” (twice). 
In ver. 11 omit “J am Alpha and Omega, the first and 
the last: and.’ The words “which are in Asia,’ are 
wanting in all our MSS. of every date. In ver. 17, 
omit “unto me.” In ver. 18, omit “Amen.” In ver. 
19, for “write,” “write therefore.” In ver. 20, omit 
“which thou sawest:’ 

In ch. ii. I, for “of Ephesus,” read “in Ephesus.” 
In ver. 3, for “hast not been weary,” “hast not fainted.” 
In ver. 5, omit “quickly.” In ver. 7, omit “the midst 





* As suggested by Dean H. Alford. . 


THE REVELATION 211 


of.” In ver. 9, omit “works, and.” In ver. 10, for 
“Fear none of those things,’ “Fear not those things.” 
In ver. 13, omit “thy works and.’ For “my faithful 
martyr,” read “my martyr, my faithful one.” In ver. 15, 
for “which thing I hate,” read, with-all the MSS., “in 
like manner.” In ver. 16, “Repent therefore.” In ver. 
17, omit “to eat.” In ver. 20, for “I have a few things 
against thee, because,” read “I have against thee, that.” 
For “that woman,” read “thy wife.” For “to teach 
and to seduce,” “and she teacheth and seduceth.” In 
ver. 21, for “of her fornication; and she repented not,” 
read “and she will not repent of her fornication.” At 
end of ver. 22, for “their deeds,” “her deeds.” In ver. 
24 (beginning), omit “and.” And for “I will put,” “I 
put.” 


In ch. iii. 2, for “God,” read “my God.” In ver. 
3, omit “on thee” (first time). In ver. 4, read with 
all the MSS., “nevertheless thou hast,” etc.; and on 
the same authority, omit “even.” In ver. 7, for “he 
that is holy, he that is true,’ read “the true one, the 
holy one.” For “shutteth,” “shall shut.” In ver. 11, 
omit “Behold.” In ver. 14, for “of the Laodiceans,” 
read “in Laodicea.” In ver. 16, for “cold nor hot,’ 
“hot nor cold.” In ver. 17, for “wretched and miser- 
able,” “the wretched one and the pitiable one.” In 
ver. 18, for “anoint thine eyes with eye-salve,’ “eye- 
salve to anoint thine eyes.” 


In ch. iv. 4, for “upon the seats I saw four-and- 
twenty elders,’ “upon the four and twenty thrones, 
elders”; omit “they had.’ In ver. 6, for “there was,” 
“as it were.” In ver. 8 there is considerable confu- 


212 THE REVELATION 


sion as to the number of times which the word “holy” 
is repeated. In the Sinaitic MS. it occurs eight times; 
in the later Vatican nine times; in other MSS. twice, 
or six times or eight. In the Alexandrine, and the 
old versions, there are considerable variations. We 
probably should read three times. In ver. 11, for “O 
Lord,’ “our Lord and God;” and for “are,” “were.” 


In ch. v. 4, “and to read” must be omitted. In ver. 
5, omit “to loose.” In ver. 6, omit “and lo”’ In ver. 
8, for “harps,’ “an harp.” In vers. 9 and to there 
is considerable variation. In ver. 9, “us” is omitted 
by the Alexandrine MS., and probably, from what 
follows, was not found originally in the text. In ver. 
10, all the MSS. for “us,” have “them.” ‘The Alex- 
andrine MS. omits “unto our God.” For “kings and 
priests,’ read “a kingdom and priests” (the Sinaitic 
MS. has “a kingdom and priesthood”). For “we 
shall reign,” read “they reign.” The reading of the 
English version rests on hardly any authority. In ver. 
11, for “the voice,’ the Sinaitic MS. and others have 
“as it were the voice.” For the latter clause of ver. 
14, read “and the elders fell down and worshipped ;” 
omitting the rest. The Authorized Version has abso- 
lutely no authority. 


In ch. vi:1, for “seals,” read “seven seals” (the 
Sinaitic MS. has “seven,” without “seals”). For “as 
it were the noise of thunder, one of the four beasts 
saying,” read “one of the four living-beings saying, as 
it were the noise of thunder.” In the same verse, and 
in vers. 3, 5, 7, after the word “Come,” omit “and 


33 


see.’ In ver. 6, for “a voice,’ read “as it were a 


x 


THE REVELATION 213 


voice.” In ver. 11, for “white robes were,’ “a white 
robe was.” In ver. 12, omit “Jo”; and for “the moon,” 
“the whole moon,” 7. e., “the full moon.” 

In ch. vii. 1, for “these things,” “this.” From vers. 
5 to 8, omit in every case except the first (Judah) 
and the last (Benjamin), the words “were sealed.” In 
wer, 14, for. “Si, “my lord.” 

In ch. viii. 7, omit “angel”; and after the word, 
“earth,” insert “and the third part of the earth was 
burnt up.” In ver. 13, instead of “an angel,” read, 
with all the oldest MSS., “an eagle.” 

a7 Chix. 0, tor Uaitle,” read “war.” . In-vers13 
the reading is very uncertain. We have but two 
ancient MSS. here; of these, the Alexandrine omits 
“four,” and the Sinaitic reads merely, “I heard the 
voice of the golden altar,” etc. In ver. 18, for “these 
three,’ read, with nearly all the authorities, “these 
three plagues.” Jn ver. 19, for “their power,’ read 
“the power of the horses.” Curiously enough the 
Alexandrine MS. has for “horses,” “places,” but it 
is probably a mistake between two similar Greek 
words. 

In ch. x. 4, “had uttered their voices,” “spoke. 
In ver. 5, for “hand,’ “right-hand.” In ver. 11, for 
“he said,” “they say.” 

Ch. xi. 1 should stand: “And there was given me 
a reed like unto a rod, saying.” In ver. 4, for “God,” 
“Lord.” Inver. 8, for “bodies,” “body,” and for “our 
Lord,” “their Lord,” or “the Lord.” In ver. 9, for 
“bodies,” “body,” and for “shall see,’ “shall not 
suffer,’ “look upon,” and “suffer not.” Also in ver. 


Id 66 39 


214 THE REVELATION 


10, for “shall rejoice,” “rejoice.” In ver. 15, for 


= 


“kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of — 


our Lord,” “kingdom over this world is become our 
Lord’s.” In ver. 17 omit “and art to come.” 
In ch. xii. 12, omit “the inhabiters of.” la were 
omit “Christ.” The Sinaitic MS. has “Cod.” 
lavch,-xi 1, for “PT stand 52 and saw is 


read “he stood...... and I saw.” In ver. 6, for “and f 
them that dwell,’ read which dwell.” In ver. 7, for @ 
“all kindreds, and tongues, and nations,” “every tribe, — 


and people, and tongue, and nation.” In ver. 10 there 
is great confusion. The Authorized Version has hardly 
any authority. The most probable reading, accord- 
ing to the most ancient MSS., is: “If any is for cap- 
tivity, into captivity he goeth: if any to be slain with 


the sword, he must be slain with the sword.” In ver. @ 


13, omit “from heaven.” In ver. 17, for “the mark,” 
or the name,” read “the mark, the name.” 

In ch. xiv., for “a lamb,” “the lamb.” For “his 
Father’s name,” “his name and his Father’s name.” 
In ver. 2, for “I heard the voice of harpers,’ “the 
noise which I heard was of harpers.” In ver. 5, for 
“for they are without fault before the throne of God,” 
read only, “they are blameless.” The words “before 
the throne of God” are inserted absolutely without 
any MS. authority. In ver. 8, for “another angel,” 
read “another second angel.” After Babylon, insert 
“the Great.” In ver. 9, for “the third angel,” read 
“another third angel.” In ver. 12, for “the saints: 
here are they that,’ “the saints, which.” In ver. 13, 
omit “unto me?’ For “and their works,” “for their 
works.” In ver. 15, omit “for thee.” . 


THE REVELATION 215 


In ch. xv. 2, omit “and over his mark.” In ver. 3,. 
for “King of saints,” read “King of the nations.” The 
Paris MS. reads “King of the ages.” King of saints 
has no authority whatever. In ver. 5, omit “behold.” 

In ch. xvi. 1, for “vials,” read “seven vials.” In 
ver. 2, for “upon the earth,” read “into the earth.” 
In vers. 3, 4, omit “angel”; and so throughout. In 
ver. 5, omit “O Lord.” For “and wast, and shalt 
be,” read “and wast holy.” The text of the Author- 
ized Version is a pure invention, resting on no author- 
ity whatever. In ver. 6, omit “for” (second time). 
In ver. 7, for “I heard another out of the altar say,” 
“T heard the altar saying.” The Authorized Version 
rests on only one MS., and that of the twelfth cen- 
tury. In ver. 14, omit the words “earth and of the.” 
The name “Armageddon” is written (H)armagedon, 
with one d, in the ancient MSS. The aspirate is in 
the Hebrew name, and in many of our MSS. (the 
ancient ones not having any aspirates). In ver. 17, 
for “into,” “upon.” Omit “of heaven’; the Sinaitic 
MS. has “of God,” showing by the variety that the 
words were interpolated. In ver. 18, for “since men 
were,’ “since there was a man.” 

In ch. xvii. 8, for “yet is,’ read “shall come again.” 
The Authorized Version has no MS. authority at 
all. The Sinaitic MS. reads, “and is present.” In 
ver. 9, omit “and.” In ver. 13, for “shall give,” “give.” 
In ver. 16, for “which thou sawest upon the beast,” 
read “which thou sawest, and the best.” 


In ch. xviii. 2, “mightily” has no MS. authority 
whatever for it. In ver 3, omit “the wine of.” In 


216 THE REVELATION 


» 
ver. 13, after cinnamon, add, “and amomum” (a | 


famous ointment made from an Asiatic shrub). The 
omission was probably occasioned by the similarity 
of readings of cinnamomum and amomum. In ver. 


14, for “departed,” “perished”; and for “thou shalt" 
“men shall.” In ver. 17, for “all the company in 
ships,” “every one who saileth any whither.” In ver. — 
20, for “ye holy apostles,” “ye saints and ye apostles.” 


In ch. xix. 1, for “a great voice,” “as it were a loud — 
voice.” For “Salvation, and glory, and honour, and 


power, unto the Lord our God,” “the salvation and — 


the glory belong unto our God.” In ver. 12, for “he . 
had a name written,” “having names written.” In ver. ; 
15, for “fierceness and wrath,’ “fierceness of the 


wrath.” In ver. 17, for “supper of the great God,” — 


“great banquet of God.” In ver. 20, for “and with 


him the false prophet,” “and those that were with him, — 


the false prophet.” 


In ch. xx. 9, omit “from God.’ In ver. 12, 108 
“small and great, stand before God,” “the great and 
the small, standing before the throne.” In ver. 14 it 
should stand, “This is the second death (even) the 
lake of fire.” 


In ch. xxi. 2, “John” is omitted by all MSS. what- 
ever, and rests on no authority. In ver. 3, for “heaven,” 
read “the throne.” In ver. 5, omit “unto me.’ In ver. 
6, for “Tt is done,” “They are fulfilled.” So the Alex- 


andrine MS. The Sinaitic and many later MSS. have _ 
only, “I am become the Alpha,” etc. In ver. 7, for “alia 
these things.” In ver. 10, for “that great 


Id 66. 


things, 
city, the holy Jerusalem,’ “the holy city,.Jerusalem.” 





THE REVELATION Zie 


Id 66 


In ver. 14, for “the names,’ “the twelve names.” In 
ver. 15, for “had a golden reed,” “had for a measure a 
golden reed.” In ver. 24, omit “of them that are 
saved”; and also omit “and honour.” 

In ch. xxii. I, omit “pure.” Inver. 5, for “no night 
there,’ “no more night.” In ver. 6, for “of the holy 
prophets,’ “of the spirits of the prophets.” In ver. 7, 
for “Behold,” “and behold”; so also in ver. 12. In ver. 
11, for “be righteous still,” “still do righteousness.” In 
Wer. 12, tor “shall be,” is.” In ver. 14, tor “do jus 
commandments,’ which is the reading of the later 
MSS., “wash their robes,” which is that of the more 
ancient. The variety is curious. The two clauses in 
the Greek sound exceedingly like one another, and 
hence the mistake. In such a case we are bound to 
follow the more ancient evidence. In ver. 17, put a 
semicolon at “come” (third time), and omit “and” 
before “whosoever.” In ver. 18, omit “For.” For 
“these things,” read “them.” In ver. 19, for “the book 
of life,” read “the tree of life.” Omit “and from the 
things.’ ‘The last verse should be: “The grace of the 
Lord Jesus be with the saints. Amen.” So the Sinaitic 
MS. The Alexandrine reads, “be with all” (and no 
more). The later MSS. read “be with all the saints.” 
But no MS. whatever reads as the Authorized Version. 

This most numerous crop of corrigenda in the read- 
ings is matched by an equally numerous one as regards 
the renderings. By no book has the Church in this 
land acted so unfaithfully as by this. She has given 
her members an incorrect version of it, in part of 
human invention, and she has repudiated the blessing 
pronounced (ch. i. 3) on its public reading. 


218 THE REVELATION 


It ts impossible to give the corrigenda in rendering 
at the same length as we have hitherto done. They 
occur at every turn. 


In ch. i. 2, for “bare record of the word of God and 
of the,” “testified the word of God and the testimony 
of the.” In ver. 7, for “clouds,’ “the clouds”; and for 
“kindred,” “the tribes.” In ver. 19, for “hast seen,’ 
“sawest”; for “and the things which are,” and what 
things they are”; and for “hereafter,” “after these.” 


In ch. ii. 4, for “I have somewhat against thee, be- 
CAUSE... 64. » substitute “I have against thee, that 
cones In ver. 8, for “is alive,’ “revived.” Put a 
semicolon at “poverty,” and proceed, removing the 
parenthesis, “nevertheless thou art rich.” In ver. 13, 
for “seat,” “throne.” For “hast not denied my faith,” 
“didst not deny the faith of me.” In ver. 22, for “will 
cast,” “cast.” In ver. 27, for “receive as I receive,” 
“as I also have received.” 

In ch. ili. 2, for “are ready,” “were ready.” In ver. 
5, for “but,” “and.” In ver. 8, for “for thou hast a 
litile strength and hast kept my word and hast not 
denied,” “because thou hast little power, and thou didst 
keep my word and didst not deny.” In ver. 10, “didst 
keep,” and “is about to come.” In ver. 16, for “J will 
spue thee,” “I shall soon spue thee.” In ver. 17; 
“knowest not that thou of all others are the wretched 
one and the pitiable one, and poor,” etc. In ver. 18, 
for “trial in the fire,’ “fresh-smelted from the fire.” 
In ver. 21, for “am set,” “sat.” 


In ch. iv: 1, for “a door was opened,” “a door set 
open.” For “the first voice which I heard was of,’ 
4 


THE REVELATION 219 


etc., “the former voice which I heard as of,” etc. Not 
the first voice after the vision, but the former voice, 
which spoke with him before, is meant. In verse 2, 
for “a throne was set in heaven and one sat,” “a throne 
was there in heaven, and one sitting.” In verse 4, 
for “seats,” “thrones.” The word is the same through- 
out: and the translators had no right to vary it, 
especially after our Lord’s prophecy, Matt. xix: 28. 
In verse 6 and henceforward, the unhappy translation 
“beasts” should by all means be corrected. The orig- 
inal word is “living beings,” which might well be re- 
tained, sometimes calling them merely “beings” where 
they are mentioned several times together. In verse 
7, “calf” should be “steer.” It is a young bullock, not 
a mere calf, that is meant. In verse 8, for “and they 
were full of eyes within,’ “around and within they are 
full of eyes.” In verse 9, for “sat,” “sitteth.” In 
verse 10, for “fall,” “shall fall”; and for “worship,” 
“shall worship”; and for “cast,” “shall cast.” In verse 
11, for “glory and honour and power,” “the glory and 
the honour and the might,’ and for “hast created,” 
“didst create.” 


In chapter v:1, for “in the right hand,” “on the 
right hand.” ‘The hand was open, and the book lying 
on it. In verse 3, for “no man,’ “no one.” In verse 
5, for “hath prevailed to,’ “conquered, so as to.” In 
verse 6, for “stood a Lamb as it had been slain,” Oa 
Lamb standing as if slain.” In verse 8, for “had 
taken,’ “took”; and for “saints,’ “the saints.” In 
verse 9, for “sung,” “sing.” In verse 12, for “was 
slain,’ “hath been slain”; and for “power,” “the 


220 THE REVELATION 


power.” In verse 13, for “such as are in the sea,’ 
“upon the sea.” For “saying,” “all saying.” , 

In chapter vi: 2, for “to conquer,” which looks as if 
it were merely prophetic of the future, “in order that 
he might,” or “in order to, conquer.” In verse 3, 
omit “had”; and so in verses 5, 7,9, 12. In verse 8, 
for “Hell,” substitute “Hades”; Hell is the place of 
punishment, as now understood, whereas the abode 
of the departed is here meant. In verse 9, for “were,” 
“have been.” For “held,” “bore.” In verse 10, for 
“O Lord,’ “Thou Master.” In verse 14, for “de- 
parted,” “parted asunder.” In verse 16, for “said,” 
“say.” In verse 17, for “shall be,” “is.” 

In chapter vii:2, for “ascending from the east,” 
“coming up from the rising of the sun.” In verse Q, 
for “no man,” “no one.” In verse 12, before “bless- 
ing,” and each of the substantives following, insert 
“the.” In verse 14, for “came out of great,’ “come out 
of the great.” For “have washed,” “they washed.” In 
verse 15, for “shall dwell among them,” “shall spread 
his habitation over them”; literally, “shall tabernacle 
upon them.” It is very difficult to express the glorious 
image; but the Authorized Version is wretchedly short 
of any rendering of it. In verse 17, “feed” is “tend,” 


or “shepherd.” It does not imply the giving of food, — 


but the leading and pasturing. 

In chapter viii: 2, for “stood,” “stand.” In verse 3, 
for “at,” “over.” ‘Verse 4 should stand: “And the 
smoke of the incense ascended up to the prayers of 
the saints out of the angel’s hand before God.” In verse 
12, for “likewise,” “in like manner,” In verse 13, for 
“yet to sound,” “about to sound.” 


a 


THE REVELATION 221 


In chapter ix: 1, for “fall,” “fallen.” For “the bot- 
tomless pit,” “the pit of the abyss,” 7. ¢., of hell. So 
also in verse 2. In verse 6, for “desire,” “vehemently 
desire.” In verse 7, for “unto battle,” “for war.” 
In verse 14, for “in,” “on.” In verse 15, for “for an 
hour, and a day, and a month, and a year,” “against 
the hour, and the day, and the month, and the year.” 
In verse 17, for “of fire and of jacinth, and brimstone,” 
“red as fire, and blue as smoke, and yellow as brim- 


stone.” 


In chapter x:1, for “a rainbow,” “the rainbow.” 
In verse 3, for “seven thunders,” “the seven thunders.” 
In verse 6, for “that there should be time no longer,” 
substitute “that there shall be delay no longer.” In 
verse 7, for “when He shall begin to sound,” “when 
He shall be about to sound.” For “declared,” “de- 
clared the glad tidings,” “evangelized.” In verse 10, 
for “was bitter,” “was embittered.” Verse 11 should 

6c 


TRI oie ale ss again concerning people, and nations, and 
tongues, and many kings.” 


In chapter xi: 2, for “leave out,” “cast thou out” ; 
for “is given,” “was given.” In verse 5 (twice), for 
“qyill hurt them,” “is minded to hurt them.” In verse 
6, for “the bottomless pit,” “the abyss.” In verse 9, 
for “they of the people and kindreds,” “some from 
among the people and tribes”; for “shall see,” “look 
upon”; and for “graves,” “a tomb.” In verse I! for 
“three,” “the three.” In verse 12, for “a cloud,” “the 
clouds.” In verse 16, for “seats,” “thrones.” In verse 
18, for “reward,” “their reward.” In verse 19, for 
“testament,” “covenant.” 


222 THE REVELATION 


In ehapter xii: 2, for “cried,” “crieth.” In verse Ee 
“crowns” were better “diadems”: it is not the usual 
word (stephanous), but diademata. In verse 4, for 
“drew,” “draweth” [down]; for “stood,” “standeth.” 
End the verse, “which is ready to be delivered, that 
when she hath borne, he may devour her child.” In 
verse 5, for “who was to rule,” “which shall rule.” 
In verse 10, for “salvation and strength,’ “the salva- 
tion and the might.” For “accused,” “accuseth.” In 
verse 11, for “by the blood...... >” “by the word,” 
“because of the DiOod sate “because of the word.” 
In verse 14, for “g great eagle,” “the great eagle.” 
In verse 15 (twice), for “flood,” “river”; and so in 
verse 16. In verse 17, for “went,” “departed.” 


In chapter xiii: I, for “beast,” “wild beast” ; and so 
in verse 2,11. The same word is used afterwards, but 
it need not be marked any further. “Crowns,” again, 
is “diadems.” In verse 4, for “which,” “because he.” 
In verse 5, for “to continue,” “to work.? In verse 
6, for “in blasphemy,” “for blasphemies.” In verse 
14, “which he had power to do,” “which it was giver, 
him to work.” In verse 1 5, for “he had power,” “it 
was given him”; for “life,” “breath”: for “both,” 
“even.” 


In chapter xiv: 3, for “beasts,” “living creatures.” 
For “no man,” “no one” ; and for “were redeemed,” 
“have been purchased.” In verse 4, for “redeemed,” 
“purchased.” For “being the first fruits,’ “as a first 
fruit.” In verse 6, for “kindred,” “tribe2? In verse 
8, for “because she made,” “which hath made.? In 
verse 13, for “follow them,” “follow with them,” 


aN 
We 





THE REVELATION 223 


In chapter xv:1, for “the seven last plagues, for,” 
“seven plagues, which are the last, because.” In verse 
2, for “the harps,” “harps.” In verse 7, for “beasts,” 
“living creatures.” 


In chapter xvi: 3, for “as the blood of a dead man,” 
“blood, as of a dead man.” ‘In verse 8, for “have 
shed,’ “shed.” In verse 10, for “seat,’ “throne.” 
For “was full of darkness,” “became darkened.” In 
verse 12, for “the kings of the east,’ “the kings which 
come from the rising of the sun.” In verse 14, for 
“spirits of devils,’ “the spirits of demons.” In verse 
14, for “battle,” “war.” In verse 16, for “great Baby- 
lon,” “Babylon the great.” 

In chapter xvii:2, for “have committed,’ ‘“com- 
mitted”; and for “have been made,’ “were made.” 
In verse 3, for “beast,” “wild beast.” In verse 5, for 
“harlots,” “the harlots”; and for “abominations,” “the 
abominations.” In verse 6, for “martyrs,” “witnesses.” 
In verse 8, for “bottomless pit,’ “abyss.” For “shall 
go,” “goeth.” In verse 10, for “there are,’ “they are”; 
and continue, “the five are fallen, the one is,” etc. In 
verse 17, for “hath put,” “put.” 

In chapter xvili:1, for “come down,” “coming 
down.” In verse 2, for “devils,” “demons.”’. In verse 
3, for “have committed,” “committed”; and for “are 
waxed,” “waxed.” In verse 6, for “hath filled, fill,” 
“mixed, mix.” In verse 8, for “hath judged,” “judg- 
eth.” In verse 9, for “have committed,” “committed.” 
In verse 11, omit “shall.” In verse 12, for “thyine,”’ 
“citron.” For “all manner vessels,” “every article” 


(twice). In verse’ 13, for’ “souls,” “persons.” ° Ta 


224 THE REVELATION 





verse 14, for “the fruits that thy soul lusted after are,” : 
“the harvest of the desire of thy soul is.” For “all Fs 
things which were dainty and goodly,” “all thy fat 
things and thy splendid things.” In verse 16, for 
“decked,” “gilded.” In verse 17, for “come to nought,” 
“made desolate.” For “shipmaster,” “pilot.” In verse 
18, for “what city,” “who”; and for “this,” “the.” In 
verse 19, for “that,” “the”; “wherein,” “whereby.” In 
verse 20, for “hath avenged her,” “hath judged your __ 
judgment.” In verse 21, for “a ei gd angel,” “one 
strong angel.” In verse 24, for “were slain,” “have 
been slain.” 


In chapter xix:3, for “rose up,” “goeth up.” In 
verse 4, for “beasts,” “living-creatures”; for “sat,” 
“sitteth.” In verse 8, for “clean and white,’ “b 
and pure”; for Bs linen,” “the fine linen”; — 
“saints,” “the saints.” In verse 11, for “SOs “se 
In verse 12, for “crowns,” “diadems.” In verse 
for “beast,” “wild beast”; for “war,? “their war”: 
“sat,” “sitteth.” ce 


In chapter xx:1, for “bottomless pit,” “abyss” 
also in verse 2. In verse 4, for “hands,” “hand.” 
verse II, for “sat,” “sitteth”’ In verse 12, for ‘ 
books,” “books.” In verse 13, for “hell,” SH 
also in verse 14. a 



















In chapter xxi:1, for “there was no 
“the sea is no more.” In verse 4, for “a 
“every tear.” In verse 5, for “sat,” “ te 


a son.” In verse 8, for 
tors.” In verse 9, for “full,” 


¥ 
F: 
tp 
‘ 


THE REVELATION 225 
j 15, for “foundations,” “foundation-stones.” In verse 
_ 24, for “in the light,” “by means of the light.” In 
verse 27, for “worketh abomination, or maketh a lie,” 
“worketh abomination or falsehood”; for “they,” 
“only they.” 

In chapter xxii: 5, for “giveth them light,’ “shall 
_ shine upon them.” In verses 8, 9, read “I John am 
he who heard these things, and saw them. And when 
I heard and saw,” etc. In verse 11, for “let him be 
holy stil,’ “let him sanctify himself still.” In verse 
14, for “right to,’ “power over.” In verse 15, prefix 
“the” to each of the classes enumerated. In verse 16, 
for “have sent,’ “sent”; for “and the bright and morn- 
ing star,’ “and bright morning star.” In verse 20, 
ie n en 502 . 


x 











rey 


Tur Enp. 








 )ttw Cha Uk hamek kin fr Pa) 
nwa Wend (Bucher ST we hur tt, 6 
% lo Prix in Crack’ 

Viet W.tuaa anf ua! | p pigs” yaa: 


te rs ay pee om 


Aa ah ad el 
wd lone aud al re dd 
oy ie i 


nes 





Jas tyindin § lr Hy ll Sea HTM 
oe jie Bi $45 10: A, ft | 


ate irk gin ; 
yi" Mi 

— ip 

:.. fay nt hui lace iby | 
= a 990) H.R )77 { 









——- 








————tFs 


asze A ee 861-1965. 
rno Clemens, 1 
ee an ily and expos! 





: {yea 
muon sy 
Deh us eles a 


Es 








BS Gaebelein, Arno Clemens, 18612945, 
The Revelation, an analysis and t ! 
ie the Bible, by Arno Cc. teres pear e 
3 tion office “Our hope”; Glasgow, Scot, Picker 
ete., ete., *1915, 
225D— 199". 


Appendix I. The ign he ek prophecy, 


Revelation, fs peeshebet Appendix TI, List 
in readings and renderIncs of Re ‘elation, 


le ible, “iT. Revel ationea? "rophe cies 
TAbrary of Congresa BS2825.G8 


338430 3) 





Appendix 11, Prominent names and tneir syn 





Helper tar 


7 


Mf 0 Pe agin fron 1a brn wrung, ere apron Lum ym wo] mang, eh 
td rato pra yy gre orp yrnay) fais a 
anh pete rc prs saa pm rk 


trom yup 9 err som fr yom Hee] men "1" Yao Lp mt ry 


in} tr wm ng TH 
STR ps ere eye ve dal on 
x ol OG LUTE “TV er] son 04] 
ai aera A pt =P yeas ad ers, P yin 
el) mE) my APS ft Vie 
npg ray rein Pen al PHY TM Tay 
TeOroy UTA OY 16 ize pb. > / | 








aw Lire “path Di ‘aia v 
; lee 7 we 


wae 
a 
Fike 

a lo arte Di 
hag tHe rape 
ain on Pall lai Jdber Wi vem to Uf 
: 7 iy ue ‘it ilies aa 

ieee ele n 


Bhs ch that ar . 
pO tae et Whe Olchia | olubany ms wo4na Cl 





Stun lo dal eutha fr Uh nt tc 

, ae pu Ue quai Rr ta ht oo tw 
s ay in Yuiodle YOM rg hele 
i nt 


i enthn ae is, 





: 
f 


Y 
if 


tasty 


i 


eet 


ueas b 
pts 


tsa 


ry eees 


= 
peri ake 





